Contemporary
Mathematics

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

DONNA KIRK, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN AT SUPERIOR
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2023 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/contemporary-mathematics in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13       978-1-711470-55-9
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13   978-1-711470-54-2
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13      978-1-951693-68-8
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR    2023
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TAM 23
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research,
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human
endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                        Get started at openstax.org/details/books/contemporary-mathematics

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Sets 5

         Introduction 5
         1.1 Basic Set Concepts 6
         1.2 Subsets 14
         1.3 Understanding Venn Diagrams 20
         1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets 28
         1.5 Set Operations with Three Sets 40
         Chapter Summary 51

2 Logic 59

         Introduction 59
         2.1 Statements and Quantifiers 60
         2.2 Compound Statements 70
         2.3 Constructing Truth Tables 78
         2.4 Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 87
         2.5 Equivalent Statements 97
         2.6 De Morgan's Laws 102
         2.7 Logical Arguments 108
         Chapter Summary 116

3 Real Number Systems and Number Theory 127

         Introduction 127
         3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers 128
         3.2 The Integers 149
         3.3 Order of Operations 158
         3.4 Rational Numbers 165
         3.5 Irrational Numbers 191
         3.6 Real Numbers 203
         3.7 Clock Arithmetic 211
         3.8 Exponents 218
         3.9 Scientific Notation 227
         3.10 Arithmetic Sequences 239
         3.11 Geometric Sequences 246
         Chapter Summary 254

4 Number Representation and Calculation 267

         Introduction 267
         4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System 268
         4.2 Early Numeration Systems 273
         4.3 Converting with Base Systems 287
         4.4 Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 300
         4.5 Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 314
              Chapter Summary 327

   5 Algebra 333

              Introduction 333
              5.1 Algebraic Expressions 334
              5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 346
              5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 356
              5.4 Ratios and Proportions 366
              5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 376
              5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 404
              5.7 Functions 428
              5.8 Graphing Functions 447
              5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 474
              5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 491
              5.11 Linear Programming 518
              Chapter Summary 530

   6 Money Management 543

              Introduction 543
              6.1 Understanding Percent 544
              6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 552
              6.3 Simple Interest 566
              6.4 Compound Interest 579
              6.5 Making a Personal Budget 589
              6.6 Methods of Savings 601
              6.7 Investments 612
              6.8 The Basics of Loans 630
              6.9 Understanding Student Loans 645
              6.10 Credit Cards 656
              6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car 675
              6.12 Renting and Homeownership 687
              6.13 Income Tax 697
              Chapter Summary 706

   7 Probability 723

              Introduction 723
              7.1 The Multiplication Rule for Counting 724
              7.2 Permutations 728
              7.3 Combinations 732
              7.4 Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 738
              7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability 751
              7.6 Probability with Permutations and Combinations 763
              7.7 What Are the Odds? 766
              7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability 771
              7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 777
              7.10 The Binomial Distribution 790
              7.11 Expected Value 797

Access for free at openstax.org
Chapter Summary 808

8 Statistics 815

         Introduction 815
         8.1 Gathering and Organizing Data 816
         8.2 Visualizing Data 827
         8.3 Mean, Median and Mode 857
         8.4 Range and Standard Deviation 873
         8.5 Percentiles 879
         8.6 The Normal Distribution 883
         8.7 Applications of the Normal Distribution 903
         8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 907
         Chapter Summary 934

9 Metric Measurement 943

         Introduction 943
         9.1 The Metric System 944
         9.2 Measuring Area 952
         9.3 Measuring Volume 960
         9.4 Measuring Weight 970
         9.5 Measuring Temperature 977
         Chapter Summary 987

10 Geometry 993

Introduction 993                             1035
10.1 Points, Lines, and Planes 994
10.2 Angles 1007
10.3 Triangles 1019
10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference
10.5 Tessellations 1052
10.6 Area 1068
10.7 Volume and Surface Area 1087
10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry 1098
Chapter Summary 1117

11 Voting and Apportionment 1129

Introduction 1129                                                       1179
11.1 Voting Methods 1130
11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods 1162
11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem
11.4 Apportionment Methods 1191
11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1212
Chapter Summary 1226
12 Graph Theory 1237

Introduction 1237                   1364
12.1 Graph Basics 1238
12.2 Graph Structures 1249
12.3 Comparing Graphs 1265
12.4 Navigating Graphs 1283
12.5 Euler Circuits 1309
12.6 Euler Trails 1326
12.7 Hamilton Cycles 1340
12.8 Hamilton Paths 1351
12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem
12.10 Trees 1380
Chapter Summary 1401

13 Math and... 1417

Introduction 1417                1425
13.1 Math and Art 1418
13.2 Math and the Environment
13.3 Math and Medicine 1431
13.4 Math and Music 1438
13.5 Math and Sports 1444
Chapter Summary 1448

A Co-Req Appendix: Integer Powers of 10 1459
     Answer Key 1463
     Index 1563

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

About OpenStax

OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational initiative, it's
our mission to transform learning so that education works for every student. Through our partnerships with
philanthropic organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we're breaking down the most
common barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Contemporary Mathematics is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its
content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or select only the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. Visit the Instructor Resources
section of your book page on OpenStax.org for more information.

Art attribution

In Contemporary Mathematics, art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license
within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same
attribution to its original source. For illustrations (e.g., graphs, charts, etc.) that are not credited, use the following
attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web-based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past and pending errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Contemporary Mathematics

Contemporary Mathematics is designed to meet the requirements for a liberal arts mathematics course. The textbook
covers a range of topics that are typically found in a liberal arts course as well as some topics to connect mathematics to
the world around us. The text provides stand-alone sections with a focus on showing relevance in the features as well as
the examples, exercises, and exposition.

Pedagogical Foundation

Learning Objectives

Every section begins with a set of clear and concise learning objectives, which have been thoroughly revised to be both
measurable and more closely aligned with current teaching practice. These objectives are designed to help the instructor
decide what content to include or assign and to guide student expectations of learning. After completing the section and
end-of-section exercises, students should be able to demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.

Key Features

Check Your Understanding: Concept checks to confirm students understand content at the end of every section
immediately before the exercise sets are provided to help bolster confidence before embarking on homework.

People in Mathematics: A mix of historic and contemporary profiles aimed to incorporate extensive diversity in gender
and ethnicity. The profiles incorporate how the person's contribution has benefitted students or is relevant to their lives
in some way.

Who Knew?: A high-interest feature designed to showcase something interesting related to the section contents. These
features are crafted to offer something students might be surprised to find is so relevant to them.
2 Preface

    Work It Out: Offers some activity ideas in line with the sections to support the learning objectives.
    Tech Check: Highlights technologies that support content in the section.
    Projects: A feature designed to put students in the driver's seat researching a topic using various online resources. It is
    intended to be primarily or wholly non-computational. Projects utilize online research and writing to summarize their
    findings.

   Section Summaries

    Section summaries distill the information in each section for both students and instructors down to key, concise points
    addressed in the section.

   Key Terms

    Key terms are bold and are followed by a definition in context.

   Answers and Solutions to Questions in the Book

    Answers for Your Turn and Check Your Understanding exercises are provided in the Answer Key at the end of the book.
    The Section Exercises, Chapter Reviews, and Chapter Tests are intended for homework assignments or assessment; thus,
    student-facing solutions are provided in the Student Solution Manual for only a subset of the exercises. Solutions for all
    exercises are provided in the Instructor Solution Manual for instructors to share with students at their discretion, as is
    standard for such resources.

   About the Authors

   Senior Contributing Author

    Donna Kirk, University of Wisconsin at Superior
    Donna Kirk received her B.S. in Mathematics from the State University of New York at Oneonta and her master's degree
    from City University - Seattle in Educational Technology and Curriculum Design. After teaching math in higher education
    for more than twenty years, she joined University of Wisconsin's Education Department in 2021, teaching math
    education for teacher preparation. She is also the director of a STEM institute focused on connecting underrepresented
    students with access to engaging and innovative experiences to empower themselves to pursue STEM related careers.

   Contributing Authors

    Barbara Boschmans Beaudrie, Northern Arizona University
    Brian Beaudrie, Northern Arizona University
    Matthew Cathey, Wofford College
    Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College
    Maureen Gerlofs, Texas State University
    Quin Hearn, Broward College
    Ian Walters, D'Youville College

   Reviewers

    Anna Pat Alpert, Navarro College
    Mario Barrientos, Angelo State University
    Keisha Brown, Perimeter College at Georgia State University
    Hugh Cornell, University of North Florida
    David Crombecque, University of Southern California
    Shari Davis, Old Dominion University
    Angela Everett, Chattanooga State Community College
    David French, Tidewater Community College
    Michele Gribben, McDaniel College
    Celeste Hernandez, Dallas College-Richland
    Trevor Jack, Illinois Wesleyan University

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

Kristin Kang, Grand View University
Karla Karstens, University of Vermont
Sergio Loch, Grand View University
Andrew Misseldine, Southern Utah University
Carla Monticelli, Camden County College
Cindy Moss, Skyline College
Jill Rafael, Sierra College
Gary Rosen, University of Southern California
Faith Willman, Harrisburg Area Community College

Additional Resources

Student and Instructor Resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including student solution manuals, instructor
solution manuals, and PowerPoint lecture slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which you
can apply for when you log in or create your account on OpenStax.org. Take advantage of these resources to
supplement your OpenStax book.

Academic Integrity

Academic integrity builds trust, understanding, equity, and genuine learning. While students may encounter significant
challenges in their courses and their lives, doing their own work and maintaining a high degree of authenticity will result
in meaningful outcomes that will extend far beyond their college career. Faculty, administrators, resource providers, and
students should work together to maintain a fair and positive experience.
We realize that students benefit when academic integrity ground rules are established early in the course. To that end,
OpenStax has created an interactive to aid with academic integrity discussions in your course.

attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license

Visit our academic integrity slider (https://openstax.org/r/academic-integrity-slider) . Click and drag icons along the
continuum to align these practices with your institution and course policies. You may then include the graphic on your
syllabus, present it in your first course meeting, or create a handout for students.
At OpenStax we are also developing resources supporting authentic learning experiences and assessment. Please visit
this book's page for updates. For an in-depth review of academic integrity strategies, we highly recommend visiting the
International Center of Academic Integrity (ICAI) website (https://openstax.org/r/academicintegrity) .

Community Hubs

OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support
OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download
resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant
course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research
as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit
4 Preface

    www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax (https://openstax.org/r/community-hub).

   Technology partners

    As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost tools that
    are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book page on
    OpenStax.org.

     Access for free at openstax.org
         1 · Introduction 5

1  SETS

Figure 1.1 A flatware drawer is like a set in that it contains distinct objects. (credit: modification of work "silverware" by Jo
Naylor/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Basic Set Concepts
  1.2 Subsets
  1.3 Understanding Venn Diagrams
  1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets
  1.5 Set Operations with Three Sets

      Introduction

Think of a drawer in your kitchen used to store flatware. This drawer likely holds forks, spoons, and knives, and possibly
other items such as a meat thermometer and a can opener. The drawer in this case represents a tool used to group a
collection of objects. The members of the group are the individual items in the drawer, such as a fork or a spoon.

The members of a set can be anything, such as people, numbers, or letters of the alphabet. In statistical studies, a set is
a well-defined collection of objects used to identify an entire population of interest. For example, in a research study
examining the effects of a new medication, there can be two sets of people: one set that is given the medication and a
different set that is given a placebo (control group). In this chapter, we will discuss sets and Venn diagrams, which are
graphical ways to show relationships between different groups.
6 1 · Sets

  1.1 Basic Set Concepts

    Figure 1.2 A spoon, fork, and knife are elements of the set of flatware. (credit: modification of work "Cupofjoy" Wikimedia
    CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication)

   Learning Objectives

    After completing this section, you should be able to:
     1. Represent sets in a variety of ways.
     2. Represent well-defined sets and the empty set with proper set notation.
     3. Compute the cardinal value of a set.
     4. Differentiate between finite and infinite sets.
     5. Differentiate between equal and equivalent sets.

   Sets and Ways to Represent Them

    Think back to your kitchen organization. If the drawer is the set, then the forks and knives are elements in the set. Sets
    can be described in a number of different ways: by roster, by set-builder notation, by interval notation, by graphing on a
    number line, and by Venn diagrams. Sets are typically designated with capital letters. The simplest way to represent a set
    with only a few members is the roster (or listing) method, in which the elements in a set are listed, enclosed by curly
    braces and separated by commas. For example, if represents our set of flatware, we can represent by using the
    following set notation with the roster method:

      EXAMPLE 1.1
    Writing a Set Using the Roster or Listing Method
    Write a set consisting of your three favorite sports and label it with a capital .

         Solution
    There are multiple possible answers depending on what your three favorite sports are, but any answer must list three
    different sports separated by commas, such as the following:

             YOUR TURN 1.1
      1. Write a set consisting of four small hand tools that might be in a toolbox and label it with a capital .

    All the sets we have considered so far have been well-defined sets. A well-defined set clearly communicates whether an
    element is a member of the set or not. The members of a well-defined set are fixed and do not change over time.
    Consider the following question. What are your top 10 songs of 2021? You could create a list of your top 10 favorite
    songs from 2021, but the list your friend creates will not necessarily contain the same 10 songs. So, the set of your top
    10 songs of 2021 is not a well-defined set. On the other hand, the set of the letters in your name is a well-defined set
    because it does not vary (unless of course you change your name). The NFL wide receiver, Chad Johnson, famously

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             1.1 · Basic Set Concepts 7

changed his name to Chad Ochocinco to match his jersey number of 85.

  EXAMPLE 1.2

Identifying Well-Defined Sets
For each of the following collections, determine if it represents a well-defined set.
 1. The group of all past vice presidents of the United States.
 2. A group of old cats.

     Solution
 1. The group of all past vice presidents of the United States is a well-defined set, because you can clearly identify if any

      individual was or was not a member of that group. For example, Britney Spears is not a member of this set, but Joe
      Biden is a member of this set.
 2. A group of old cats is not a well-defined set because the word old is ambiguous. Some people might consider a
      seven-year-old cat to be old, while others might think a cat is not old until it is 13 years old. Because people can
      disagree on what is and what is not a member of this group, the set is not well-defined.

      YOUR TURN 1.2

For each of the following collections, determine if it represents a well-defined set.
    1. A collection of medium-sized potatoes.
    2. The original members of the Black Eyed Peas musical group.

On January 20, 2021, Kamala Harris was sworn in as the first woman vice president of the United States of America. If we
were to consider the set of all women vice presidents of the United States of America prior to January 20, 2021, this set
would be known as an empty set; the number of people in this set is 0, since there were no women vice presidents
before Harris. The empty set, also called the null set, is written symbolically using a pair of braces, , or a zero with a
slash through it, .

The set containing the number        , is a set with one element in it. It is not the same as the empty set,  , which

does not have any elements in it. Symbolically:         .

EXAMPLE 1.3

Representing the Empty Set Symbolically
Represent each of the following sets symbolically.

1. The set of prime numbers less than 2.
2. The set of birds that are also mammals.

Solution

1. A prime number is a natural number greater than 1 that is only divisible by one and itself. Since there are no prime

numbers less than 2, this set is empty, and we can represent it symbolically as follows:  These two different

symbols for the empty set can be used interchangeably.

2. The set of birds and the set of mammals do not intersect, so the set of birds that are also mammals is empty, and

we can represent it symbolically as

      YOUR TURN 1.3
1. Represent the set of all numbers divisible by 0 symbolically.
8 1 · Sets

      WHO KNEW?

The Number Zero

We use the number zero to represent the concept of nothing every day. The machine language of computers is
binary, consisting only of zeros and ones, and even way before that, the number zero was a powerful invention that
allowed our understanding of mathematics and science to develop. The historical record shows the Babylonians first
used zeros around 300 B.C., while the Mayans developed and began using zero separately around 350 A.D. What is
considered the first formal use of zero in arithmetic operations was developed by the Indian mathematician
Brahmagupta around 650 A.D.

Brahmagupta, Mathematician and Astronomer (https://openstax.org/r/brahmagupta.html)

Another interesting feature of the number zero is that although it is an even number, it is the only number that is
neither negative nor positive.

For larger sets that have a natural ordering, sometimes an ellipsis is used to indicate that the pattern continues. It is
common practice to list the first three elements of a set to establish a pattern, write the ellipsis, and then provide the last
element. Consider the set of all lowercase letters of the English alphabet, . This set can be written symbolically as

                           .

The sets we have been discussing so far are finite sets. They all have a limited or fixed number of elements. We also use

an ellipsis for infinite sets, which have an unlimited number of elements, to indicate that the pattern continues. For

example, in set theory, the set of natural numbers, which is the set of all positive counting numbers, is represented as

             .

Notice that for this set, there is no element following the ellipsis. This is because there is no largest natural number; you
can always add one more to get to the next natural number. Because the set of natural numbers grows without bound, it
is an infinite set.

EXAMPLE 1.4

Writing a Finite Set Using the Roster Method and an Ellipsis
Write the set of even natural numbers including and between 2 and 100, and label it with a capital . Include an ellipsis.

     Solution
Write the label, , followed by an equal sign and then a bracket. Write the first three even numbers separated by
commas, beginning with the number two to establish a pattern. Next, write the ellipsis followed by a comma and the last
number in the list, 100. Finally, write the closing bracket to complete the set.

Write the label, , followed by an equal sign and then a bracket.

Write the first three even numbers separated by commas, beginning with the number 2 to establish a pattern.

Next, write the ellipsis followed by a comma and the last number in the list, 100.

Finally, write the closing bracket to complete the set.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             1.1 · Basic Set Concepts 9

        YOUR TURN 1.4

  1. Use an ellipsis to write the set of single digit numbers greater than or equal to zero and label it with a capital .

Our number system is made up of several different infinite sets of numbers. The set of integers,  is another infinite

set of numbers. It includes all the positive and negative counting numbers and the number zero. There is no largest or
smallest integer.

  EXAMPLE 1.5

Writing an Infinite Set Using the Roster Method and Ellipses

Write the set of integers using the roster method, and label it with a  .

     Solution
Step 1: As always, we write the label and then the opening bracket. Because the negative counting numbers are infinite,
to represent that the pattern continues without bound to the left, we must use an ellipsis as the first element in our list.
Step 2: We place a comma and follow it with at least three consecutive integers separated by commas to establish a
pattern.
Step 3: Add an ellipsis to the end of the list to show that the set of integers continues without bound to the right.
Complete the list with a closing bracket. The set of integers may be represented as follows:



        YOUR TURN 1.5
  1. Write the set of odd numbers greater than 0 and label it with a capital .

A shorthand way to write sets is with the use of set builder notation, which is a verbal description or formula for the
set. For example, the set of all lowercase letters of the English alphabet, , written in set builder notation is:

This is read as, "Set is the set of all elements such that is a lowercase letter of the English alphabet."

EXAMPLE 1.6

Writing a Set Using Set Builder Notation
Using set builder notation, write the set of all types of balls. Explain what the notation means.

     Solution                               is the set of all elements such that is a ball." This set can be written in set
The verbal description of the set is, "Set
builder notation as follows:

        YOUR TURN 1.6
  1. Using set builder notation, write the set of all types of cars.

  EXAMPLE 1.7
Writing Sets Using Various Methods
Consider the set of letters in the word "happy." Determine the best way to represent this set, and then write the set using
10 1 · Sets

either the roster method or set builder notation, whichever is more appropriate.

     Solution
Because the letters in the word "happy" consist of a small finite set, the best way to represent this set is with the roster
method. Choose a label to represent the set, such as .

                      .

Notice that the letter "p" is only represented one time. This occurs because when representing members of a set, each
unique element is only listed once no matter how many times it occurs. Duplicate elements are never repeated when
representing members of a set.

      YOUR TURN 1.7
1. Use the roster method or set builder notation to represent the collection of all musical instruments.

Computing the Cardinal Value of a Set

Almost all the sets most people work with outside of pure mathematics are finite sets. For these sets, the cardinal value
or cardinality of the set is the number of elements in the set. For finite set , the cardinality is denoted symbolically as

       . For example, a set that contains four elements has a cardinality of 4.

How do we measure the cardinality of infinite sets? The `smallest' infinite set is the set of natural numbers, or counting

numbers,                         . This set has a cardinality of (pronounced "aleph-null"). All sets that have the same

cardinality as the set of natural numbers are countably infinite. This concept, as well as notation using aleph, was
introduced by mathematician Georg Cantor who once said, "A set is a Many that allows itself to be thought of as a One."

EXAMPLE 1.8

Computing the Cardinal Value of a Set
Write the cardinal value of each of the following sets in symbolic form.

 1.
 2. The empty set.

     Solution
 1. There are 5 distinct elements in set : a fork, a spoon, a knife, a meat thermometer, and a can opener. Therefore,

      the cardinal value of set is 5 and written symbolically as
 2. Because the empty set does not have any elements in it, the cardinality of the empty set is zero. Symbolically we

      write this as:

             YOUR TURN 1.8

Write the cardinal value of each of the following sets in symbolic form.

1. Set is the set of prime numbers less than 2.

2. Set is the set of lowercase letters of the English alphabet,           .

Now that we have learned to represent finite and infinite sets using both the roster method and set builder notation, we
should also be able to determine if a set is finite or infinite based on its verbal or symbolic description. One way to
determine if a set is finite or not is to determine the cardinality of the set. If the cardinality of a set is a natural number,
then the set is finite.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         1.1 · Basic Set Concepts 11

EXAMPLE 1.9

Differentiating Between Finite and Infinite Sets
Classify each of the following sets as infinite or finite.

1.

2. is the set of lowercase letters of the English Alphabet,                  .

3. 

    Solution

1.            . Since 5 is a natural number, the set is finite.

2.            . Since 26 is a natural number, the set is finite.

3. Set  is the set of rational numbers or fractions. Because the set of integers is a subset of the set of rational

    numbers, and the set of integers is infinite, the set of rational numbers is also infinite. There is no smallest or
    largest rational number.

      YOUR TURN 1.9

Classify each of the following sets as infinite or finite.
    1.
    2.

Equal versus Equivalent Sets

When speaking or writing we tend to use equal and equivalent interchangeably, but there is an important distinction
between their meanings. Consider a new Ford Escape Hybrid and a new Toyota Rav4 Hybrid. Both cars are hybrid electric
sport utility vehicles; in that sense, they are equivalent. They will both get you from place to place in a relatively fuel-
efficient way. In this example we are comparing the single member set {Toyota Rav4 Hybrid} to the single member set
{Ford Escape Hybrid}. Since these two sets have the same number of elements, they are also equivalent mathematically,
meaning they have the same cardinality. But they are not equal, because the two cars have different looks and features,
and probably even handle differently. Each manufacturer will emphasize the features unique to their vehicle to persuade
you to buy it; if the SUVs were truly equal, there would be no reason to choose one over the other.

Now consider two Honda CR-Vs that are made with exactly the same parts, on the same assembly line within a few

minutes of each other--these SUVs are equal. They are identical to each other, containing the same elements without

regard to order, and the only differentiator when making a purchasing decision would be varied pricing at different

dealerships. The set {Honda CR-V} is equal to the set {Honda CR-V}. Symbolically, we represent equal sets as             and

equivalent sets as  .

Now, let us consider a Toyota dealership that has 10 RAV4s on the lot, 8 Prii, 7 Highlanders, and 12 Camrys. There is a
one-to-one relationship between the set of vehicles on the lot and the set consisting of the number of each type of
vehicle on the lot. Therefore, these two sets are equivalent, but not equal. The set {RAV4, Prius, Highlander, Camry} is
equivalent to the set {10, 8, 7, 12} because they have the same number of elements.

    VIDEO

    Equal and Equivalent Sets (https://openstax.org/r/Equal_and_Equivalent_Sets)

    If two sets are equal, they are also equivalent, because equal sets also have the same cardinality.

  EXAMPLE 1.10

Differentiating Between Equivalent and Equal Sets
Determine if the following pairs of sets are equal, equivalent, or neither.
12 1 · Sets

1.                           and

2. The empty set and the set of prime numbers less than 2.

3. The set of vowels in the word happiness and the set of consonants in the word happiness.

    Solution

1. Sets E and F both have a cardinal value of 5, but the elements in these sets are different. So, the two sets are

    equivalent, but they are not equal:  .

2. The set of prime numbers consists of the set of counting numbers greater than one that can only be divided evenly

    by one and itself. The set of prime numbers less than 2 is an empty set, since there are no prime numbers less than

    2. Therefore, these two sets are equal (and equivalent).

3. The set of vowels in the word happiness is  and the set of consonants in the word happiness is

              The cardinal value of these sets two sets is                   and             respectively.

    Because the cardinality of the two sets differs, they are not equivalent. Further, their elements are not identical, so

    they are also not equal.

             YOUR TURN 1.10

Determine if the following pairs of sets are equal, equivalent, or neither.

    1. Set                   and set
    2. Set                   and set
    3. Set                   and set

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Georg Cantor

                                            Figure 1.3 Georg Cantor (credit: Wikimedia, public domain)
  Georg Cantor, the father of modern set theory, was born during the year 1845 in Saint Petersburg, Russa and later
  moved to Germany as a youth. Besides being an accomplished mathematician, he also played the violin. Cantor
  received his doctoral degree in Mathematics at the age of 22.
  In 1870, at the age of 25 he established the uniqueness theorem for trigonometric series. His most significant work
  happened between 1874 and 1884, when he established the existence of transcendental numbers (also called
  irrational numbers) and proved that the set of real numbers are uncountably infinite--despite the objections of his
  former professor Leopold Kronecker.
  Cantor published his final treatise on set theory in 1897 at the age of 52, and was awarded the Sylvester Medial from
  the Royal Society of London in 1904 for his contributions to the field. At the heart of Cantor's work was his goal to
  solve the continuum problem, which later influenced the works of David Hilbert and Ernst Zermelo.
  References:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.1 · Basic Set Concepts 13

Wikipedia contributors. "Cantor." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 23 Mar. 2021. Web. 20 Jul. 2021.

Akihiro Kanamori, "Set Theory from Cantor to Cohen," Editor(s): Dov M. Gabbay, Akihiro Kanamori, John Woods,
Handbook of the History of Logic, North-Holland, Volume 6, 2012.

Check Your Understanding

 1. A _____________ is a well-defined collection of objects.

2. The _________________ of a finite set , denoted   , is the number of elements in set .

3. Determine if the following description describes a well-defined set: "The top 5 pizza restaurants in Chicago."

4. The United States is the only country to have landed people on the moon as of March 21, 2021. What is the
    cardinality of the set of all people who have walked on the moon prior to this date?

5. Set is a set of a dozen distinct donuts, and set  is a set of a dozen different types of apples. Is set  equal to set
       , equivalent to set , or neither?

6. Is the set of all butterflies in the world a finite set or an infinite set?

7. Represent the set of all upper-case letters of the English alphabet using both the roster method and set builder
    notation.

        SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, represent each set using the roster method.
     1. The set of primary colors: red, yellow, and blue.
     2. A set of the following flowers: rose, tulip, marigold, iris, and lily.
     3. The set of natural numbers between 50 and 100.
     4. The set of natural numbers greater than 17.
     5. The set of different pieces in a game of chess.
     6. The set of natural numbers less than 21.

For the following exercises, represent each set using set builder notation.
     7. The set of all types of lizards.
     8. The set of all stars in the universe.
     9. The set of all integer multiples of 3 that are greater than zero.
    10. The set of all integer multiples of 4 that are greater than zero.
    11. The set of all plants that are edible.
    12. The set of all even numbers.

For the following exercises, represent each set using the method of your choice.
    13. The set of all squares that are also circles.
    14. The set of natural numbers divisible by zero.
    15. The set of Mike and Carol's children on the TV show, The Brady Bunch.
    16. The set of all real numbers.
    17. The set of polar bears that live in Antarctica.
    18. The set of songs written by Prince.
    19. The set of children's books written and illustrated by Mo Willems.
    20. The set of seven colors commonly listed in a rainbow.

For the following exercises, determine if the collection of objects represents a well-defined set or not.
    21. The names of all the characters in the book, The Fault in Our Stars by John Green.
    22. The five greatest soccer players of all time.
    23. A group of old dogs that are able to learn new tricks.
    24. A list of all the movies directed by Spike Lee as of 2021.
    25. The group of all zebras that can fly an airplane.
    26. The group of National Baseball League Hall of Fame members who have hit over 700 career home runs.

For the following exercises, compute the cardinal value of each set.
    27.
14 1 · Sets

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36. The set of numbers on a standard 6-sided die.

For the following exercises, determine whether set  and set  are equal, equivalent or neither.
                                                                      .
37.                      ;
                                                                  .
38.             ;                 .
                                                                                   .
39.                      ;

40.          ;        .

41.                ;                 .

42.                            ;

43.

44.                         ;

For the following exercises, determine if the set described is finite or infinite.
    45. The set of natural numbers.
    46. The empty set.
    47. The set consisting of all jazz venues in New Orleans, Louisiana.
    48. The set of all real numbers.
    49. The set of all different types of cheeses.
    50. The set of all words in Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, published in 2020.

1.2 Subsets

Figure 1.4 The players on a soccer team who are actively participating in a game are a subset of the greater set of team
members. (Credit: "PAFC-Mezokovesd-108" by Puskás Akadémia/Flickr, Public Domain Mark 1.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Represent subsets and proper subsets symbolically.
 2. Compute the number of subsets of a set.
 3. Apply concepts of subsets and equivalent sets to finite and infinite sets.
The rules of Major League Soccer (MLS) allow each team to have up to 30 players on their team. However, only 18 of
these players can be listed on the game day roster, and of the 18 listed, 11 players must be selected to start the game.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1.2 · Subsets 15

How the coaches and general managers form the team and choose the starters for each game will determine the
success of the team in any given year.

The entire group of 30 players is each team's set. The group of game day players is a subset of the team set, and the
group of 11 starters is a subset of both the team set and the set of players on the game day roster.

Set is a subset of set if every member of set is also a member of set . Symbolically, this relationship is written as
         .

Sets can be related to each other in several different ways: they may not share any members in common, they may share
some members in common, or they may share all members in common. In this section, we will explore the way we can
select a group of members from the whole set.

      Every set is also a subset of itself,

Recall the set of flatware in our kitchen drawer from Section 1.1,

                                                   . Suppose you are preparing to eat dinner, so you pull a fork and

a knife from the drawer to set the table. The set                      is a subset of set , because every member or

element of set is also a member of set . More specifically, set is a proper subset of set , because there are other

members of set not in set . This is written as     . The only subset of a set that is not a proper subset of the set

would be the set itself.

The empty set or null set, , is a proper subset of every set, except itself.

Graphically, sets are often represented as circles. In the following graphic, set is represented as a circle completely
enclosed inside the circle representing set , showing that set is a proper subset of set . The element represents
an element that is in both set and set .

                                                                       Figure 1.5

While we can list all the subsets of a finite set, it is not possible to list all the possible subsets of an infinite set, as it
would take an infinitely long time.

EXAMPLE 1.11

Listing All the Proper Subsets of a Finite Set                                                     . List all the
Set is a set of reading materials available in a shop at the airport,
subsets of set .

     Solution
Step 1: It is best to begin with the set itself, as every set is a subset of itself. In our example, the cardinality of set is

            . There is only one subset of set that has the same number of elements of set
                                             .

Step 2: Next, list all the proper subsets of the set containing        elements. In this case,     . There are three
                                                                                                           .
subsets that each contain two elements:                             ,                  , and

Step 3: Continue this process by listing all the proper subsets of the set containing           elements. In this case,

. There are three subsets that contain one element:                          ,         , and    .

Step 4: Finally, list the subset containing 0 elements, or the empty set: .
16 1 · Sets                                                             . List all the possible subsets of set

              YOUR TURN 1.11
       1. Consider the set of possible outcomes when you flip a coin,

EXAMPLE 1.12

Determining Whether a Set Is a Proper Subset

Consider the set of common political parties in the United States,                                                 .

Determine if the following sets are proper subsets of .

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. is a proper subset of , written symbolically as       because every member of is a member of set , but

    also contains at least one element that is not in .

2. is a single member proper subset of , written symbolically as        because Green is a member of set , but

    also contains other members (such as Democratic) that are not in .

3. is subset of because every member of is also a member of , but it is not a proper subset of because there

    are no members of that are not also in set . We can represent the relationship symbolically as              or more

    precisely, set is equal to set ,

      YOUR TURN 1.12                                                                          . Give an example

Consider the set of generation I legendary Pokémon,
of a proper subset containing:

    1. one member.
    2. three members.
    3. no members.

EXAMPLE 1.13

Expressing the Relationship between Sets Symbolically

Consider the subsets of a standard deck of cards:                                          ;                    ;

              ; and                   .

Express the relationship between the following sets symbolically.

1. Set  and set .
2. Set  and set .
3. Set  and .

    Solution

1.      .     is a proper subset of set .
              is a proper subset of set .
2.      .
                         . is subset of itself, but not a proper subset of itself because
3.                                                                                         is equal to itself.

      YOUR TURN 1.13                                                    and the set of even numbers,

1. Express the relationship between the set of natural numbers,
                            .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      1.2 · Subsets 17

Exponential Notation

So far, we have figured out how many subsets exist in a finite set by listing them. Recall that in Example 1.11, when we

listed all the subsets of the three-element set                                 we saw that there are eight subsets. In

Your Turn 1.11, we discovered that there are four subsets of the two-element subset,                  . A one-element

set has two subsets, the empty set and itself. The only subset of the empty set is the empty set itself. But how can we

easily figure out the number of subsets in a very large finite set? It turns out that the number of subsets can be found by

raising 2 to the number of elements in the set, using exponential notation to represent repeated multiplication. For

example, the number of subsets of the set                                    is equal to              . Exponential

notation is used to represent repeated multiplication,                    , where appears as a factor times.

FORMULA

The number of subsets of a finite set  is equal to 2 raised to the power of        , where  is the number of
elements in set :                                           .

    Note that        , so this formula works for the empty set, also.

EXAMPLE 1.14

Computing the Number of Subsets of a Set
Find the number of subsets of each of the following sets.

 1. The set of top five scorers of all time in the NBA:

2. The set of the top four bestselling albums of all time:

                                                                                .

3.                           .

    Solution

1.            . So, the total number of subsets of                           .

2.            . Therefore, the total number of subsets of              .

3.            . So, the total number of subsets of           .

      YOUR TURN 1.14
1. Compute the total number of subsets in the set of the top nine tennis grand slam singles winners,

                                                                                                .

Equivalent Subsets

In the early 17th century, the famous astronomer Galileo Galilei found that the set of natural numbers and the subset of
the natural numbers consisting of the set of square numbers, , are equivalent. Upon making this discovery, he
conjectured that the concepts of less than, greater than, and equal to did not apply to infinite sets.

Sequences and series are defined as infinite subsets of the set of natural numbers by forming a relationship between

the sequence or series in terms of a natural number, . For example, the set of even numbers can be defined using set

builder notation as                                         . The formula in this case replaces every natural number with

two times the number, resulting in the set of even numbers,               . The set of even numbers is also equivalent to

the set of natural numbers.
18 1 · Sets

      WHO KNEW?

Employment Opportunities

You can make a career out of working with sets. Applications of equivalent sets include relational database design
and analysis.

Relational databases that store data are tables of related information. Each row of a table has the same number of
columns as every other row in the table; in this way, relational databases are examples of set equivalences for finite
sets. In a relational database, a primary key is set up to identify all related information. There is a one-to-one
relationship between the primary key and any other information associated with it.

Database design and analysis is a high demand career with a median entry-level salary of about $85,000 per year,
according to salary.com.

EXAMPLE 1.15

Writing Equivalent Subsets of an Infinite Set                                . Write this set using set builder notation by
Using natural numbers, multiples of 3 are given by the sequence              .
expressing each multiple of 3 using a formula in terms of a natural number,

Solution

                                 or  . In this example, is a multiple of 3 and is a

natural number. The symbol is read as "is a member or element of." Because there is a one-to-one correspondence

between the set of multiples of 3 and the natural numbers, the set of multiples of 3 is an equivalent subset of the natural

numbers.

      YOUR TURN 1.15                                                            . Write this set using set builder

1. Using natural numbers, multiples of 5 are given by the sequence
    notation by associating each multiple of 5 in terms of a natural number, .

  EXAMPLE 1.16

Creating Equivalent Subsets of a Finite Set That Are Not Equal
A fast-food restaurant offers a deal where you can select two options from the following set of four menu items for $6: a
chicken sandwich, a fish sandwich, a cheeseburger, or 10 chicken nuggets. Javier and his friend Michael are each
purchasing lunch using this deal. Create two equivalent, but not equal, subsets that Javier and Michael could choose to
have for lunch.

     Solution
The possible two-element subsets are: {chicken sandwich, fish sandwich}, {chicken sandwich, cheeseburger}, {chicken
sandwich, chicken nuggets}, {fish sandwich, cheeseburger}, {fish sandwich, chicken nuggets}, and {cheeseburger,
chicken nuggets}. One possible solution is that Javier picked the set {chicken sandwich, chicken nuggets}, while Michael
chose the {cheeseburger, chicken nuggets}. Because Javier and Michael both picked two items, but not exactly the same
two items, these sets are equivalent, but not equal.

      YOUR TURN 1.16

1. Serena and Venus Williams walk into the same restaurant as Javier and Michael, but they order the same pair of
    items, resulting in equal sets of choices. If Venus ordered a fish sandwich and chicken nuggets, what did Serena
    order?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.2 · Subsets 19

  EXAMPLE 1.17

Creating Equivalent Subsets of a Finite Set
A high school volleyball team at a small school consists of the following players: {Angie, Brenda, Colleen, Estella, Maya,
Maria, Penny, Shantelle}. Create two possible equivalent starting line-ups of six players that the coach could select for
the next game.

     Solution
There are actually 28 possible ways that the coach could choose his starting line-up. Two such equivalent subsets are
{Angie, Brenda, Maya, Maria, Penny, Shantelle} and {Angie, Brenda, Colleen, Estella, Maria, Shantelle}. Each subset has
six members, but they are not identical, so the two sets are equivalent but not equal.

      YOUR TURN 1.17

1. Consider the same group of volleyball players from above: {Angie, Brenda, Colleen, Estella, Maya, Maria, Penny,
    Shantelle}. The team needs to select a captain and an assistant captain from their members. List two possible
    equivalent subsets that they could select.

Check Your Understanding

 8. Every member of a __________ of a set is also a member of the set.

9. Explain what distinguishes a proper subset of a set from a subset of a set.

10. The __________ set is a proper subset of every set except itself.

11. Is the following statement true or false?

12. If the cardinality of set is     , then set has a total of ___________ subsets.

13. Set is ______________ to set if

14. If every member of set is a member of set and every member of set is also a member set , then set is
      ____________ to set .

        SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, list all the proper subsets of each set.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.

For the following exercises, determine the relationship between the two sets and write the relationship symbolically.

                                                                                                                          and

     5. and
     6. and
     7. and
     8. and
     9. and
    10. and
    11. and
    12. and
    13. and
    14. and

For the following exercises, calculate the total number of subsets of each set.
    15.
    16.
20 1 · Sets

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23. Set if
24. Set if

For the following exercises, use the set of letters in the word largest as the set,
    25. Find a subset of that is equivalent, but not equal, to the set:
    26. Find a subset of that is equal to the set:
    27. Find a subset of that is equal to the set:
    28. Find a subset of that is equivalent, but not equal, to the set
    29. Find a subset of that is equivalent, but not equal, to the set:
    30. Find a subset of that is equal to the set:
    31. Find two three-character subsets of set that are equivalent, but not equal, to each other.
    32. Find two three-character subsets of set that are equal to each other.
    33. Find two five-character subsets of set that are equal to each other.
    34. Find two five-character subsets of set that are equivalent, but not equal, to each other.

For the following exercises, use the set of integers as the set

35. Find two equivalent subset of with a cardinality of 7.

36. Find two equal subsets of with a cardinality of 4.

37. Find a subset of that is equivalent, but not equal to,

38. Find a subset of that is equivalent, but not equal to,

39. True or False. The set of natural numbers,                   , is equivalent to set

40. True or False. Set is an equivalent subset of the set of rational numbers,

1.3 Understanding Venn Diagrams

Figure 1.6 When assembling furniture, instructions with images are easier to follow, just like how set relationships are
easier to understand when depicted graphically. (credit: "Time to assemble more Ikea furniture!" by Rod Herrea/Flickr, CC
BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Utilize a universal set with two sets to interpret a Venn diagram.
 2. Utilize a universal set with two sets to create a Venn diagram.
 3. Determine the complement of a set.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      1.3 · Understanding Venn Diagrams 21

Have you ever ordered a new dresser or bookcase that required assembly? When your package arrives you excitedly
open it and spread out the pieces. Then you check the assembly guide and verify that you have all the parts required to
assemble your new dresser. Now, the work begins. Luckily for you, the assembly guide includes step-by-step instructions
with images that show you how to put together your product. If you are really lucky, the manufacturer may even provide
a URL or QR code connecting you to an online video that demonstrates the complete assembly process. We can likely all
agree that assembly instructions are much easier to follow when they include images or videos, rather than just written
directions. The same goes for the relationships between sets.

Interpreting Venn Diagrams

Venn diagrams are the graphical tools or pictures that we use to visualize and understand relationships between sets.
Venn diagrams are named after the mathematician John Venn, who first popularized their use in the 1880s. When we use
a Venn diagram to visualize the relationships between sets, the entire set of data under consideration is drawn as a
rectangle, and subsets of this set are drawn as circles completely contained within the rectangle. The entire set of data
under consideration is known as the universal set.

Consider the statement: All trees are plants. This statement expresses the relationship between the set of all plants and

the set of all trees. Because every tree is a plant, the set of trees is a subset of the set of plants. To represent this

relationship using a Venn diagram, the set of plants will be our universal set and the set of trees will be the subset. Recall

that this relationship is expressed symbolically as:  To create a Venn diagram, first we draw a rectangle

and label the universal set "  " Then we draw a circle within the universal set and label it with the word "Trees."

                                                                              Figure 1.7
This section will introduce how to interpret and construct Venn diagrams. In future sections, as we expand our
knowledge of relationships between sets, we will also develop our knowledge and use of Venn diagrams to explore how
multiple sets can be combined to form new sets.

  EXAMPLE 1.18

Interpreting the Relationship between Sets in a Venn Diagram
Write the relationship between the sets in the following Venn diagram, in words and symbolically.

                                                                              Figure 1.8
     Solution
The set of terriers is a subset of the universal set of dogs. In other words, the Venn diagram depicts the relationship that
all terriers are dogs. This is expressed symbolically as

        YOUR TURN 1.18
  1. Write the relationship between the sets in the following Venn diagram, in words and symbolically.
22 1 · Sets

     So far, the only relationship we have been considering between two sets is the subset relationship, but sets can be
     related in other ways. Lions and tigers are both different types of cats, but no lions are tigers, and no tigers are lions.
     Because the set of all lions and the set of all tigers do not have any members in common, we call these two sets disjoint
     sets, or non-overlapping sets.
     Two sets and are disjoint sets if they do not share any elements in common. That is, if is a member of set , then
     is not a member of set . If is a member of set , then is not a member of set . To represent the relationship
     between the set of all cats and the sets of lions and tigers using a Venn diagram, we draw the universal set of cats as a
     rectangle and then draw a circle for the set of lions and a separate circle for the set of tigers within the rectangle,
     ensuring that the two circles representing the set of lions and the set of tigers do not touch or overlap in any way.

                                                                                    Figure 1.9
        EXAMPLE 1.19
     Describing the Relationship between Sets
     Describe the relationship between the sets in the following Venn diagram.

                                                                                   Figure 1.10
           Solution
     The set of triangles and the set of squares are two disjoint subsets of the universal set of two-dimensional figures. The
     set of triangles does not share any elements in common with the set of squares. No triangles are squares and no
     squares are triangles, but both squares and triangles are 2D figures.

              YOUR TURN 1.19
        1. Describe the relationship between the sets in the following Venn diagram.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.3 · Understanding Venn Diagrams 23

Creating Venn Diagrams

The main purpose of a Venn diagram is to help you visualize the relationship between sets. As such, it is necessary to be
able to draw Venn diagrams from a written or symbolic description of the relationship between sets.

Procedure

To create a Venn diagram:

1. Draw a rectangle to represent the universal set, and label it                          .

2. Draw a circle within the rectangle to represent a subset of the universal set and label it with the set name.

If there are multiple disjoint subsets of the universal set, their separate circles should not touch or overlap.

  EXAMPLE 1.20                                                                               , then draw a circle
                                                                                                          .
Drawing a Venn Diagram to Represent the Relationship Between Two Sets
Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between each of the sets.

 1. All rectangles are parallelograms.
 2. All women are people.

     Solution
 1. The set of rectangles is a subset of the set of parallelograms.

      First, draw a rectangle to represent the universal set and label it with
      completely within the rectangle, and label it with the name of the set it represents,

                                                                             Figure 1.11

In this example, both letters and names are used to represent the sets involved, but this is not necessary. You may use
either letters or names alone, as long as the relationship is clearly depicted in the diagram, as shown below.

                                                                             Figure 1.12
or
24 1 · Sets

                                                                            Figure 1.13
2. The universal set is the set of people, and the set of all women is a subset of the set of people.

                                 Figure 1.14

             YOUR TURN 1.20

1. Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between each of the sets. All natural numbers are

             integers.

2.           . Draw a Venn diagram to represent this relationship.

EXAMPLE 1.21

Drawing a Venn Diagram to Represent the Relationship Between Three Sets
All bicycles and all cars have wheels, but no bicycle is a car. Draw a Venn diagram to represent this relationship.

Solution

Step 1: The set of bicycles and the set of cars are both subsets of the set of things with wheels. The universal set is the

set of things with wheels, so we first draw a rectangle and label it with                  .

Step 2: Because the set of bicycles and the set of cars do not share any elements in common, these two sets are disjoint
and must be drawn as two circles that do not touch or overlap with the universal set.

                                 Figure 1.15

      YOUR TURN 1.21
1. Airplanes and birds can fly, but no birds are airplanes. Draw a Venn diagram to represent this relationship.

The Complement of a Set

Recall that if set is a proper subset of set , the universal set (written symbolically as  ), then there is at least one

element in set that is not in set . The set of all the elements in the universal set that are not in the subset is

called the complement of set , . In set builder notation this is written symbolically as:                            The

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           1.3 · Understanding Venn Diagrams 25

symbol is used to represent the phrase, "is a member of," and the symbol is used to represent the phrase, "is not a
member of." In the Venn diagram below, the complement of set is the region that lies outside the circle and inside the
rectangle. The universal set includes all of the elements in set and all of the elements in the complement of set ,
and nothing else.

                                  Figure 1.16

Consider the set of digit numbers. Let this be our universal set,                      Now, let set              be the

subset of consisting of all the prime numbers in set ,                The complement of set is

              The following Venn diagram represents this relationship graphically.

                                  Figure 1.17

EXAMPLE 1.22

Finding the Complement of a Set
For both of the questions below, is a proper subset of .

1. Given the universal set                                                                    and set
2. Given the universal set
                                        , find                        , find
                                  and

Solution

1. The complement of set is the set of all elements in the universal set that are not in set

                            .

2. The complement of set is the set of all dogs that are not beagles. All members of set are in the universal set

because they are dogs, but they are not in set because they are not beagles. This relationship can be expressed in

set build notation as follows:                                     ,                            , or

YOUR TURN 1.22

For both of the questions below,  is a proper subset of .                     and set                                    ,
    1. Given the universal set                      and set
         find .                                                               find .
    2. Given the universal set

Check Your Understanding

15. A Venn diagram is a graphical representation of the _____________ between sets.
16. In a Venn diagram, the set of all data under consideration, the _____________ set, is drawn as a rectangle.
17. Two sets that do not share any elements in common are _____________ sets.
26 1 · Sets

18. The _____________ of a subset or the universal set, , is the set of all members of  that are not in .
19. The sets and are _____________ subsets of the universal set.

        SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, interpret each Venn diagram and describe the relationship between the sets, symbolically
and in words.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

     7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.3 · Understanding Venn Diagrams 27

8.

For the following exercises, create a Venn diagram to represent the relationships between the sets.

9. All birds have wings.

10. All cats are animals.

11. All almonds are nuts, and all pecans are nuts, but no almonds are pecans.

12. All rectangles are quadrilaterals, and all trapezoids are quadrilaterals, but no rectangles are trapezoids.

13. Lizards Reptiles.

14. Ladybugs Insects.

15. Ladybugs Insects and Ants Insects, but no Ants are Ladybugs.

16. Lizards Reptiles and Snakes Reptiles, but no Lizards are Snakes.

17. and are disjoint subsets of

18. and are disjoint subsets of .

19. is a subset of .

20. is a subset of .

21.  Jazz,    Music, and           .

22.  Reggae,           Music, and     .

23.  Jazz, Reggae, and             Music are sets with the following relationships:                  and is

     disjoint from .

24.  Jazz, Bebop, and              Music are sets with the following relationships:  and             .

For the following exercises, the universal set is the set of single digit numbers,                      . Find the
complement of each subset of .

    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.

For the following exercises, the universal set is  {Bashful, Doc, Dopey, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Sneezy}. Find the

complement of each subset of .

33.  {Happy, Bashful, Grumpy}

34.  {Sleepy, Sneezy}

35.  {Doc}

36.  {Doc, Dopey}

37.

38.  {Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, Dopey}

For the following exercises, the universal set is          . Find the complement of each subset of .
    39.
    40.
    41.
    42.

For the following exercises, use the Venn diagram to determine the members of the complement of set     .

43.
28 1 · Sets

          44.

          45.

          46.

   1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets

     Figure 1.18 A large, multigenerational family contains an intersection and a union of sets. (credit: "Family Photo Shoot
     Bani Syakur" by Mainur Risyada/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Learning Objectives

     After completing this section, you should be able to:
      1. Determine the intersection of two sets.
      2. Determine the union of two sets.
      3. Determine the cardinality of the union of two sets.
      4. Apply the concepts of AND and OR to set operations.
      5. Draw conclusions from Venn diagrams with two sets.
     The movie Yours, Mine, and Ours was originally released in 1968 and starred Lucille Ball and Henry Fonda. This movie,
     which is loosely based on a true story, is about the marriage of Helen, a widow with eight children, and Frank, a widower
     with ten children, who then have an additional child together. The movie is a comedy that plays on the interpersonal and
     organizational struggles of feeding, bathing, and clothing twenty people in one household.
     If we consider the set of Helen's children and the set of Frank's children, then the child they had together is the
     intersection of these two sets, and the collection of all their children combined is the union of these two sets. In this
     section, we will explore the operations of union and intersection as it relates to two sets.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 29

The Intersection of Two Sets

The members that the two sets share in common are included in the intersection of two sets. To be in the intersection

of two sets, an element must be in both the first set and the second set. In this way, the intersection of two sets is a

logical AND statement. Symbolically, intersection is written as:    . intersection is written in set builder

notation as:                              .

Let us look at Helen's and Frank's children from the movie Yours, Mine, and Ours. Helen's children consist of the set

                                                                            and Frank's children are included in the set

                                                                               . intersection is the set

of children they had together.                   , because Joseph is in both set and set .

EXAMPLE 1.23

Finding the Intersection of Set  and Set
                                           Find
Set           and                                intersection

     Solution
The intersection of sets and include the elements that set and have in common: 3, 5, and 7.

     YOUR TURN 1.23

1. Set                and                 . Find intersection .

Notice that if sets and are disjoint sets, then they do not share any elements in common, and  intersection            is the
empty set, as shown in the Venn diagram below.

                                                       Figure 1.19

EXAMPLE 1.24

Determining the Intersection of Disjoint Sets

Set           and set                            Find

     Solution
Because sets and are disjoint, they do not share any elements in common. So, the intersection of set and set is
the empty set.

      YOUR TURN 1.24             and set                            . Find  .
1. Set

Notice that if set is a subset of set , then intersection is equal to set , as shown in the Venn diagram below.
30 1 · Sets

                                                           Figure 1.20

EXAMPLE 1.25

Finding the Intersection of a Set and a Subset

Set           and set                                   Find

     Solution                             intersection  is equal to set .  the set of odd natural
Because set is a subset of set ,
numbers.

      YOUR TURN 1.25             and set                   . Find     .
1. Set

The Union of Two Sets

Like the union of two families in marriage, the union of two sets includes all the members of the first set and all the

members of the second set. To be in the union of two sets, an element must be in the first set, the second set, or both. In

this way, the union of two sets is a logical inclusive OR statement. Symbolically, union is written as:     union

is written in set builder notation as:

Let us consider the sets of Helen's and Frank's children from the movie Yours, Mine, and Ours again. Helen's children is

set                                                                        and Frank's children is set

                                                                           . The union of these two

sets is the collection of all nineteen of their children,

Notice, Joseph is in both set and set , but he is only one child, so, he is only listed once in the union.

EXAMPLE 1.26

Finding the Union of Sets and             When and Overlap
                                                      . Find union .
Set           and set

     Solution
   union is the set formed by including all the unique elements in set , set , or both sets and :

                                    The first five elements of the union are the five unique elements in set . Even though 3, 5, and
7 are also members of set , these elements are only listed one time. Lastly, set includes the unique element 2, so 2 is
also included as part of the union of sets and .

             YOUR TURN 1.26

1. Set                       and set      . Find union .

When observing the union of sets and , notice that both set and set are subsets of union . Graphically,
union can be represented in several different ways depending on the members that they have in common. If and
are disjoint sets, then union would be represented with two disjoint circles within the universal set, as shown in the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 31

Venn diagram below.

If sets and                                                      Figure 1.21
that overlap.  share some, but not all, members in common, then the Venn diagram is drawn as two separate circles

                                                                             Figure 1.22

If every member of set is also a member of set , then is a subset of set , and union would be equal to set .
To draw the Venn diagram, the circle representing set should be completely enclosed in the circle containing set .

                                       Figure 1.23

EXAMPLE 1.27

Finding the Union of Sets and  When    and Are Disjoint
                                           Find
Set                  and set

     Solution                                                                                       and set .
Because sets and are disjoint, the union is simply the set containing all the elements in both set

      YOUR TURN 1.27          and set                     . Find     .
1. Set

EXAMPLE 1.28

Finding the Union of Sets and When One Set is a Subset of the Other

Set            and set                 Find

     Solution

Because set is a subset of set , union is equal to set .  
32 1 · Sets

      YOUR TURN 1.28                and set       . Find  .
1. Set

VIDEO
The Basics of Intersection of Sets, Union of Sets and Venn Diagrams (https://openstax.org/r/operation-on-Sets)

        TECH CHECK

Set Operation Practice
Sets Challenge is an application available on both Android and iPhone smartphones that allows you to practice and
gain familiarity with the operations of set union, intersection, complement, and difference.

                  Figure 1.24 Google Play Store image of Sets Challenge game. (credit: screenshot from Google Play)

The Sets Challenge application/game uses some notation that differs from the notation covered in the text.

· The complement of set in this text is written symbolically as but the Sets Challenge game uses to

             represent the complement operation.

· In the text we do not cover set difference between two sets and , represented in the game as                       In the

             game this operation removes from set all the elements in  For example, if set      and set

                   are subsets of the universal set                    then

             and                                  There is a project at the end of the chapter to research the set

             difference operation.

Determining the Cardinality of Two Sets

The cardinality of the union of two sets is the total number of elements in the set. Symbolically the cardinality of

union is written,                   . If two sets and are disjoint, the cardinality of union is the sum of the cardinality of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 33

set and the cardinality of set . If the two sets intersect, then intersection is a subset of both set   and set . This
means that if we add the cardinality of set and set , we will have added the number of elements in     intersection
twice, so we must then subtract it once as shown in the formula that follows.

FORMULA

The cardinality of union is found by adding the number of elements in set        to the number of elements in set
  , then subtracting the number of elements in the intersection of set and set  .
                                                   or

If sets and are disjoint, then                            and the formula is still valid, but simplifies to

EXAMPLE 1.29

Determining the Cardinality of the Union of Two Sets                is 20, and the number of elements in
The number of elements in set is 10, the number of elements in set
intersection is 4. Find the number of elements in union .

     Solution
Using the formula for determining the cardinality of the union of two sets, we can say

YOUR TURN 1.29

1. If           and                     then find         .

EXAMPLE 1.30

Determining the Cardinality of the Union of Two Disjoint Sets                           is 43, find the cardinality of
If and are disjoint sets and the cardinality of set is 37 and the cardinality of set          Because sets and are
union .

Solution

To find the cardinality of union , apply the formula,

disjoint,  is the empty set, therefore                 and

YOUR TURN 1.30

1. If           and                     then find      .

Applying Concepts of "AND" and "OR" to Set Operations

To become a licensed driver, you must pass some form of written test and a road test, along with several other
requirements depending on your age. To keep this example simple, let us focus on the road test and the written test. If
you pass the written test but fail the road test, you will not receive your license. If you fail the written test, you will not be
allowed to take the road test and you will not receive a license to drive. To receive a driver's license, you must pass the
written test AND the road test. For an "AND" statement to be true, both conditions that make up the statement must be
true. Similarly, the intersection of two sets and is the set of elements that are in both set and set . To be a
member of intersection , an element must be in set and also must be in set . The intersection of two sets
corresponds to a logical "AND" statement.

The union of two sets is a logical inclusive "OR" statement. Say you are at a birthday party and the host offers Leah,
34 1 · Sets

Lenny, Maya, and you some cake or ice cream for dessert. Leah asks for cake, Lenny accepts both cake and ice cream,
Maya turns down both, and you choose only ice cream. Leah, Lenny, and you are all having dessert. The "OR" statement
is true if at least one of the components is true. Maya is the only one who did not have cake or ice cream; therefore, she
did not have dessert and the "OR" statement is false. To be in the union of two sets and , an element must be in set
or set or both set and set .

EXAMPLE 1.31

Applying the "AND" or "OR" Operation
                                                          and

Find the set consisting of elements in:

1.
2.
3.
4.

    Solution

1.                                  because only the elements 0 and 12 are members of both set and set .

2.                                                             because the set or is the collection of all elements in set or set ,

    or both.

3.                                                             because the set or is the collection of all elements in set or set

             , or both.

4.                                  Parentheses are evaluated first:               because the only

    member that both set and set share in common is 8. So, now we need to find                            Because

    the word translates to the union operation, the problem becomes                which is equal to

             YOUR TURN 1.31

                            and             and

Find the set consisting of elements in:

    1.        .

    2.                   .

    3.        .

    4.                           .

EXAMPLE 1.32

Determine and Apply the Appropriate Set Operations to Solve the Problem
Don Woods is serving cake and ice cream at his Juneteenth celebration. The party has a total of 54 guests in attendance.
Suppose 30 guests requested cake, 20 guests asked for ice cream, and 12 guests did not have either cake or ice cream.

1. How many guests had cake or ice cream?
2. How many guests had cake and ice cream?

    Solution

1. The total number of people at the party is 54, and 12 people did not have cake or ice cream. Recall that the total

    number of elements in the universal set is always equal to the number of elements in a subset plus the number of

    elements in the complement of the set,                     That means

                                                               , or equivalently,

                                                                      A total of 42 people at the party had cake

    or ice cream.

2. To determine the number of people who had both cake and ice cream, we need to find the intersection of the set of

    people who had cake and the set of people who had ice cream. From Question 1, the number of people who had

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 35

cake or ice cream is 42. This is the union of the two sets. The formula for the union of two sets is

                        Use the information given in the problem and substitute the known values into

the formula to solve for the number of people in the intersection:  Adding 30 and 20, the

equation simplifies to  Which means

        YOUR TURN 1.32

  Ravi and Priya are serving soup and salad along with the main course at their wedding reception. The reception will
  have a total of 150 guests in attendance. A total of 92 soups and 85 salads were ordered, while 23 guests did not
  order any soup or salad.

      1. How many guests had soup or salad or both?
      2. How many guests had both soup and a salad?

        WHO KNEW?

  The Real Inventor of the Venn Diagram

  John Venn, in his writings, references works by both John Boole and Augustus De Morgan, who referred to the circle
  diagrams commonly used to present logical relationships as Euler's circles. Leonhard Euler's works were published
  over 100 years prior to Venn's, and Euler may have been influenced by the works of Gottfried Leibniz.

  So, why does John Venn get all the credit for these graphical depictions? Venn was the first to formalize the use of
  these diagrams in his book Symbolic Logic, published in 1881. Further, he made significant improvements in their
  design, including shading to highlight the region of interest. The mathematician C.L. Dodgson, also known as Lewis
  Carroll, built upon Venn's work by adding an enclosing universal set.

  Invention is not necessarily coming up with an initial idea. It is about seeing the potential of an idea and applying it to
  a new situation.

  References:

  Margaret E. Baron. "A Note on the Historical Development of Logic Diagrams: Leibniz, Euler and Venn." The
  Mathematical Gazette, vol. 53, no. 384, 1969, pp. 113-125. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/3614533. Accessed 15 July
  2021.

  Deborah Bennett. "Drawing Logical Conclusions." Math Horizons, vol. 22, no. 3, 2015, pp. 12-15. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/
  stable/10.4169/mathhorizons.22.3.12. Accessed 15 July 2021.

Drawing Conclusions from a Venn Diagram with Two Sets

All Venn diagrams will display the relationships between the sets, such as subset, intersecting, and/or disjoint. In
addition to displaying the relationship between the two sets, there are two main additional details that Venn diagrams
can include: the individual members of the sets or the cardinality of each disjoint subset of the universal set.
A Venn diagram with two subsets will partition the universal set into 3 or 4 sections depending on whether they are
disjoint or intersecting sets. Recall that the complement of set , written is the set of all elements in the universal set
that are not in set

Figure 1.25 Side-by-side Venn diagrams with disjoint and intersecting sets, respectively.
36 1 · Sets

       EXAMPLE 1.33
     Using a Venn Diagram to Draw Conclusions about Set Membership

                                                  Figure 1.26

1. Find
2. Find
3. Find .
4. Find

    Solution

1.                    because union is the collection of all elements in set or set or both.

2. Because and are disjoint sets, there are no elements that are in both and . Therefore, intersection is

    the empty set,

3. The complement of set is the set of all elements in the universal set that are not in set :

4. The cardinality, or number of elements in set

    YOUR TURN 1.33

                      Venn diagram with two intersecting sets and members.

    1. Find   .
    2. Find   .
    3. Find    .
    4. Find
                   .

  EXAMPLE 1.34
Using a Venn Diagram to Draw Conclusions about Set Cardinality

            Figure 1.27 Venn diagram with two intersecting sets and number of elements in each section indicated.
 1. Find
 2. Find
 3. Find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 37

    Solution
1. The number of elements in or is the number of elements in union :
2. The number of elements in and is the number of elements in intersection :
3. The number of elements in set is the sum of all the numbers enclosed in the circle representing set :

       YOUR TURN 1.34

1. Find      Venn diagram with two disjoint sets and number of elements in each section.
2. Find
3. Find       .
                .

         .

Check Your Understanding

20. The ___________ of two sets and is the set of all elements that they share in common.

21. The ___________ of two sets and is the collection of all elements that are in set or set , or both set  and set
        .

22. The union of two sets and is represented symbolically as __________.

23. The intersection of two sets and is represented symbolically as ___________.

24. If set is a subset of set , then intersection is equal to set ___________.

25. If set is a subset of set , then union is equal to set ___________.

26. If set and set are disjoint sets, then intersection is the ___________ set.

27. The cardinality of union ,  , is found using the formula: ___________.

     SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the union or intersection of the sets as indicated.

         ,                      ,  , and                                                    .

 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
 7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.

For the following exercises, use the sets provided to apply the "AND" or "OR" operation as indicated to find the resulting
set.
38 1 · Sets

             ,                   ,  ,                        ,  , and  .

13. Find the set consisting of elements in and .
14. Find the set consisting of elements in or .
15. Find the set consisting of elements in or .
16. Find the set consisting of elements in and .
17. Find the set consisting of elements in and .
18. Find the set consisting of elements in or .
19. Find the set consisting of the elements in or or .
20. Find the set consisting of the elements in or or .
21. Find the set consisting of the elements in ( or ) and .
22. Find the set consisting of the elements in or ( and ).
23. Find the set consisting of elements in or ( and ).
24. Find the set consisting of elements in ( or ) and .

For the following exercises, use the Venn diagram provided to answer the following questions about the sets.

25. Find     .

26. Find     .

27. Find           .

28. Find           .

29. Find        .

30. Find        .

For the following exercises, use the Venn diagram provided to answer the following questions about the sets.

31. Find     .

32. Find     .

33. Find           .

34. Find           .

35. Find        .

36. Find        .

For the following exercises, use the Venn diagram provided to answer the following questions about the sets.

37. Find     .

38. Find     .

39. Find           .

40. Find           .

41. Find        .

42. Find        .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.4 · Set Operations with Two Sets 39

For the following exercises, determine the cardinality of the union of set and set .

43. If set  and set  , find     .

44. If set  and set  , find the number of elements in or .

45. If set  and set          , find the number of elements in                              or .

46. If set                   and Set

                     , find  .

For the following exercises, use the Venn diagram to determine the cardinality of union .

47.

48.

49.

50.
40 1 · Sets

   1.5 Set Operations with Three Sets

     Figure 1.28 Companies like Google collect data on how you use their services, but the data requires analysis to really
     mean something. (credit: "Man holding smartphone and searches through google" by Nenad Stojkovic/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Learning Objectives

     After completing this section, you should be able to:
       1. Interpret Venn diagrams with three sets.
       2. Create Venn diagrams with three sets.
       3. Apply set operations to three sets.
       4. Prove equality of sets using Venn diagrams.
     Have you ever searched for something on the Internet and then soon after started seeing multiple advertisements for
     that item while browsing other web pages? Large corporations have built their business on data collection and analysis.
     As we start working with larger data sets, the analysis becomes more complex. In this section, we will extend our
     knowledge of set relationships by including a third set.
     A Venn diagram with two intersecting sets breaks up the universal set into four regions; simply adding one additional set
     will increase the number of regions to eight, doubling the complexity of the problem.

    Venn Diagrams with Three Sets

     Below is a Venn diagram with two intersecting sets, which breaks the universal set up into four distinct regions.

                                                                                   Figure 1.29
     Next, we see a Venn diagram with three intersecting sets, which breaks up the universal set into eight distinct
     regions.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        1.5 · Set Operations with Three Sets 41

                                                                           Figure 1.30
        TECH CHECK
Shading Venn Diagrams
Venn Diagram is an Android application that allows you to visualize how the sets are related in a Venn diagram by
entering expressions and displaying the resulting Venn diagram of the set shaded in gray.

               Figure 1.31 Google Play Store image of Venn Diagram app. (credit: screenshot from Google Play)
The Venn Diagram application uses some notation that differs from the notation covered in this text.
 a. The complement of set in this text is written symbolically as , but the Venn Diagram app uses to
42 1 · Sets

      represent the complement operation.
b. The set difference operation, , is available in the Venn Diagram app, although this operation is not covered in

      the text.

It is recommended that you explore this application to expand your knowledge of Venn diagrams prior to continuing
with the next example.

In the next example, we will explore the three main blood factors, A, B and Rh. The following background information

about blood types will help explain the relationships between the sets of blood factors. If an individual has blood factor A

or B, those will be included in their blood type. The Rh factor is indicated with a or a . For example, if a person has all

three blood factors, then their blood type would be  . In the Venn diagram, they would be in the intersection of all

three sets,  If a person did not have any of these three blood factors, then their blood type would be

and they would be in the set            which is the region outside all three circles.

  EXAMPLE 1.35

Interpreting a Venn Diagram with Three Sets
Use the Venn diagram below, which shows the blood types of 100 people who donated blood at a local clinic, to answer
the following questions.

                                                     Figure 1.32

1. How many people with a type A blood factor donated blood?

2. Julio has blood type If he needs to have surgery that requires a blood transfusion, he can accept blood from

anyone who does not have a type A blood factor. How many people donated blood that Julio can accept?

3. How many people who donated blood do not have the  blood factor?

4. How many people had type A and type B blood?

    Solution
1. The number of people who donated blood with a type A blood factor will include the sum of all the values included

     in the A circle. It will be the union of sets

2. In part 1, it was determined that the number of donors with a type A blood factor is 46. To determine the number of

people who did not have a type A blood factor, use the following property, union is equal to , which means

                                 and                              Thus, 54 people donated blood that Julio can

accept.

3. This would be everyone outside the   circle, or everyone with a negative Rh factor,

4. To have both blood type A and blood type B, a person would need to be in the intersection of sets and . The two

circles overlap in the regions labeled  and          Add up the number of people in these two regions to get the

total:       This can be written symbolically as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1.5 · Set Operations with Three Sets 43

      YOUR TURN 1.35

Use the same Venn diagram in the example above to answer the following questions.
    1. How many people donated blood with a type B blood factor?
    2. How many people who donated blood did not have a type B blood factor?
    3. How many people who donated blood had a type B blood factor or were Rh+?

WHO KNEW?

Blood Types

Most people know their main blood type of A, B, AB, or O and whether they are  or , but did you know that

the International Society of Blood Transfusion recognizes twenty-eight additional blood types that have important

implications for organ transplants and successful pregnancy? For more information, check out this article:

Blood mystery solved: Two new blood types identified (https://openstax.org/r/Two-new-blood-types-identified)

Creating Venn Diagrams with Three Sets

In general, when creating Venn diagrams from data involving three subsets of a universal set, the strategy is to work
from the inside out. Start with the intersection of the three sets, then address the regions that involve the intersection of
two sets. Next, complete the regions that involve a single set, and finally address the region in the universal set that does
not intersect with any of the three sets. This method can be extended to any number of sets. The key is to start with the
region involving the most overlap, working your way from the center out.

  EXAMPLE 1.36

Creating a Venn Diagram with Three Sets
A teacher surveyed her class of 43 students to find out how they prepared for their last test. She found that 24 students
made flash cards, 14 studied their notes, and 27 completed the review assignment. Of the entire class of 43 students, 12
completed the review and made flash cards, nine completed the review and studied their notes, and seven made flash
cards and studied their notes, while only five students completed all three of these tasks. The remaining students did not
do any of these tasks. Create a Venn diagram with subsets labeled: "Notes," "Flash Cards," and "Review" to represent how
the students prepared for the test.

     Solution
Step 1: First, draw a Venn diagram with three intersecting circles to represent the three intersecting sets: Notes, Flash
Cards, and Review. Label the universal set with the cardinality of the class.

                                                                             Figure 1.33
Step 2: Next, in the region where all three sets intersect, enter the number of students who completed all three tasks.
44 1 · Sets

                                                 Figure 1.34

Step 3: Next, calculate the value and label the three sections where just two sets overlap.

a. Review and flash card overlap. A total of 12 students completed the review and made flash cards, but five of these

twelve students did all three tasks, so we need to subtract:     . This is the value for the region where the

flash card set intersects with the review set.

b. Review and notes overlap. A total of 9 students completed the review and studied their notes, but again, five of

these nine students completed all three tasks. So, we subtract:  . This is the value for the region where the

review set intersects with the notes set.

c. Flash card and notes overlap. A total of 7 students made flash cards and studied their notes; subtracting the five

students that did all three tasks from this number leaves 2 students who only studied their notes and made flash

cards. Add these values to the Venn diagram.

                                                 Figure 1.35

Step 4: Now, repeat this process to find the number of students who only completed one of these three tasks.

a. A total of 24 students completed flash cards, but we have already accounted for            of these. Thus,

             students who just made flash cards.

b. A total of 14 students studied their notes, but we have already accounted for              of these. Thus,

             students only studied their notes.

c. A total of 27 students completed the review assignment, but we have already accounted for                   of these,

which means                      students only completed the review assignment.

d. Add these values to the Venn diagram.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             1.5 · Set Operations with Three Sets 45

                                                Figure 1.36

Step 5: Finally, compute how many students did not do any of these three tasks. To do this, we add together each value

that we have already calculated for the separate and intersecting sections of our three sets:

. Because there 43 students in the class, and                , this means only one student

did not complete any of these tasks to prepare for the test. Record this value somewhere in the rectangle, but outside of

all the circles, to complete the Venn diagram.

                                                                             Figure 1.37

        YOUR TURN 1.36

  1. A group of 50 people attending a conference who preordered their lunch were able to select their choice of soup,
      salad, or sandwich. A total of 17 people selected soup, 29 people selected salad and 35 people selected a
      sandwich. Of these orders, 11 attendees selected soup and salad, 10 attendees selected soup and a sandwich,
      and 18 selected a salad and a sandwich, while eight people selected a soup, a salad, and a sandwich. Create a
      Venn diagram with subsets labeled "Soup," "Salad," and "Sandwich," and label the cardinality of each section of
      the Venn diagram as indicated by the data.

Applying Set Operations to Three Sets

Set operations are applied between two sets at a time. Parentheses indicate which operation should be performed first.
As with numbers, the inner most parentheses are applied first. Next, find the complement of any sets, then perform any
union or intersections that remain.
46 1 · Sets

EXAMPLE 1.37

Applying Set Operations to Three Sets

Perform the set operations as indicated on the following sets:                                          ,

                                                     and

1. Find
2. Find
3. Find

     Solution

1. Parentheses first, intersection equals                       the elements common to both and .

                                                          because the only elements that are in both sets are 0 and 6.

2. Parentheses first, union equals                                         the collection of all elements in set or set

     or both.                                                                           because the intersection of

     these two sets is the set of elements that are common to both sets.

3. Parentheses first, intersection equals                       Next, find The complement of set is the set of

     elements in the universal set that are not in set                                  Finally, find

             YOUR TURN 1.37

Using the same sets from Example 1.37, perform the set operations indicated.

     1. Find                 .
     2. Find                         .
     3. Find                            .

Notice that the answers to the Your Turn are the same as those in the Example. This is not a coincidence. The following
equivalences hold true for sets:

·                                 and                           These are the associative property for set intersection

     and set union.

·                    and                   These are the commutative property for set intersection and set union.

·                                          and                             These are the distributive property for sets

     over union and intersection, respectively.

Proving Equality of Sets Using Venn Diagrams

To prove set equality using Venn diagrams, the strategy is to draw a Venn diagram to represent each side of the equality,
then look at the resulting diagrams to see if the regions under consideration are identical.

Augustus De Morgan was an English mathematician known for his contributions to set theory and logic. De Morgan's law

for set complement over union states that                       . In the next example, we will use Venn diagrams to prove

De Morgan's law for set complement over union is true. But before we begin, let us confirm De Morgan's law works for a

specific example. While showing something is true for one specific example is not a proof, it will provide us with some

reason to believe that it may be true for all cases.

Let                                        and                  We will use these sets in the equation

To begin, find the value of the set defined by each side of the equation.

Step 1:        is the collection of all unique elements in set or set or both.                             The complement
                                                                                        . So, the left side the equation
of A union B,        , is the set of all elements in the universal set that are not in

             is equal to the set

Step 2: The right side of the equation is             is the set of all members of the universal set that are not in set .
                         Similarly,

Step 3: Finally,     is the set of all elements that are in both and The numbers 1 and 7 are common to both
sets, therefore,
                                           Because,       we have demonstrated that De Morgan's law for set

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           1.5 · Set Operations with Three Sets 47

complement over union works for this particular example. The Venn diagram below depicts this relationship.

                                                  Figure 1.38

EXAMPLE 1.38

Proving De Morgan's Law for Set Complement over Union Using a Venn Diagram                       Use a Venn
De Morgan's Law for the complement of the union of two sets and states that:
diagram to prove that De Morgan's Law is true.

Solution

Step 1: First, draw a Venn diagram representing the left side of the equality. The regions of interest are shaded to

highlight the sets of interest.       is shaded on the left, and  is shaded on the right.

                                                  Figure 1.39

Step 2: Next, draw a Venn diagram to represent the right side of the equation.    is shaded and  is shaded. Because

and mix to form                  is also shaded.

                      Figure 1.40 Venn diagram of intersection of the complement of two sets.

Step 3: Verify the conclusion. Because the shaded region in the Venn diagram for  matches the shaded region in

the Venn diagram for             , the two sides of the equation are equal, and the statement is true. This completes the

proof that De Morgan's law is valid.

YOUR TURN 1.38

1. De Morgan's Law for the complement of the intersection of two sets and states that                                 .

Use a Venn diagram to prove that De Morgan's Law is true.

Check Your Understanding

28. When creating a Venn diagram with two or more subsets, you should begin with the region involving the most
      _____________, then work your way from the center outward.

29. To construct a Venn diagram with three subsets, draw and label three circles that overlap in a common
48 1 · Sets

_____________ region inside the rectangle of the universal set to represent each of the three subsets.

30. In a Venn diagram with three sets, the area where all three sets, , , and  overlap is equal to the set
      _____________.

31. When performing set operations with three or more sets, the order of operations is inner most _____________ first,
      then find the ___________ of any sets, and finally perform any union or intersection operations that remain.

32. To prove set equality using Venn diagrams, draw a Venn diagram to represent each side of the ______________ and
      then compare the diagrams to determine if they match or not. If they match, the statement is ____________,
      otherwise it is not.

        SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES

A gamers club at Baily Middle School consisting of 25 members was surveyed to find out who played board games,
card games, or video games. Use the results depicted in the Venn diagram below to answer the following exercises.

1. How many gamers club members play all three types of games: board games, card games, and video games?

2. How many gamers are in the set Board Video?

3. If Javier is in the region with a total of three members, what type of games does he play?

4. How many gamers play video games?

5. How many gamers are in the set Board Card?

6. How many members of the gamers club do not play video games?

7. How many members of this club only play board games?

8. How many members of this club only play video games?

9. How many members of the gamers club play video and card games?

10. How many members of the gamers club are in the set   ?

A blood drive at City Honors High School recently collected blood from 140 students, staff, and faculty. Use the results
depicted in the Venn diagram below to answer the following exercises.

11. Blood type  is the universal acceptor. Of the 140 people who donated at City Honors, how many had blood

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                1.5 · Set Operations with Three Sets 49

       type  ?

12. Blood type is the universal donor. Anyone needing a blood transfusion can receive this blood type. How

       many people who donated blood during this drive had blood?

13. How many people donated with a type A blood factor?

14. How many people donated with a type A and type B blood factor (that is, they had type AB blood).

15. How many donors were ?

16. How many donors were not ?

17. Opal has blood type . If she needs to have surgery that requires a blood transfusion, she can accept blood

       from anyone who does not have a type B blood factor. How many people donated blood during this drive at City

       Honors that Opal can accept?

18. Find            .

19. Find            .

20. Find                  .

For the following exercises, create a three circle Venn diagram to represent the relationship between the described

sets.

21. The number of elements in the universal set, , is       . Sets , , and are subsets of :

                             , and          . Also,                                                , and

                       .

22. The number of elements in the universal set, , is       . Sets , , and are subsets of :

                             :              . Also,                ,                               , and                   .

23. The number of elements in the universal set, , is       . Sets , , and are subsets of :                          ,

             , and                 . Also,                                          , and                        .

24. The number of elements in the universal set, , is              . Sets , , and are subsets of :                      ,

             , and                 . Also,                                          , and                        .

25. The universal set, , has a cardinality of 36.

                                                                                                ,         , and

26. The universal set, , has a cardinality of 63.        ,

                                                                      , and                                .

27. The universal set, , has a cardinality of 72.

                                                                                                   , and

                                .

28. The universal set, , has a cardinality of 81.

                                                                                                   , and

                                .

29. The anime drawing club at Pratt Institute conducted a survey of its 42 members and found that 23 of them

       sketched with pastels, 28 used charcoal, and 17 used colored pencils. Of these, 10 club members used all three

       mediums, 18 used charcoal and pastels, 11 used colored pencils and charcoal, and 12 used colored pencils and

       pastels. The remaining club members did not use any of these three mediums.

30. A new SUV is selling with three optional packages: a sport package, a tow package, and an entertainment

       package. A dealership gathered the following data for all 31 of these vehicles sold during the month of July. A

       total of 18 SUVs included the entertainment package, 11 included the tow package, and 16 included the sport

       package. Of these, five SUVs included all three packages, seven were sold with both the tow package and sport

       package, 11 were sold with the entertainment and sport package, and eight were sold with the tow package

       and entertainment package. The remaining SUVs sold did not include any of these optional packages.

For the following exercises, perform the set operations as indicated on the following sets:

                                                                                                          , and

                    .

31. Find            .

32. Find            .

33. Find            .

34. Find            .

35. Find               .

36. Find               .

For the following exercises, perform the set operations as indicated on the following sets:

                                                            , and                            .
50 1 · Sets

37. Find         .
38. Find     .
39. Find
40. Find          .
41. Find       .
42. Find
                   .
                 .

For the following exercises, use Venn diagrams to prove the following properties of sets:

43. Commutative property for the union of two sets:             .

44. Commutative property for the intersection of two sets:         .

45. Associative property for the intersection of three sets:                               .

46. Associative property for the union of three sets:                 .

47. Distributive property for set intersection over set union:                                .

48. Distributive property for set union over set intersection:                                .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1 · Chapter Summary 51

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

1.1 Basic Set Concepts

  · set
  · elements
  · well-defined set
  · empty set
  · roster method
  · finite set
  · infinite set
  · natural numbers
  · integer
  · set-builder notation
  · cardinality of a set
  · countably infinite
  · equal sets
  · equivalent sets

1.2 Subsets

  · subset
  · proper subset
  · equivalent subsets
  · exponential notation

1.3 Understanding Venn Diagrams

  · Venn diagram
  · universal set
  · disjoint set
  · complement of a set

1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets

  · intersection of two sets
  · union of two sets

Key Concepts

1.1 Basic Set Concepts

  · Identify a set as being a well-defined collection of objects and differentiate between collections that are not well-
      defined and collections that are sets.

  · Represent sets using both the roster or listing method and set builder notation which includes a description of the
      members of a set.

  · In set theory, the following symbols are universally used:
       - The set of natural numbers, which is the set of all positive counting numbers.

                                                             

       - The set of integers, which is the set of all the positive and negative counting numbers and the number zero.

                                                       

       - The set of rational numbers or fractions.

                                               

  · Distinguish between finite sets, infinite sets, and the empty set to determine the size or cardinality of a set.
  · Distinguish between equal sets which have exactly the same members and equivalent sets that may have different

      members but must have the same cardinality or size.
52 1 · Chapter Summary

1.2 Subsets

· Every member of a subset of a set is also a member of the set containing it.

· A proper subset of a set does not contain all the members of the set containing it. There is a least one member of

set that is not a member of set .

· The number subsets of a finite set with   members is equal to 2 raised to the      power.

· The empty set is a subset of every set and must be included when listing all the subsets of a set.

· Understand how to create and distinguish between equivalent subsets of finite and infinite sets that are not equal

to the original set.

1.3 Understanding Venn Diagrams

· A Venn diagram is a graphical representation of the relationship between sets.
· In a Venn diagram, the universal set, is the largest set under consideration and is drawn as a rectangle. All

    subsets of the universal set are drawn as circles within this rectangle.
· The complement of set includes all the members of the universal set that are not in set . A set and its

    complement are disjoint sets, they do not share any elements in common.
· To find the complement of set remove all the elements of set from the universal set , the set that includes

    only the remaining elements is the complement of set , .
· Determine the complement of a set using Venn diagrams, the roster method and set builder notation.

1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets

· The intersection of two sets,   is the set of all elements that they have in common. Any member of

intersection must be is both set and set .

· The union of two sets,         , is the collection of all members that are in either in set , set or both sets and

combined.

· Two sets that share at least one element in common, so that they are not disjoint are represented in a Venn

Diagram using two circles that overlap.                                     or the circle representing set  or their
 The region of the overlap is the set intersection ,
 The regions that include everything in the circle representing set

overlap is the set union ,

· Apply knowledge of set union and intersection to determine cardinality and membership using Venn Diagrams, the
    roster method and set builder notation.

1.5 Set Operations with Three Sets

· A Venn diagram with two overlapping sets breaks the universal set up into four distinct regions. When a third

    overlapping set is added the Venn diagram is broken up into eight distinct regions.

· Analyze, interpret, and create Venn diagrams involving three overlapping sets.
    Including the blood factors: A, B and Rh
    To find unions and intersections.
    To find cardinality of both unions and intersections.

· When performing set operations with three or more sets, the order of operations is inner most parentheses first,
    then fine the complement of any sets, then perform any union or intersection operations that remain.

· To prove set equality using Venn diagrams the strategy is to draw a Venn diagram to represent each side of the
    equality or equation, then look at the resulting diagrams to see if the regions under consideration are identical. If
    they regions are identical the equation represents a true statement, otherwise it is not true.

Videos

1.1 Basic Set Concepts

· Equal and Equivalent Sets (https://openstax.org/r/Equal_and_Equivalent_Sets)

1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets

· The Basics of Intersection of Sets, Union of Sets and Venn Diagrams (https://openstax.org/r/operation-on-Sets)

Formula Review

1.2 Subsets

The number of subsets of a finite set is equal to 2 raised to the power of  , where  is the number of elements

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 1 · Chapter Summary 53

in set : Number of Subsets of Set  .

1.4 Set Operations with Two Sets

The cardinality of union

Projects

Cardinality of Infinite Sets

In set theory, it has been shown that the set of irrational numbers has a cardinality greater than the set of natural
numbers. That is, the set of irrational numbers is so large that it is uncountably infinite.

1. Perform a search with the phrase, "Who first proved that the real numbers are uncountable?"
      a. Who first proved that the real numbers are uncountable?
      b. What was the significance of this proof to the development of set theory and by extension other fields of
            mathematics?

2. Recent discoveries in the field of set theory include the solution to a 70-year-old problem previously thought to be
     unprovable. To learn more read this article (https://openstax.org/r/measure-infinities):
      a. What does it mean for two infinite sets to have the same size?
      b. The real numbers are sometimes referred to as what?
      c. Summarize your understanding of the problem known as the "Continuum Hypothesis."
      d. Malliaris and Shelah's proof of this 70-year-old problem is opening up investigation in what two fields of
            mathematics?

3. Summarize your understanding of infinity.
      a. Define what it means to be infinite.
      b. Explain the difference between countable and uncountable sets.
      c. Research the difference between a discrete set and a continuous set, then summarize your findings.

Set Notation

In arithmetic, the operation of addition is represented by the plus sign, +, but multiplication is represented in multiple

ways, including  and parentheses, such as 5(3). Several set operations also are written in different forms based on

the preferences of the mathematician and often their publisher.

1. Search for "Set Complement" on the internet and list at least three ways to represent the complement of a set.
2. Both the Set Challenge and Venn Diagram smartphone apps highlighted in the Tech Check sections have an

     operation for set difference. List at least two ways to represent set difference and provide a verbal description of
     how to calculate the difference between two sets and .
3. When researching possible Venn diagram applications, the Greek letter delta, appeared as a symbol for a set
     operator. List at least one other symbol used for this same operation.
4. Search for "List of possible set operations and their symbols." Find and select two symbols that were not presented
     in this chapter.

The Real Number System

The set of real numbers and their properties are studied in elementary school today, but how did the number system
evolve? The idea of natural numbers or counting numbers surfaced prior to written words, as evidenced by tally marks in
cave writing. Create a timeline for significant contributions to the real number system.

1. Use the following phrase to search online for information on the origins of the number zero: "History of the number
     zero." Then, record significant dates for the invention and common use of the number zero on your timeline.

2. Find out who is credited for discovering that the is irrational and add this information to your timeline. Hint:
     Search for, "Who was the first to discover irrational numbers?"

3. Research Georg Cantor's contribution to the representation of real numbers as a continuum and add this to your
     timeline.

4. Research Ernst Zermelo's contribution to the real number system and add this to your timeline.
54 1 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Basic Set Concepts
 1. A ______________ is a well-defined collection of distinct objects.

2. A collection of well-defined objects without any members in it is called the ________ _______.

3. Write the set consisting of the last five letters of the English alphabet using the roster method.

4. Write the set consisting of the numbers 1 through 20 inclusive using the roster method and an ellipsis.

5. Write the set of all zebras that do not have stripes in symbolic form.

6. Write the set of negative integers using the roster method and an ellipsis.

7. Use set builder notation to write the set of all even integers.

8. Write the set of all letters in the word Mississippi and label it with a capital .

9. Determine whether the following collection describes a well-defined set: "A group of these five types of apples:
    Granny Smith, Red Delicious, McIntosh, Fuji, and Jazz."

10. Determine whether the following collection describes a well-defined set: "A group of five large dogs."

11. Determine the cardinality of the set                                                  .

12. Determine whether the following set is a finite set or an infinite set:                      .

13. Determine whether sets and are equal, equivalent, or neither:                         and                .

14. Determine if sets and are equal, equivalent, or neither:                     and                .

15. Determine if sets and are equal, equivalent, or neither:                     and                .

Subsets                       is also a member of set , then set        is a _________ of set .
16. If every member of set

17. Determine whether set     is a subset, proper subset, or neither a subset nor proper subset of set :

and                     .

18. Determine whether set     is a subset, proper subset, or neither a subset nor proper subset of set :

and  .

19. Determine whether set     is a subset, proper subset, or neither a subset nor proper subset of set :

and  .

20. List all the subsets of the set       .

21. List all the subsets of the set .

22. Calculate the total number of subsets of the set {Scooby, Velma, Daphne, Shaggy, Fred}.

23. Calculate the total number of subsets of the set {top hat, thimble, iron, shoe, battleship, cannon}.

24. Find a subset of the set              that is equivalent, but not equal, to        .

25. Find a subset of the set              that is equal to        .

26. Find two equivalent finite subsets of the set of natural numbers,                     , with a cardinality of 4.

27. Find two equal finite subsets of the set of natural numbers,                 , with a cardinality of 3.

Understanding Venn Diagrams
28. Use the Venn diagram below to describe the relationship between the sets, symbolically and in words:

29. Use the Venn diagram below to describe the relationship between the sets, symbolically and in words:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1 · Chapter Summary 55

30. Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between the described sets: Falcons Raptors.

31. Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between the described sets: Natural numbers   Integers
      Real numbers.

32. The universal set is the set           . Find the complement of the set  .

33. The universal set is the set           . Find the complement of the set        .

34. Use the Venn diagram below to determine the members of the set .

35. Use the Venn diagram below to determine the members of the set .

Set Operations with Two Sets

Determine the union and intersection of the sets indicated:           ,         ,                             ,

          ,                   , and           .

36. What is  ?

37. What is  ?

38. Write the set containing the elements in sets            .

39. Write the set containing all the elements is both sets      .

40. Find           .

41. Find     .

42. Find the cardinality of             .

43. Find        .

44. Use the Venn diagram below to find     .

45. Use the Venn diagram below to find             .
56 1 · Chapter Summary

Set Operations with Three Sets
Use the Venn diagram below to answer the following questions.

46. Find             .

47. Find             .

48. A food truck owner surveyed a group of 50 customers about their preferences for hamburger condiments. After

tallying the responses, the owner found that 24 customers preferred ketchup, 11 preferred mayonnaise, and 31

preferred mustard. Of these customers, eight preferred ketchup and mayonnaise, one preferred mayonnaise

and mustard, and 13 preferred ketchup and mustard. No customer preferred all three. The remaining

customers did not select any of these three condiments. Draw a Venn diagram to represent this data.

49. Given                        ,      ,                             , and     , find                     .

50. Use Venn diagrams to prove that if  , then                     .

Chapter Test

 1. Determine whether the following collection describes a well-defined set: "A group of small tomatoes."

Classify each of the following sets as either finite or infinite.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.

Use the sets provided to answer the following questions:                     ,                                   ,
                                                                                        . Justify your answer.
                        , and                   .

7. Find     .

8. Find           .

9. Determine if set is equivalent to, equal to, or neither equal nor equivalent to set

10. Find             .

11. Find                .

12. Find                   .

13. Find                   .

Use the Venn diagram below to answer the following questions.

14. Find .

15. Find    .

16. Find       .

17. Draw a Venn diagram to represent the relationship between the two sets: "All flowers are plants."

For the following questions, use the Venn diagram showing the blood types of all donors at a recent mobile blood

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 1 · Chapter Summary 57

drive.

18. Find the number of donors who were ; that is, find        .

19. Find the number of donors who were                  .

20. Use Venn diagrams to prove that if  , then             .
58 1 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
          2 · Introduction 59

2  LOGIC

Figure 2.1 Logic is key to a well-reasoned argument, in both math and law. (credit: modification of work "Lady Justicia
holding sword and scale bronze figurine with judge hammer on wooden table" by Jernej Furman/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Statements and Quantifiers
  2.2 Compound Statements
  2.3 Constructing Truth Tables
  2.4 Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional
  2.5 Equivalent Statements
  2.6 De Morgan's Laws
  2.7 Logical Arguments

      Introduction

What is logic? Logic is the study of reasoning, and it has applications in many fields, including philosophy, law,
psychology, digital electronics, and computer science.

In law, constructing a well-reasoned, logical argument is extremely important. The main goal of arguments made by
lawyers is to convince a judge and jury that their arguments are valid and well-supported by the facts of the case, so the
case should be ruled in their favor. Think about Thurgood Marshall arguing for desegregation in front of the U.S.
Supreme Court during the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka lawsuit in 1954, or Ruth Bader Ginsburg arguing for
equality in social security benefits for both men and women under the law during the mid-1970s. Both these great minds
were known for the preparation and thoroughness of their logical legal arguments, which resulted in victories that
advanced the causes they fought for. Thurgood Marshall and Ruth Bader Ginsburg would later become well respected
justices on the U.S. Supreme Court themselves.

In this chapter, we will explore how to construct well-reasoned logical arguments using varying structures. Your ability to
form and comprehend logical arguments is a valuable tool in many areas of life, whether you're planning a dinner date,
negotiating the purchase of a new car, or persuading your boss that you deserve a raise.
60 2 · Logic

   2.1 Statements and Quantifiers

     Figure 2.2 Construction of a logical argument, like that of a house, requires you to begin with the right parts. (credit:
     modification of work "Barn Raising" by Robert Stinnett/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Learning Objectives

     After completing this section, you should be able to:
       1. Identify logical statements.
       2. Represent statements in symbolic form.
       3. Negate statements in words.
       4. Negate statements symbolically.
       5. Translate negations between words and symbols.
       6. Express statements with quantifiers of all, some, and none.
       7. Negate statements containing quantifiers of all, some, and none.
     Have you ever built a club house, tree house, or fort with your friends? If so, you and your friends likely started by
     gathering some tools and supplies to work with, such as hammers, saws, screwdrivers, wood, nails, and screws.
     Hopefully, at least one member of your group had some knowledge of how to use the tools correctly and helped to
     direct the construction project. After all, if your house isn't built on a strong foundation, it will be weak and could
     possibly fall apart during the next big storm. This same foundation is important in logic.
     In this section, we will begin with the parts that make up all logical arguments. The building block of any logical
     argument is a logical statement, or simply a statement. A logical statement has the form of a complete sentence, and it
     must make a claim that can be identified as being true or false.
     When making arguments, sometimes people make false claims. When evaluating the strength or validity of a logical
     argument, you must also consider the truth values, or the identification of true or false, of all the statements used to
     support the argument. While a false statement is still considered a logical statement, a strong logical argument starts
     with true statements.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                2.1 · Statements and Quantifiers 61

Identifying Logical Statements

   Figure 2.3 Not all roses are red. (credit: "assorted pink yellow white red roses macro" by ProFlowers/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

An example of logical statement with a false truth value is, "All roses are red." It is a logical statement because it has the
form of a complete sentence and makes a claim that can be determined to be either true or false. It is a false statement
because not all roses are red: some roses are red, but there are also roses that are pink, yellow, and white. Requests,
questions, or directives may be complete sentences, but they are not logical statements because they cannot be
determined to be true or false. For example, suppose someone said to you, "Please, sit down over there." This request
does not make a claim and it cannot be identified as true or false; therefore, it is not a logical statement.

  EXAMPLE 2.1

Identifying Logical Statements
Determine whether each of the following sentences represents a logical statement. If it is a logical statement, determine
whether it is true or false.

 1. Tiger Woods won the Master's golf championship at least five times.
 2. Please, sit down over there.
 3. All cats dislike dogs.

     Solution
 1. This is a logical statement because it is a complete sentence that makes a claim that can be identified as being true

      or false. As of 2021, this statement is true: Tiger Woods won the Master's in 1997, 2001, 2002, 2005 and 2019.
 2. This is not a logical statement because, although it is a complete sentence, this request does not make a claim that

      can be identified as being either true or false.
 3. This is a logical statement because it is a complete sentence that makes a claim that can be identified as being true

      or false. This statement is false because some cats do like some dogs.

        YOUR TURN 2.1

  Determine whether each of the following sentences represents a logical statement. If it is a logical statement,
  determine whether it is true or false.

      1. The Buffalo Bills defeated the New York Giants in Super Bowl XXV.
      2. Michael Jackson's album Thriller was released in 1982.
      3. Would you like some coffee or tea?

Representing Statements in Symbolic Form

When analyzing logical arguments that are made of multiple logical statements, symbolic form is used to reduce the
amount of writing involved. Symbolic form also helps visualize the relationship between the statements in a more
62 2 · Logic

     concise way in order to determine the strength or validity of an argument. Each logical statement is represented
     symbolically as a single lowercase letter, usually starting with the letter .
     To begin, you will practice how to write a single logical statement in symbolic form. This skill will become more useful as
     you work with compound statements in later sections.

        EXAMPLE 2.2
     Representing Statements Using Symbolic Form
     Write each of the following logical statements in symbolic form.
       1. Barry Bonds holds the Major League Baseball record for total career home runs.
       2. Some mammals live in the ocean.
       3. Ruth Bader Ginsburg served on the U.S. Supreme Court from 1993 to 2020.

           Solution
       1. : Barry Bonds holds the Major League Baseball record for total career home runs. The statement is labeled with a

               Once the statement is labeled, use as a replacement for the full written statement to write and analyze the
            argument symbolically.
       2. : Some mammals live in the ocean. The letter is used to distinguish this statement from the statement in question
            1, but any lower-case letter may be used.
       3. : Ruth Bader Ginsburg served on the U.S. Supreme Court from 1993 to 2020. When multiple statements are present
            in later sections, you will want to be sure to use a different letter for each separate logical statement.

              YOUR TURN 2.2

        Write each of the following logical statements in symbolic form.
            1. The movie Gandhi won the Academy Award for Best Picture in 1982.
            2. Soccer is the most popular sport in the world.
            3. All oranges are citrus fruits.

              WHO KNEW?

        Mathematics is not the only language to use symbols to represent thoughts or ideas. The Chinese and Japanese
        languages use symbols known as Hanzi and Kanji, respectively, to represent words and phrases. At one point, the
        American musician Prince famously changed his name to a symbol representing love.
        BBC Prince Symbol Article (https://openstax.org/r/magazine-36107590)

    Negating Statements

     Consider the false statement introduced earlier, "All roses are red." If someone said to you, "All roses are red," you might
     respond with, "Some roses are not red." You could then strengthen your argument by providing additional statements,
     such as, "There are also white roses, yellow roses, and pink roses, to name a few."
     The negation of a logical statement has the opposite truth value of the original statement. If the original statement is
     false, its negation is true, and if the original statement is true, its negation is false. Most logical statements can be
     negated by simply adding or removing the word not. For example, consider the statement, "Emma Stone has green
     eyes." The negation of this statement would be, "Emma Stone does not have green eyes." The table below gives some
     other examples.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        2.1 · Statements and Quantifiers 63

                        Logical Statement                   Negation

             Gordon Ramsey is a chef.                       Gordon Ramsey is not a chef.

             Tony the Tiger does not have spots.            Tony the Tiger has spots.

             Table 2.1

The way you phrase your argument can impact its success. If someone presents you with a false statement, the ability to
rebut that statement with its negation will provide you with the tools necessary to emphasize the correctness of your
position.

  EXAMPLE 2.3

Negating Logical Statements
Write the negation of each logical statement in words.

 1. Michael Phelps was an Olympic swimmer.
 2. Tom is a cat.
 3. Jerry is not a mouse.

     Solution
 1. Add the word not to negate the affirmative statement: "Michael Phelps was not an Olympic swimmer."
 2. Add the word not to negate the affirmative statement: "Tom is not a cat."
 3. Remove the word not to negate the negative statement: "Jerry is a mouse."

      YOUR TURN 2.3

Write the negation of each logical statement in words.
    1. Ted Cruz was not born in Texas.
    2. Adele has a beautiful singing voice.
    3. Leaves convert carbon dioxide to oxygen during the process of photosynthesis.

Negating Logical Statements Symbolically

The symbol for negation, or not, in logic is the tilde, ~. So, not is represented as . To negate a statement symbolically,
remove or add a tilde. The negation of not (not ) is . Symbolically, this equation is

EXAMPLE 2.4

Negating Logical Statements Symbolically                                                  The answer is .
Write the negation of each logical statement symbolically.

 1. : Michael Phelps was an Olympic swimmer.
 2. : Tom is not a cat.
 3. : Jerry is not a mouse.

     Solution
 1. To negate an affirmative logical statement symbolically, add a tilde: .
 2. Because the symbol for this statement is , its negation is .
 3. The symbol for this statement is , so to negate it we simply remove the ~, because

      YOUR TURN 2.4
Write the negation of each logical statement symbolically.
64 2 · Logic

            1. : Ted Cruz was not born in Texas.
            2. : Adele has a beautiful voice.
            3. : Leaves convert carbon dioxide to oxygen during the process of photosynthesis.

    Translating Negations Between Words and Symbols

     In order to analyze logical arguments, it is important to be able to translate between the symbolic and written forms of
     logical statements.

        EXAMPLE 2.5

     Translating Negations Between Words and Symbols
     Given the statements:
       : Elmo is a red Muppet.

       : Ketchup is not a vegetable.
       1. Write the symbolic form of the statement, "Elmo is not a red Muppet."
       2. Translate the statement into words.

           Solution
       1. "Elmo is not a red muppet" is the negation of "Elmo is a red muppet," which is represented as . Thus, we would

            write "Elmo is not a red muppet" symbolically as .
       2. Because is the symbol representing the statement, "Ketchup is not a vegetable," is equivalent to the statement,

            "Ketchup is a vegetable."

              YOUR TURN 2.5

        Given the statements:
         : Woody and Buzz Lightyear are best friends.

           : Wonder Woman is not stronger than Captain Marvel.
            1. Write the symbolic form of the statement, "Wonder Woman is stronger than Captain Marvel."
            2. Translate the statement into words.

    Expressing Statements with Quantifiers of All, Some, or None

     A quantifier is a term that expresses a numerical relationship between two sets or categories. For example, all squares
     are also rectangles, but only some rectangles are squares, and no squares are circles. In this example, all, some, and
     none are quantifiers. In a logical argument, the logical statements made to support the argument are called premises,
     and the judgment made based on the premises is called the conclusion. Logical arguments that begin with specific
     premises and attempt to draw more general conclusions are called inductive arguments.
     Consider, for example, a parent walking with their three-year-old child. The child sees a cardinal fly by and points it out.
     As they continue on their walk, the child notices a robin land on top of a tree and a duck flying across to land on a pond.
     The child recognizes that cardinals, robins, and ducks are all birds, then excitedly declares, "All birds fly!" The child has
     just made an inductive argument. They noticed that three different specific types of birds all fly, then synthesized this
     information to draw the more general conclusion that all birds can fly. In this case, the child's conclusion is false.
     The specific premises of the child's argument can be paraphrased by the following statements:

        · Premise: Cardinals are birds that fly.
        · Premise: Robins are birds that fly.
        · Premise: Ducks are birds that fly.
     The general conclusion is: "All birds fly!"
     All inductive arguments should include at least three specific premises to establish a pattern that supports the general
     conclusion. To counter the conclusion of an inductive argument, it is necessary to provide a counter example. The parent
     can tell the child about penguins or emus to explain why that conclusion is false.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.1 · Statements and Quantifiers 65

On the other hand, it is usually impossible to prove that an inductive argument is true. So, inductive arguments are
considered either strong or weak. Deciding whether an inductive argument is strong or weak is highly subjective and
often determined by the background knowledge of the person making the judgment. Most hypotheses put forth by
scientists using what is called the "scientific method" to conduct experiments are based on inductive reasoning.

In the following example, we will use quantifiers to express the conclusion of a few inductive arguments.

EXAMPLE 2.6

Drawing General Conclusions to Inductive Arguments Using Quantifiers
For each series of premises, draw a logical conclusion to the argument that includes one of the following quantifiers: all,
some, or none.

1. Squares and rectangles have four sides. A square is a parallelogram, and a rectangle is a parallelogram. What

    conclusion can be drawn from these premises?

2.                   and                       Of these, 1 and 2, 6 and 7, and 23 and 24 are consecutive integers; 3, 13,

    and 47 are odd numbers. What conclusion can be drawn from these premises?

3. Sea urchins live in the ocean, and they do not breathe air. Sharks live in the ocean, and they do not breathe air. Eels

    live in the ocean, and they do not breath air. What conclusion can be drawn from these premises?

    Solution

1. The conclusion you would likely come to here is "Some four-sided figures are parallelograms." However, it would be

    incorrect to say that all four-sided figures are parallelograms because there are some four-sided figures, such as

    trapezoids, that are not parallelograms. This is a false conclusion.

2. From these premises, you may draw the conclusion "All sums of two consecutive counting numbers result in an odd

    number." Most inductive arguments cannot be proven true, but several mathematical properties can be. If we let

    represent our first counting number, then     would be the next counting number and                            .

    Because is divisible by two, it is an even number, and if you add one to any even number the result is always an

    odd number. Thus, the conclusion is true!

3. Based on the premises provided, with no additional knowledge about whales or dolphins, you might conclude "No

    creatures that live in the ocean breathe air." Even though this conclusion is false, it still follows from the known

    premises and thus is a logical conclusion based on the evidence presented. Alternatively, you could conclude "Some

    creatures that live in the ocean do not breathe air." The quantifier you choose to write your conclusion with may vary

    from another person's based on how persuasive the argument is. There may be multiple acceptable answers.

    YOUR TURN 2.6

For each series of premises, draw a logical conclusion to the argument that includes one of the following quantifiers:

all, some, or none.

    1.        ,      , and                     . Of these, 1 and 2 are consecutive integers, 5 and 6 are consecutive

        integers, and 14 and 15 are consecutive integers. Also, their sums, 3, 11, and 29 are all prime numbers. Prime

        numbers are positive integers greater than one that are only divisible by one and the number itself. What

        conclusion can you draw from these premises?

    2. A robin is a bird that lays blue eggs. A chicken is a bird that typically lays white and brown eggs. An ostrich is a

        bird that lays exceptionally large eggs. If a bird lays eggs, then they do not give live birth to their young. What

        conclusion can you draw from these premises?

    3. All parallelograms have four sides. All rectangles are parallelograms. All squares are rectangles. What

        additional conclusion can you make about squares from these premises?

      It is not possible to prove definitively that an inductive argument is true or false in most cases.

Negating Statements Containing Quantifiers

Recall that the negation of a statement will have the opposite truth value of the original statement. There are four basic
forms that logical statements with quantifiers take on.

  · All are .
66 2 · Logic

        · Some are .
        · No are .
        · Some are not .
     The negation of logical statements that use the quantifiers all, some, or none is a little more complicated than just
     adding or removing the word not.
     For example, consider the logical statement, "All oranges are citrus fruits." This statement expresses as a subset
     relationship. The set of oranges is a subset of the set of citrus fruit. This means that there are no oranges that are
     outside the set of citrus fruit. The negation of this statement would have to break the subset relationship. To do this, you
     could say, "At least one orange is not a citrus fruit." Or, more concisely, "Some oranges are not citrus fruit." It is tempting
     to say "No oranges are citrus fruit," but that would be incorrect. Such a statement would go beyond breaking the subset
     relationship, to stating that the two sets have nothing in common. The negation of " is a subset of " would be to state
     that " is not a subset of ," as depicted by the Venn diagram in Figure 2.4.

                                                                                    Figure 2.4
     The statement, "All oranges are citrus fruit," is true, so its negation, "Some oranges are not citrus fruit," is false.
     Now, consider the statement, "No apples are oranges." This statement indicates that the set of apples is disjointed from
     the set of oranges. The negation must state that the two are not disjoint sets, or that the two sets have a least one
     member in common. Their intersection is not empty. The negation of the statement, " intersection is the empty set,"
     is the statement that " intersection is not empty," as depicted in the Venn diagram in Figure 2.5.

                                                                                    Figure 2.5
     The negation of the true statement "No apples are oranges," is the false statement, "Some apples are oranges."
     Table 2.2 summarizes the four different forms of logical statements involving quantifiers and the forms of their
     associated negations, as well as the meanings of the relationships between the two categories or sets and .

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       2.1 · Statements and Quantifiers 67

Logical Statements with Quantifiers            Negation of Logical Statements w/Quantifiers

                      Form: All are .                    Form: Some are not .
           Means: is a subset of ,              Means: is not a subset of ,
                                               Some zebras do not have stripes. (False)
              All zebras have stripes. (True)

Means:           Form: Some are .              Means:       Form: No are .
           intersection is not empty,                  intersection is empty,
                                                       No fish are sharks. (False)
            Some fish are sharks. (True)

                   Form: No are .                                  Form: Some are .
Means: intersection is empty,                  Means: intersection is not empty,

          No trees are evergreens. (False)                Some trees are evergreens. (True)

         Form: Some are not .                             Form: All are .
Means: is not a subset of ,                    Means: is a subset of ,
Some horses are not mustangs. (True)
                                                All horses are mustangs. (False)

Table 2.2

We covered sets in great detail in Chapter 1. To review, " is a subset of " means that every member of set is also a
member of set . The intersection of two sets and is the set of all elements that they share in common. If
intersection is the empty set, then sets and do not have any elements in common. The two sets do not overlap.
They are disjoint.

       VIDEO

      Logic Part 1A: Logic Statements and Quantifiers (https://openstax.org/r/Logic_Statements_and_Quantifiers)

  EXAMPLE 2.7

Negating Statements Containing Quantifiers All, Some, or None
Given the statements:

 : All leopards have spots.
 : Some apples are red.
 : No lemons are sweet.

Write each of the following symbolic statements in words.

 1.
 2. ~
 3.

     Solution
 1. The statement "All leopards have spots" is and has the form "All are ." According to Table 2.2, the negation will

      have the form "Some are not ." The negation of is the statement, "Some leopards do not have spots."
 2. The statement "Some apples are red" has the form "Some are ." This indicates that the categories and

      overlap or intersect. According to Table 2.2, the negation will have the form, "No are ," indicating that and
      do not intersect. This results in the opposite truth value of the original statement, so the negation of "Some apples
      are red" is the statement: "No apples are red."
 3. Because is the statement: "No lemons are sweet," is asserting that the set of lemons does not intersect with the
      set of sweet things. The negation of , , must make the opposite claim. It must indicate that the set of lemons
      intersects with the set of sweet things. This means at least one lemon must be sweet. The statement, "Some lemons
      are sweet" is . The negation of the statement, "No are ," is the statement, "Some are ," as indicated in
      Table 2.2.
68 2 · Logic

      YOUR TURN 2.7

Given the statements:
   : Some apples are not sweet.

 : No triangles are squares.
 : Some vegetables are green. Write each of the following symbolic statements in words.

    1.
    2.
    3.

Check Your Understanding

 1. A _________ __________ is a complete sentence that makes a claim that may be either true or false.

2. The _________________ of a logical statement has the opposite truth value of the original statement.

3. If represents the logical statement, "Marigolds are yellow flowers," then ______ represents the statement,
    "Marigolds are not yellow flowers."

4. The statement      has the same truth value as the statement _______.

5. The logical statements used to support the conclusion of an argument are called ____________.

6. _______________________ arguments attempt to draw a general conclusion from specific premises.

7. All, some, and none are examples of ______________________, words that assign a numerical relationship between two
    or more groups.

8. The negation of the statement, "All giraffes are tall," is _______________________________.

              SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether the sentence represents a logical statement. If it is a logical statement,

determine whether it is true or false.

1. A loan used to finance a house is called a mortgage.

2. All odd numbers are divisible by 2.

3. Please, bring me that notebook.

4. Robot, what's your function?

5. In English, a conjunction is a word that connects two phrases or parts of a sentence together.

6.            .

7.               .

8. What is 7 plus 3?

For the following exercises, write each statement in symbolic form.
     9. Grammy award winning singer, Lady Gaga, was not born in Houston, Texas.
    10. Bruno Mars performed during the Super Bowl halftime show twice.
    11. Coco Chanel said, "The most courageous act is still to think for yourself. Aloud."
    12. Bruce Wayne is not Superman.

For the following exercises, write the negation of each statement in words.
    13. Bozo is not a clown.
    14. Ash is Pikachu's trainer and friend.
    15. Vanilla is the most popular flavor of ice cream.
    16. Smaug is a fire breathing dragon.
    17. Elephant and Piggy are not best friends.
    18. Some dogs like cats.
    19. Some donuts are not round.
    20. All cars have wheels.
    21. No circles are squares.
    22. Nature's first green is not gold.
    23. The ancient Greek philosopher Plato said, "The greatest wealth is to live content with little."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              2.1 · Statements and Quantifiers 69

24. All trees produce nuts.

For the following exercises, write the negation of each statement symbolically and in words.
    25. : Their hair is red.
    26. : My favorite superhero does not wear a cape.
    27. : All wolves howl at the moon.
    28. : Nobody messes with Texas.
    29. : I do not love New York.
    30. : Some cats are not tigers.
    31. : No squares are not parallelograms.
    32. : The President does not like broccoli.

For the following exercises, write each of the following symbolic statements in words.

33. Given: : Kermit is a green frog; translate into words.

34. Given: : Mick Jagger is not the lead singer for The Rolling Stones; translate into words.

35. Given: : All dogs go to heaven; translate into words.

36. Given: : Some pizza does not come with pepperoni on it; translate into words.

37. Given: : No pizza comes with pineapple on it; translate    into words.

38. Given: : Not all roses are red; translate     into words.

39. Given: : Thelonious Monk is not a famous jazz pianist; translate  into words.

40. Given: : Not all violets are blue; translate  into words.

For the following exercises, draw a logical conclusion from the premises that includes one of the following quantifiers:
all, some, or none.

    41. The Ford Motor Company builds cars in Michigan. General Motors builds cars in Michigan. Chrysler builds cars
          in Michigan. What conclusion can be drawn from these premises?

    42. Michelangelo Buonarroti was a great Renaissance artist from Italy. Raphael Sanzio was a great Renaissance
          artist from Italy. Sandro Botticelli was a great Renaissance artist from Italy. What conclusion can you draw from
          these premises?

    43. Four is an even number and it is divisible by 2. Six is an even number and it is divisible by 2. Eight is an even
          number and it is divisible by 2. What conclusion can you draw from these premises?

    44. Three is an odd number and it is not divisible by 2. Seven is an odd number and it is not divisible by 2. Twenty-
          one is an odd number and it is not divisible by 2. What conclusion can you draw from these premises?

    45. The odd number 5 is not divisible by 3. The odd number 7 is not divisible by 3. The odd number 29 is not
          divisible by 3. What conclusion can you draw from these premises?

    46. Penguins are flightless birds. Emus are flightless birds. Ostriches are flightless birds. What conclusion can you
          draw from these premises?

    47. Plants need water to survive. Animals need water to survive. Bacteria need water to survive. What conclusion
          can you draw from these premises?

    48. A chocolate chip cookie is not sour. An oatmeal cookie is not sour. An Oreo cookie is not sour. What conclusion
          can you draw from these premises?
70 2 · Logic

   2.2 Compound Statements

     Figure 2.6 A person seeking their driver's license must pass two tests. A compound statement can be used to explain
     performance on both tests at once. (credit: modification of work "Drivers License -Teen driver" by State Farm/Flickr, CC BY
     2.0)

    Learning Objectives

     After completing this section, you should be able to:
       1. Translate compound statements into symbolic form.
       2. Translate compound statements in symbolic form with parentheses into words.
       3. Apply the dominance of connectives.
     Suppose your friend is trying to get a license to drive. In most places, they will need to pass some form of written test
     proving their knowledge of the laws and rules for driving safely. After passing the written test, your friend must also pass
     a road test to demonstrate that they can perform the physical task of driving safely within the rules of the law.
     Consider the statement: "My friend passed the written test, but they did not pass the road test." This is an example of a
     compound statement, a statement formed by using a connective to join two independent clauses or logical
     statements. The statement, "My friend passed the written test," is an independent clause because it is a complete
     thought or idea that can stand on its own. The second independent clause in this compound statement is, "My friend did
     not pass the road test." The word "but" is the connective used to join these two statements together, forming a
     compound statement. So, did your friend acquire their driving license?.
     This section introduces common logical connectives and their symbols, and allows you to practice translating compound
     statements between words and symbols. It also explores the order of operations, or dominance of connectives, when a
     single compound statement uses multiple connectives.

    Common Logical Connectives

     Understanding the following logical connectives, along with their properties, symbols, and names, will be key to applying
     the topics presented in this chapter. The chapter will discuss each connective introduced here in more detail.
     The joining of two logical statements with the word "and" or "but" forms a compound statement called a conjunction. In
     logic, for a conjunction to be true, all the independent logical statements that make it up must be true. The symbol for a
     conjunction is . Consider the compound statement, "Derek Jeter played professional baseball for the New York Yankees,
     and he was a shortstop." If represents the statement, "Derrick Jeter played professional baseball for the New York
     Yankees," and if represents the statement, "Derrick Jeter was a short stop," then the conjunction will be written
     symbolically as
     The joining of two logical statements with the word "or" forms a compound statement called a disjunction. Unless
     otherwise specified, a disjunction is an inclusive or statement, which means the compound statement formed by joining
     two independent clauses with the word or will be true if a least one of the clauses is true. Consider the compound
     statement, "The office manager ordered cake for for an employee's birthday or they ordered ice cream." This is a
     disjunction because it combines the independent clause, "The office manager ordered cake for an employee's birthday,"
     with the independent clause, "The office manager ordered ice cream," using the connective, or. This disjunction is true if

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.2 · Compound Statements 71

the office manager ordered only cake, only ice cream, or they ordered both cake and ice cream. Inclusive or means you
can have one, or the other, or both!

Joining two logical statements with the word implies, or using the phrase "if first statement, then second statement," is
called a conditional or implication. The clause associated with the "if" statement is also called the hypothesis or
antecedent, while the clause following the "then" statement or the word implies is called the conclusion or consequent.
The conditional statement is like a one-way contract or promise. The only time the conditional statement is false, is if the
hypothesis is true and the conclusion is false. Consider the following conditional statement, "If Pedro does his
homework, then he can play video games." The hypothesis/antecedent is the statement following the word if, which is
"Pedro does/did his homework." The conclusion/consequent is the statement following the word then, which is "Pedro
can play his video games."

Joining two logical statements with the connective phrase "if and only if" is called a biconditional. The connective phrase

"if and only if" is represented by the symbol, In the biconditional statement,        is called the hypothesis or

antecedent and is called the conclusion or consequent. For a biconditional statement to be true, the truth values of

and must match. They must both be true, or both be false.

The table below lists the most common connectives used in logic, along with their symbolic forms, and the common
names used to describe each connective.

Connective         Symbol                                  Name

and                                                        conjunction

but

           or                                              disjunction, inclusive or

not                ~                                       negation

if , then implies                                          conditional, implication

if and only if                                             biconditional

Table 2.3

These connectives, along with their names, symbols, and properties, will be used throughout this chapter and
should be memorized.

  EXAMPLE 2.8

Associate Connectives with Symbols and Names
For each of the following connectives, write its name and associated symbol.

 1. or
 2. implies
 3. but

     Solution
 1. A compound statement formed with the connective word or is called a disjunction, and it is represented by the

      symbol.
 2. A compound statement formed with the connective word implies or phrase "if ..., then" is called a conditional

      statement or implication and is represented by the symbol.
 3. A compound statement formed with the connective words but or and is called a conjunction, and it is represented

      by the symbol.
72 2 · Logic

      YOUR TURN 2.8

For each connective write its name and associated symbol.
    1. not
    2. and
    3. if and only if

Translating Compound Statements to Symbolic Form

To translate a compound statement into symbolic form, we take the following steps.

1. Identify and label all independent affirmative logical statements with a lower case letter, such as , , or .
2. Identify and label any negative logical statements with a lowercase letter preceded by the negation symbol, such as

         , , or .
3. Replace the connective words with the symbols that represent them, such as

Consider the previous example of your friend trying to get their driver's license. Your friend passed the written test, but

they did not pass the road test. Let represent the statement, "My friend passed the written test." And, let represent

the statement, "My friend did not pass the road test." Because the connective but is logically equivalent to the word and,

the symbol for but is the same as the symbol for and; replace but with the symbol The compound statement is

symbolically written as:         . My friend passed the written test, but they did not pass the road test.

When translating English statements into symbolic form, do not assume that every connective "and" means you are
dealing with a compound statement. The statement, "The stripes on the U.S. flag are red and white," is a simple
statement. The word "white" doesn't express a complete thought, so it is not an independent clause and does not
get its own symbol. This statement should be represented by a single letter, such as : The stripes on the U.S. flag
are red and white.

  EXAMPLE 2.9

Translating Compound Statements into Symbolic Form
Let represent the statement, "It is a warm sunny day," and let represent the statement, "the family will go to the
beach." Write the symbolic form of each of the following compound statements.

 1. If it is a warm sunny day, then the family will go to the beach.
 2. The family will go to the beach, and it is a warm sunny day.
 3. The family will not go to the beach if and only if it is not a warm sunny day.
 4. The family not go to the beach, or it is a warm sunny day.

     Solution
 1. Replace "it is a warm sunny day" with . Replace "the family will go to the beach." with . Next. Next, because the

      connective is if ..., then place the conditional symbol, , between and . The compound statement is written
      symbolically as:
 2. Replace "The family will go to the beach" with . Replace "it is a warm sunny day." with . Next, because the
      connective is and, place the symbol between and . The compound statement is written symbolically as:
 3. Replace "The family will not go to the beach. with . Replace "it is not a warm sunny day" with . Next, because
      the connective is or, if and only if, place the biconditional symbol, between and . The compound statement
      is written symbolically as:
 4. Replace "The family will not go to the beach" with . Replace "it is a warm sunny day" with . Next, because the
      connective is or, place the symbol between and . The compound statement is written symbolically as:

      YOUR TURN 2.9

Let represent the statement, "Last night it snowed," and let represent the statement, "Today we will go skiing."
Write the symbolic form of each of the following compound statements:

    1. Today we will go skiing, but last night it did not snow.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.2 · Compound Statements 73

    2. Today we will go skiing if and only if it snowed last night.
    3. Last night is snowed or today we will not go skiing.
    4. If it snowed last night, then today we will go skiing.

Translating Compound Statements in Symbolic Form with Parentheses into Words

When parentheses are written in a logical argument, they group a compound statement together just like when
calculating numerical or algebraic expressions. Any statement in parentheses should be treated as a single component
of the expression. If multiple parentheses are present, work with the inner most parentheses first.

Consider your friend's struggles to get their license to drive. Let represent the statement, "My friend passed the written

test," let represent the statement, "My friend passed the road test," and let represent the statement, "My friend

received a driver's license." The statement          can be translated into words as follows: the statement        is

grouped together to form the hypothesis of the conditional statement and is the conclusion. The conditional statement

has the form "if  then " Therefore, the written form of this statement is: "If my friend passed the written test and

they passed the road test, then my friend received a driver's license."

Sometimes a compound statement within parentheses may need to be negated as a group. To accomplish this, add the

phrase, "it is not the case that" before the translation of the phrase in parentheses. For example, using , , and of your

friend obtaining a license, let's translate the statement                into words.

In this case, the hypothesis of the conditional statement is         and the conclusion is To negate the hypothesis,

add the phrase "it is not the case" before translating what is in parentheses. The translation of the hypothesis is the

sentence, "It is not the case that my friend passed the written test and they passed the road test," and the translation of

the conclusion is, "My friend did not receive a driver's license." So, a translation of the complete conditional statement,

              is: "If it is not the case that my friend passed the written test and the road test, then my friend did not

receive a driver's license."

    It is acceptable to interchange proper names with pronouns and remove repeated phrases to make the written
    statement more readable, as long the meaning of the logical statement is not changed.

    VIDEO
    Logic Part 1B: Compound Statements, Connectives and Symbols (https://openstax.org/r/Compound_Statements)

EXAMPLE 2.10

Translating Compound Statements in Symbolic Form with Parentheses into Words
Let represent the statement, "My child finished their homework," let represent the statement, "My child cleaned her
room," let represent the statement, "My child played video games," and let represent the statement, "My child
streamed a movie." Translate each of the following symbolic statements into words.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. Replace ~ with "It is not the case," and with "and." One possible translation is: "It is not the case that my child

    finished their homework and cleaned their room."

2. The hypothesis of the conditional statement is, "My child finished their homework and cleaned their room." The

    conclusion of the conditional statement is, "My child played video games or streamed a movie." One possible

    translation of the entire statement is: "If my child finished their homework and cleaned their room, then they played

    video games or streamed a movie."

3. The hypothesis of the biconditional statement is           and is written in words as: "It is not the case that my child

    played video games or streamed a movie." The conclusion of the biconditional statement is  , which

    translates to: "It is not the case that my child finished their homework and cleaned their room." Because the

    biconditional, translates to if and only if, one possible translation of the statement is: "It is not the case that my

    child played video games or streamed a movie if and only if it is not the case that my child finished their homework

    and cleaned their room."
74 2 · Logic

      YOUR TURN 2.10

Let represent the statement, "My roommates ordered pizza," let represent the statement, "I ordered wings," and
let be the statement, "Our friends came over to watch the game." Translate the following statements into words.

    1.
    2.
    3.

The Dominance of Connectives

The order of operations for working with algebraic and arithmetic expressions provides a set of rules that allow

consistent results. For example, if you were presented with the problem     , and you were not familiar with the

order of operation, you might assume that you calculate the problem from left to right. If you did so, you would add 1

and 3 to get 4, and then multiply this answer by 2 to get 8, resulting in an incorrect answer. Try inputting this expression

into a scientific calculator. If you do, the calculator should return a value of 7, not 8.

Scientific Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/Scientific_Calculator)

The order of operations for algebraic and arithmetic operations states that all multiplication must be applied prior to any

addition. Parentheses are used to indicate which operation--addition or multiplication--should be done first. Adding

parentheses can change and/or clarify the order. The parentheses in the expression          indicate that 3 should be

multiplied by 2 to get 6, and then 1 should be added to 6 to get 7:

As with algebraic expressions, there is a set of rules that must be applied to compound logical statements in order to
evaluate them with consistent results. This set of rules is called the dominance of connectives. When evaluating
compound logical statements, connectives are evaluated from least dominant to most dominant as follows:

1. Parentheses are the least dominant connective. So, any expression inside parentheses must be evaluated first. Add
     as many parentheses as needed to any statement to specify the order to evaluate each connective.

2. Next, we evaluate negations.
3. Then, we evaluate conjunctions and disjunctions from left to right, because they have equal dominance.
4. After evaluating all conjunctions and disjunctions, we evaluate conditionals.
5. Lastly, we evaluate the most dominant connective, the biconditional. If a statement includes multiple connectives of

     equal dominance, then we will evaluate them from left to right.

See Figure 2.7 for a visual breakdown of the dominance of connectives.

                                 Figure 2.7

Let's revisit your friend's struggles to get their driver's license. Let represent the statement, "My friend passed the
written test," let represent the statement, "My friend passed the road test," and let represent the statement, "My
friend received a driver's license." Let's use the dominance of connectives to determine how the compound statement

                should be evaluated.

Step 1: There are no parentheses, which is least dominant of all connectives, so we can skip over that.

Step 2: Because negation is the next least dominant, we should evaluate first. We could add parentheses to the

statement to make it clearer which connecting needs to be evaluated first:                  is equivalent to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.2 · Compound Statements 75

Step 3: Next, we evaluate the conjunction, .                    is equivalent to
Step 4: Finally, we evaluate the conditional,   as this is the most dominant connective in this compound statement.

    WHO KNEW?

When using spreadsheet applications, like Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets, have you noticed that core functions,
such as sum, average, or rate, have the same name and syntax for use? This is not a coincidence. Various standards
organizations have developed requirements that software developers must implement to meet the conditions set by
governments and large customers worldwide. The OpenDocument Format OASIS Standard enables transferring data
between different office productivity applications and was approved by the International Standards Organization
(ISO) and IEC on May 6, 2006.

Prior to adopting these standards, a government entity, business, or individual could lose access to their own data
simply because it was saved in a format no longer supported by a proprietary software product--even data they were
required by law to preserve, or data they simply wished to maintain access to.

Just as rules for applying the dominance of connectives help maintain understanding and consistency when writing
and interpreting compound logical statements and arguments, the standards adopted for database software
maintain global integrity and accessibility across platforms and user bases.

EXAMPLE 2.11

Applying the Dominance of Connectives
For each of the following compound logical statements, add parentheses to indicate the order to evaluate the statement.
Recall that parentheses are evaluated innermost first.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. Because negation is the least dominant connective, we evaluate it first:  Because conjunction and

    disjunction have the same dominance, we evaluate them left to right. So, we evaluate the conjunction next, as

    indicated by the additional set of parentheses:              The only remaining connective is the disjunction, so it

    is evaluated last, as indicated by the third set of parentheses. The complete solution is:

2. Negation has the lowest dominance, so it is evaluated first:              The remaining connectives are the

    conditional and the conjunction. Because conjunction has a lower precedence than the conditional, it is evaluated

    next, as indicated by the second set of parentheses:         The last step is to evaluate the conditional, as

    indicated by the third set of parentheses:

3. This statement is known as De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction. It is always true. Section 2.6 of this

    chapter will explore De Morgan's Laws in more detail.
     First, we evaluate the negations on the right side of the biconditional prior to the conjunction.
     Then, we evaluate the disjunction on the left side of the biconditional, followed by the negation of the disjunction

        on the left side.
     Lastly, after completely evaluating each side of the biconditional, we evaluate the biconditional. It does not

    matter which side you begin with.

    The final solution is:

      YOUR TURN 2.11

For each of the following compound logical statements, add parentheses to indicate the order in which to evaluate
the statement. Recall that parentheses are evaluated innermost first.

    1.
    2.
76 2 · Logic

3.

WORK IT OUT

Logic Terms and Properties - Matching Game
Materials: For every group of four students, include 30 cards (game, trading, or playing cards), 30 individual clear
plastic gaming card sleeves, and 30 card-size pieces of paper. Prepare a list of 60 questions and answers ahead of
time related to definitions and problems in Statements and Quantifiers and Compound Statements. Provide each
group of four students with 20 questions and their associated answers. Instruct each group to select 15 of the 20
questions, and then, for each problem selected, create one card with the question and one card with the answer.
Instruct the groups to then place each problem and answer in a separate card sleeve. Once they create 15 problem
cards and 15 answer cards, have students shuffle the set of cards.

To play the game, groups should exchange their card decks to ensure no team begins playing with the deck that they
created. Split each four-person group into teams of two students. After shuffling the cards, one team lays cards face
down on their desk in a five-by-six grid. The other team will go first.

Each player will have a turn to try matching the question with the correct answer by flipping two cards to the face up
position. If a team makes a match, they get to flip another two cards; if they do not get a match, they flip the cards
face down and it is the other team's turn to flip over two cards. The game continues in this manner until teams match
all question cards with their corresponding answer cards. The team with the most set of matching cards wins.

In the first module of this chapter, we evaluated the truth value of negations. In the following modules, we will discuss
how to evaluate conjunctions, disjunctions, conditionals, and biconditionals, and then evaluate compound logical
statements using truth tables and our knowledge of the dominance of connectives.

Check Your Understanding

 9. A __________ __________ is a logical statement formed by combining two or more statements with connecting words,
      such as and, or, but, not, and if ..., then.

10. A _____ is a word or symbol used to join two or more logical statements together to form a compound statement.

11. The most dominant connective is the _____.

12. _____ are used to specify which logical connective should be evaluated first when evaluating a compound
      statement.

13. Both _____ and _____ have equal dominance and are evaluated from left to right when no parentheses are present
      in a compound logical statement.

        SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, translate each compound statement into symbolic form.
Given : "Layla has two weeks for vacation," : "Marcus is Layla's friend," : "Layla will travel to Paris, France," and :
"Layla and Marcus will travel together to Niagara Falls, Ontario."

     1. If Layla has two weeks for vacation, then she will travel to Paris, France.
     2. Layla and Marcus will travel together to Niagara Falls, Ontario or Layla will travel to Paris, France.
     3. If Marcus is not Layla's friend, then they will not travel to Niagara Falls, Ontario together."
     4. Layla and Marcus will travel to Niagara Falls, Ontario together if and only if Layla and Marcus are friends.
     5. If Layla does not have two weeks for vacation and Marcus is Layla's friend, then Marcus and Layla will travel

          together to Niagara Falls, Ontario.
     6. If Layla has two weeks for vacation and Marcus is not her friend, then she will travel to Paris, France.

For the following exercises, translate each compound statement into symbolic form.           : "Spike catches Tom."
Given : "Tom is a cat," : "Jerry is a mouse," : "Spike is a dog," : "Tom chases Jerry," and

     7. Jerry is a mouse and Tom is a cat.
     8. If Tom chases Jerry, then Spike will catch Tom.
     9. If Spike does not catch Tom, then Tom did not chase Jerry.

Access for free at openstax.org
2.2 · Compound Statements 77

10. Tom is a cat and Spike is a dog, or Jerry is not a Mouse.
11. It is not the case that Tom is not a cat and Jerry is not a mouse.
12. Spike is not a dog and Jerry is a mouse if and only if Tom chases Jerry, but Spike does not catch Tom.

For the following exercises, translate the symbolic form of each compound statement into words.               : "Elton John
Given : "Tracy Chapman plays guitar," : "Joan Jett plays guitar," : "All rock bands include guitarists," and
plays the piano."

    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.

For the following exercises, translate the symbolic form of each compound statement into words.
Given : "The median is the middle number," : "The mode is the most frequent number," : "The mean is the average
number," : "The median, mean, and mode are equal," and : "The data set is symmetric."

    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.

For the following exercises, apply the proper dominance of connectives by adding parentheses to indicate the order in
which the statement must be evaluated.

    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
78 2 · Logic

   2.3 Constructing Truth Tables

Figure 2.8 Just like solving a puzzle, a computer programmer must consider all potential solutions in order to account
for each possible outcome. (credit: modification of work "Deadline Xmas 2010" by Allan Henderson/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Interpret and apply negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions.
 2. Construct a truth table using negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions.
 3. Construct a truth table for a compound statement and interpret its validity.

Are you familiar with the Choose Your Own Adventure book series written by Edward Packard? These gamebooks allow
the reader to become one of the characters and make decisions that affect what happens next, resulting in different
sequences of events in the story and endings based on the choices made. Writing a computer program is a little like
what it must be like to write one of these books. The programmer must consider all the possible inputs that a user can
put into the program and decide what will happen in each case, then write their program to account for each of these
possible outcomes.

A truth table is a graphical tool used to analyze all the possible truth values of the component logical statements to
determine the validity of a statement or argument along with all its possible outcomes. The rows of the table correspond
to each possible outcome for the given logical statement identified at the top of each column. A single logical statement

  has two possible truth values, true or false. In truth tables, a capital T will represent true values, and a capital F will
represent false values.

In this section, you will use the knowledge built in Statements and Quantifiers and Compound Statements to analyze
arguments and determine their truth value and validity. A logical argument is valid if its conclusion follows from its
premises, regardless of whether those premises are true or false. You will then explore the truth tables for negation,
conjunction, and disjunction, and use these truth tables to analyze compound logical statements containing these
connectives.

Interpret and Apply Negations, Conjunctions, and Disjunctions                                   is true,  is false, and

The negation of a statement will have the opposite truth value of the original statement. When
when is false, is true.

EXAMPLE 2.12

Finding the Truth Value of a Negation
For each logical statement, determine the truth value of its negation.

 1. :
 2. : All horses are mustangs.
 3. : New Delhi is not the capital of India.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.3 · Constructing Truth Tables 79

    Solution

1. is true because 3 + 5 does equal 8; therefore, the negation of ,     , is false.

2. is false because there are other types of horses besides mustangs, such as Clydesdales or Arabians; therefore, the

    negation of , , is true.

3. is false because New Delhi is the capital of India; therefore, the negation of , , is true.

       YOUR TURN 2.12

For each logical statement, determine the truth value of its negation.

    1. :      .

    2. : Some houses are built with bricks.

    3. : Abuja is the capital of Nigeria.

A conjunction is a logical and statement. For a conjunction to be true, both statements that make up the conjunction
must be true. If at least one of the statements is false, the and statement is false.

EXAMPLE 2.13

Finding the Truth Value of a Conjunction

Given                               and      determine the truth value of each conjunction.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution
1. is true, and is false. Because one statement is true, and the other statement is false, this makes the complete

     conjunction false.
2. is false, so is true, and is true. Therefore, both statements are true, making the complete conjunction true.
3. is false, and is false. Because both statements are false, the complete conjunction is false.

       YOUR TURN 2.13

Given : Yellow is a primary color,  : Blue is a primary color, and  : Green is a primary color, determine the truth value
of each conjunction.

    1.
    2.
    3.

    The only time a conjunction is true is if both statements that make up the conjunction are true.

A disjunction is a logical inclusive or statement, which means that a disjunction is true if one or both statements that
form it are true. The only way a logical inclusive or statement is false is if both statements that form the disjunction are
false.

EXAMPLE 2.14

Finding the Truth Value of a Disjunction

Given                               and      determine the truth value of each disjunction.

1.
2.
3.
80 2 · Logic

    Solution
1. is true, and is false. One statement is true, and one statement is false, which makes the complete disjunction

     true.
2. is false, so is true, and is true. Therefore, one statement is true, and the other statement is true, which makes

     the complete disjunction true.
3. is false, and is false. When all of the component statements are false, the disjunction is false.

       YOUR TURN 2.14

Given : Yellow is a primary color,  : Blue is a primary color, and  : Green is a primary color, determine the truth value
of each disjunction.

    1.
    2.
    3.

In the next example, you will apply the dominance of connectives to find the truth values of compound statements
containing negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions and use a table to record the results. When constructing a truth
table to analyze an argument where you can determine the truth value of each component statement, the strategy is to
create a table with two rows. The first row contains the symbols representing the components that make up the
compound statement. The second row contains the truth values of each component below its symbol. Include as many
columns as necessary to represent the value of each compound statement. The last column includes the complete
compound statement with its truth value below it.

       VIDEO

      Logic Part 2: Truth Values of Conjunctions: Is an "AND" statement true or false? (https://openstax.org/r/
      Truth_Values_of_Conjunctions)

      Logic Part 3: Truth Values of Disjunctions: Is an "OR" statement true or false? (https://openstax.org/r/
      Truth_Values_of_Disjunctions)

EXAMPLE 2.15

Finding the Truth Value of Compound Statements

Given                               and                   construct a truth table to determine the truth value of each

compound statement

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. Step 1: The statement "          " contains three basic logical statements, , , and , and three connectives,

    When we place parentheses in the statement to indicate the dominance of connectives, the statement becomes

    Step 2: After we have applied the dominance of connectives, we create a two row table that includes a column for

    each basic statement that makes up the compound statement, and an additional column for the contents of each

    parentheses. Because we have three sets of parentheses, we include a column for the innermost parentheses, a

    column for         the next set of parentheses, and             in the last column for the third parentheses.

    Step 3: Once the table is created, we determine the truth value of each statement starting from left to right. The

    truth values of , , and are true, false, and true, respectively, so we place T, F, and T in the second row of the table.

    Because is true, is false.

    Step 4: Next, evaluate       from the table: is false, and is also false, so  is false, because a conjunction

    is only true if both of the statements that make it are true. Place an F in the table below its heading.

    Step 5: Finally, using the table, we understand that            is false and is true, so the complete statement

                is false or true, which is true (because a disjunction is true whenever at least one of the statements that

Access for free at openstax.org
make it is true). Place a T in the last column of the table. The complete statement   2.3 · Constructing Truth Tables 81

                                                                                        is true.

                                        TFT F                  F      T

2. Step 1: Applying the dominance of connectives to the original compound statement   , we get

Step 2: The table needs columns for                 and

Step 3:The truth values of , , , and are the same as in Question 1.

Step 4: Next,     is false or false, which is false, so we place an F below this statement in the table. This is the

only time that a disjunction is false.

Step 5: Finally,  and are the conjunction of the statements,          and , and so the expressions evaluate to

false and true, which is false. Recall that the only time an "and" statement is true is when both statements that form

it are also true. The complete statement            is false.

                                        TFT F                  F      F

3. Step 1: Applying the dominance of connectives to the original statement, we have:  .

Step 2: So, the table needs the following columns:                    and

Step 3: The truth values of , , and are the same as in Questions 1 and 2.

Step 4: From the table it can be seen that        is true and true, which is true. So the negation of and is false,

because the negation of a statement always has the opposite truth value of the original statement.

Step 5: Finally,           is the disjunction of    with , and so we have false or false, which makes the

complete statement false.

                                        TFT T                      F     F

YOUR TURN 2.15

Given : Yellow is a primary color, : Blue is a primary color, and  : Green is a primary color, determine the truth value
of each compound statement, by constructing a truth table.

    1.
    2.
    3.

Construct Truth Tables to Analyze All Possible Outcomes

Recall from Statements and Questions that the negation of a statement will always have the opposite truth value of the
original statement; if a statement is false, then its negation is true, and if a statement is true, then its negation
is false. To create a truth table for the negation of statement , add a column with a heading of , and for each row,
input the truth value with the opposite value of the value listed in the column for , as depicted in the table below.
82 2 · Logic

                                                       Negation

                                                       TF
                                                       FT

Conjunctions and disjunctions are compound statements formed when two logical statements combine with the

connectives "and" and "or" respectively. How does that change the number of possible outcomes and thus determine the

number of rows in our truth table? The multiplication principle, also known as the fundamental counting principle,

states that the number of ways you can select an item from a group of items and another item from a group with

items is equal to the product of and . Because each proposition and has two possible outcomes, true or false, the

multiplication principle states that there will be     possible outcomes: {TT, TF, FT, FF}.

The tree diagram and table in Figure 2.9 demonstrate the four possible outcomes for two propositions and .

                                                                              Figure 2.9

A conjunction is a logical and statement. For a conjunction to be true, both the statements that make up the conjunction
must be true. If at least one of the statements is false, the and statement is false.

A disjunction is a logical inclusive or statement. Which means that a disjunction is true if one or both statements that
make it are true. The only way a logical inclusive or statement is false is if both statements that make up the disjunction
are false.

                                 Conjunction (AND)         Disjunction (OR)

                                 TT                 T            TT  T

                                 TF                 F            TF  T

                                 FT                 F            FT  T

                                 FF                 F            FF  F

VIDEO
Logic Part 4: Truth Values of Compound Statements with "and", "or", and "not" (https://openstax.org/r/opL9I4tZCC0)
Logic Part 5: What are truth tables? How do you set them up? (https://openstax.org/r/-tdSRqLGhaw)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.3 · Constructing Truth Tables 83

  EXAMPLE 2.16

Constructing Truth Tables to Analyze Compound Statements
Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following arguments.

 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. Step 1: Because there are two basic statements, and , and each of these has two possible outcomes, we will have

                   rows in our table to represent all possible outcomes: TT, TF, FT, and FF. The columns will include , , ,
      and
      Step 2: Every value in column will have the opposite truth value of the corresponding value in column : F, T, F,
      and T.
      Step 3: To complete the last column, evaluate each element in column with the corresponding element in column

          using the connective or.

                                                   TT F       T

                                                   TF T       T

                                                   FT F       F

                                                   FF T       T

2. Step 1: The columns will include , ,       and    . Because there are two basic statements, and , the table

will have four rows to account for all possible outcomes.

Step 2: The  column will be completed by evaluating the corresponding elements in columns and

respectively with the and connective.

Step 3: The final column,  , will be the negation of the                 column.

                                              TT T               F

                                              TF F               T

                                              FT F               T

                                              FF F               T

3. Step 1: This statement has three basic statements, , , and . Because each basic statement has two possible truth

values, true or false, the multiplication principal indicates there are           possible outcomes. So eight rows of

outcomes are needed in the truth table to account for each possibility. Half of the eight possibilities must be true for

the first statement, and half must be false.

Step 2: So, the first column for statement , will have four T's followed by four F's. In the second column for

statement , when is true, half the outcomes for must be true and the other half must be false, and the same

pattern will repeat for when is false. So, column will have TT, FF, FF, FF.

Step 3: The column for the third statement, , must alternate between T and F. Once, the three basic propositions

are listed, you will need a column for ,      , and        .

Step 4: The column for the negation of , , will have the opposite truth value of each value in column .

Step 5: Next, fill in the truth values for the column containing the statement    The or statement is true if at

least one of or is true, otherwise it is false.
84 2 · Logic

    Step 6: Finally, fill in the column containing the conjunction        . To evaluate this statement, combine

    column    and column with the and connective. Recall, that only time "and" is true is when both values are

    true, otherwise the statement is false. The complete truth table is:

                                         TTT F                      T     T

                                         TTF F                      T     F

                                         TFT T                      T     T

                                         TFF T                      T     F

                                         FTT F                      F     F

                                         FTF F                      F     F

                                         FFT T                      T     T

                                         FFF T                      T     F

      YOUR TURN 2.16

Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following arguments.
    1.
    2.
    3.

    VIDEO
    Logic Part 6: More on Truth Tables and Setting Up Rows and Column Headings (https://openstax.org/r/j3kKnUNIt6c)

Determine the Validity of a Truth Table for a Compound Statement

A logical statement is valid if it is always true regardless of the truth values of its component parts. To test the validity of
a compound statement, construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes. If the last column, representing the
complete statement, contains only true values, the statement is valid.

EXAMPLE 2.17

Determining the Validity of Compound Statements
Construct a truth table to determine the validity of each of the following statements.

1.
2.

    Solution

1. Step 1: Because there are two statements, and , and each of these has two possible outcomes, there will be

              rows in our table to represent all possible outcomes: TT, TF, FT, and FF.

    Step 2: The columns, will include , , and  Every value in column will have the opposite truth value of

    the corresponding value in column .

    Step 3: To complete the last column, evaluate each element in column with the corresponding element in

    column using the connective and . The last column contains at least one false, therefore the statement       is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                2.3 · Constructing Truth Tables 85

not valid.

                                                         TT F         F

                                                         TF F         F

                                                         FT T         T

                                                         FF T         F

2. Step 1: Because the statement            only contains one basic proposition, the truth table will only contain two

rows. Statement may be either true or false.

Step 2: The columns will include , ,                     and        Evaluate column     with the and connective,

because the symbol represents a conjunction or logical and statement. True and false is false, and false and true

is also false.

Step 3: The final column is the negation of each entry in the third column, both of which are false, so the negation

of false is true. Because all the truth values in the final column are true, the statement      is valid.

                                            TF                F          T

                                            FT                F          T

      YOUR TURN 2.17

Construct a truth table to determine the validity of each of the following statements.
    1.
    2.

Check Your Understanding

14. A logical argument is _____ if its conclusion follows from its premises.

15. A logical statement is valid if it is always _____.

16. A _____ _____ is a tool used to analyze all the possible outcomes for a logical statement.

17. The truth table for the conjunction,    , has _____ rows of truth values.

18. The truth table for the negation of a logical statement, , has _____ rows of truth values.

SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the truth value of each statement.

1. :            . What is the truth value of ?

2. : The sun revolves around the Earth. What is the truth value of ?
3. : The acceleration of gravity is m/sec2. What is the truth value of ?

4. : Dan Brown is not the author of the book, The Davinci Code. What is the truth value of      ?

5. : Broccoli is a vegetable. What is the truth value of         ?

For the following exercises, given :        , : Five is an even number, and : Seven is a prime number, find the truth
value of each of the following statements.
86 2 · Logic

           6.
           7.
           8.
           9.
          10.
          11.
          12.
          13.
          14.
          15.
          16.
          17.
          18.
          19.
          20.
     For the following exercises, complete the truth table to determine the truth value of the proposition in the last column.

          21.
                                                                   TTT

          22.
                                                                    FTF

          23.
                                                                 FFF

          24.
                                                               FFF

     For the following exercises, given All triangles have three sides, Some rectangles are not square, and A
     pentagon has eight sides, determine the truth value of each compound statement by constructing a truth table.

          25.
          26.
          27.
          28.
     For the following exercises, construct a truth table to analyze all the possible outcomes for the following arguments.
          29.
          30.
          31.
          32.

     For the following exercises, construct a truth table to determine the validity of each statement.
          33.
          34.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               2.4 · Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 87

    35.
    36.

2.4 Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional

    Figure 2.10 If-then statements use logic to execute directions. (credit: "Coding" by Carlos Varela/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Use and apply the conditional to construct a truth table.
 2. Use and apply the biconditional to construct a truth table.
 3. Use truth tables to determine the validity of conditional and biconditional statements.

Computer languages use if-then or if-then-else statements as decision statements:

    · If the hypothesis is true, then do something.
    · Or, if the hypothesis is true, then do something; else do something else.

For example, the following representation of computer code creates an if-then-else decision statement:

Check value of variable .

If  , then print "Hello, World!" else print "Goodbye".

In this imaginary program, the if-then statement evaluates and acts on the value of the variable . For instance, if        ,

the program would consider the statement  as true and "Hello, World!" would appear on the computer screen. If

instead,  , the program would consider the statement    as false (because 3 is greater than 1), and print

"Goodbye" on the screen.

In this section, we will apply similar reasoning without the use of computer programs.

          PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

    The Countess of Lovelace, Ada Lovelace, is credited with writing the first computer program. She wrote an algorithm
    to work with Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine that could compute the Bernoulli numbers in 1843. In doing so, she
    became the first person to write a program for a machine that would produce more than just a simple calculation.
    The computer programming language ADA is named after her.

    Reference: Posamentier, Alfred and Spreitzer Christian, "Chapter 34 Ada Lovelace: English (1815-1852)" pp. 272-278,
    Math Makers: The Lives and Works of 50 Famous Mathematicians, Prometheus Books, 2019.
88 2 · Logic

Use and Apply the Conditional to Construct a Truth Table

A conditional is a logical statement of the form if , then . The conditional statement in logic is a promise or contract.

The only time the conditional,   is false is when the contract or promise is broken.

For example, consider the following scenario. A child's parent says, "If you do your homework, then you can play your
video games." The child really wants to play their video games, so they get started right away, finish within an hour, and
then show their parent the completed homework. The parent thanks the child for doing a great job on their homework
and allows them to play video games. Both the parent and child are happy. The contract was satisfied; true implies true is
true.

Now, suppose the child does not start their homework right away, and then struggles to complete it. They eventually
finish and show it to their parent. The parent again thanks the child for completing their homework, but then informs
the child that it is too late in the evening to play video games, and that they must begin to get ready for bed. Now, the
child is really upset. They held up their part of the contract, but they did not receive the promised reward. The contract
was broken; true implies false is false.

So, what happens if the child does not do their homework? In this case, the hypothesis is false. No contract has been
entered, therefore, no contract can be broken. If the conclusion is false, the child does not get to play video games and
might not be happy, but this outcome is expected because the child did not complete their end of the bargain. They did
not complete their homework. False implies false is true. The last option is not as intuitive. If the parent lets the child
play video games, even if they did not do their homework, neither parent nor child are going to be upset. False implies
true is true.

The truth table for the conditional statement below summarizes these results.

                                 TT                   T

                                 TF                   F

                                 FT                   T

                                 FF                   T

Notice that the only time the conditional statement,  is false is when the hypothesis, , is true and the
conclusion, , is false.

VIDEO
Logic Part 8: The Conditional and Tautologies (https://openstax.org/r/Conditional_and_Tautologies)

  EXAMPLE 2.18

Constructing Truth Tables for Conditional Statements
Assume both of the following statements are true: : My sibling washed the dishes, and : My parents paid them $5.00.
Create a truth table to determine the truth value of each of the following conditional statements.

 1.
 2.
 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.4 · Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 89

    Solution

1. Because is true and is true, the statement        is, "If my sibling washed the dishes, then my parents paid them

    $5.00." My sibling did wash the dishes, since is true, and the parents did pay the sibling $5.00, so the contract was

    entered and completed. The conditional statement is true, as indicated by the truth table representing this case:
    T  T = T.

                                                     TT  T

2.            translates to the statement, "If my sibling washed the dishes, then my parents did not pay them $5.00." is

    true, but is false. The sibling completed their end of the contract, but they did not get paid. The contract was

    broken by the parents. The conditional statement is false, as indicated by the truth table representing this case:
    T  F = F.

                                               TT F         F

3.            translates to the statement, "If my sibling did not wash the dishes, then my parents paid them $5.00." is

    false, but is true. The sibling did not do the dishes. No contract was entered, so it could not be broken. The parents

    decided to pay them $5.00 anyway. The conditional statement is true, as indicated by the truth table representing
    this case: F  T = T.

                                               TT F         T

      YOUR TURN 2.18

Assume is true and is false. : Kevin vacuumed the living room, and : Kevin's parents did not let him borrow the
car. Create a truth table to determine the truth value of each of the following conditional statements.

    1.
    2.
    3.

EXAMPLE 2.19

Determining Validity of Conditional Statements
Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following statements then determine whether
they are valid.

1.
2.

    Solution

1. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement        is equivalent to  So, the columns

    of the truth table will include , ,       , and      Because there are only two basic propositions, and ,

    the table will have  rows of truth values to account for all the possible outcomes. The statement is not valid

    because the last column is not all true.
90 2 · Logic

                                         TT T                    F  F

                                         TF    F                 T  T

                                         FT F                    F  T

                                         FF    F                 T  T

2. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement             is equivalent to  So, the

columns of the truth table will include , , ,               and        Because there are only two basic

propositions, and , the table will have        rows of truth values to account for all the possible outcomes. The

statement is not valid because the last column is not all true.

                                 TT F                       T       T

                                 TF F                       F       F

                                 FT T                       T       T

                                 FF T                       T       T

      YOUR TURN 2.19

Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following statements, then determine
whether they are valid.

    1.
    2.

Use and Apply the Biconditional to Construct a Truth Table

The biconditional,      , is a two way contract; it is equivalent to the statement    A biconditional

statement,          is true whenever the truth value of the hypothesis matches the truth value of the conclusion,

otherwise it is false.

The truth table for the biconditional is summarized below.

                                               TT                T

                                               TF                F

                                               FT                F

                                               FF                T

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              2.4 · Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 91

    VIDEO
    Logic Part 11B: Biconditional and Summary of Truth Value Rules in Logic (https://openstax.org/r/omKzui0Fytk)

EXAMPLE 2.20

Constructing Truth Tables for Biconditional Statements
Assume both of the following statements are true: : The plumber fixed the leak, and : The homeowner paid the
plumber $150.00. Create a truth table to determine the truth value of each of the following biconditional statements.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. Because is true and is true, the statement  is "The plumber fixed the leak if and only if the homeowner paid

    them $150.00." Because both and are true, the leak was fixed and the plumber was paid, meaning both parties

    satisfied their end of the bargain. The biconditional statement is true, as indicated by the truth table representing
    this case: T  T = T.

                                               TT    T

2.            translates to the statement, "The plumber fixed the leak if and only if the homeowner did not pay them

    $150." If the plumber fixed the leak and the homeowner did not pay them, the homeowner will have broken their

    end of the contract. The biconditional statement is false, as indicated by the truth table representing this case:
    T  F = F.

                                               TT F     F

3.            translates to the statement, "The plumber did not fix the leak if and only if the homeowner did not pay

    them $150." In this case, neither party--the plumber nor the homeowner--entered into the contract. The leak was

    not repaired, and the plumber was not paid. No agreement was broken. The biconditional statement is true, as
    indicated by the truth table representing this case: F  F = T.

                        TT F F                             T

      YOUR TURN 2.20

Assume is true and is false: The contractor fixed the broken window, and The homeowner paid the
contractor $200. Create a truth table to determine the truth value of each of the following biconditional statements.

    1.
    2.
    3.

    The biconditional,  is true whenever the truth values of and match, otherwise it is false.
92 2 · Logic

    VIDEO
    Logic Part 13: Truth Tables to Determine if Argument is Valid or Invalid (https://openstax.org/r/AQB3svnxxiw)

EXAMPLE 2.21

Determining Validity of Biconditional Statements
Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following statements, then determine whether
they are valid.

1.
2.
3.
4.

    Solution

1. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement             is equivalent to                              So, the

    columns of the truth table will include , ,          ,     and                  Because there are only two

    basic propositions, and , the table will have           rows of truth values to account for all the possible

    outcomes. The statement is not valid because the last column is not all true.

                                 TT T                    F  F       F

                                 TF              F       T  T       F

                                 FT F                    F  F       T

                                 FF              F       T  F       T

2. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement             is equivalent to                              So, the

    columns of the truth table will include , ,          ,     and                  Because there are only two

    basic propositions, and , the table will have           rows of truth values to account for all the possible

    outcomes. The statement is not valid because the last column is not all true.

                                 TT T                    F  T       T

                                 TF T                    F  F       F

                                 FT T                    T  T       T

                                 FF F                    T  T       F

3. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement             is equivalent to

    So, the columns of the truth table will include , ,        ,,      and            Because

    there are only two basic propositions, and the table will have  rows of truth values to account for all the

    possible outcomes. The statement is valid because the last column is all true.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.4 · Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 93

                TT     T                  FF                     T           T

                TF     F                  TF                     F           T

                FT     T                  FT                     T           T

                FF     T                  TT                     T           T

4. Applying the dominance of connectives, the statement                      is equivalent to

                       So, the columns of the truth table will include , , , ,

           and                            Because there are three basic propositions, , , and , the table

will have       rows of truth values to account for all the possible outcomes. The statement is not valid

because the last column is not all true.

                TTT F  T                  F                         T           T

                TTF T  T                  T                         F           T

                TFT F  F                  T                         F           F

                TFF T  F                  T                         F           F

                FTT F  F                  T                         F           F

                FTF T  F                  T                         F           F

                FFT F  F                  T                         F           F

                FFF T  F                  T                         F           F

      YOUR TURN 2.21

Construct a truth table to analyze all possible outcomes for each of the following statements, then determine
whether they are valid.

    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.

Check Your Understanding

19. In logic, a conditional statement can be thought of as a _____________.

20. If the hypothesis, , of a conditional statement is true, the _____, , must also be true for the conditional statement
               to be true.

21. If the ______________ of a conditional statement is false, the conditional statement is true.

22. The symbolic form of the _____________________ statement is     .
94 2 · Logic

     23. The _____________________ statement is equivalent to the statement
     24. if and only if is ____________ whenever the truth value of matches the truth value of , otherwise it is false.

            SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES

     For the following exercises, complete the truth table to determine the truth value of the proposition in the last column.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                               2.4 · Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional 95

     1.
                                                                          TT

     2.
                                                                          TT

     3.
                                                                          FT

     4.
                                                                          FT

     5.
                                                             FTF

     6.
                                                        FFF

     7.
                                                        FFF

     8.
                                                        TFF

     9.
                                            FFF

    10.
                                            TTT

For the following exercises, assume these statements are true: Faheem is a software engineer, Ann is a project
96 2 · Logic

     manager, Giacomo works with Faheem, and The software application was completed on time. Translate each of the
     following statements to symbols, then construct a truth table to determine its truth value.

          11. If Giacomo works with Faheem, then Faheem is not a software engineer.
          12. If the software application was not completed on time, then Ann is not a project manager.
          13. The software application was completed on time if and only if Giacomo worked with Faheem.
          14. Ann is not a project manager if and only if Faheem is a software engineer.
          15. If the software application was completed on time, then Ann is a project manager, but Faheem is not a software

                engineer.
          16. If Giacomo works with Faheem and Ann is a project manager, then the software application was completed on

                time.
          17. The software application was not completed on time if and only if Faheem is a software engineer or Giacomo

                did not work with Faheem.
          18. Faheem is a software engineer or Ann is not a project manager if and only if Giacomo did not work with

                Faheem and the software application was completed on time.
          19. Ann is a project manager implies Faheem is a software engineer if and only if the software application was

                completed on time implies Giacomo worked with Faheem.
          20. If Giacomo did not work with Faheem implies that the software application was not completed on time, then

                Ann was not the project manager.
     For the following exercises, construct a truth table to analyze all the possible outcomes and determine the validity of
     each argument.

          21.
          22.
          23.
          24.
          25.
          26.
          27.
          28.
          29.
          30.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.5 · Equivalent Statements 97

2.5 Equivalent Statements

Figure 2.11 How your logical argument is stated affects the response, just like how you speak when holding a
conversation can affect how your words are received. (credit: modification of work by Goelshivi/Flickr, Public Domain
Mark 1.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Determine whether two statements are logically equivalent using a truth table.
 2. Compose the converse, inverse, and contrapositive of a conditional statement

Have you ever had a conversation with or sent a note to someone, only to have them misunderstand what you intended
to convey? The way you choose to express your ideas can be as, or even more, important than what you are saying. If
your goal is to convince someone that what you are saying is correct, you will not want to alienate them by choosing
your words poorly.

Logical arguments can be stated in many different ways that still ultimately result in the same valid conclusion. Part of
the art of constructing a persuasive argument is knowing how to arrange the facts and conclusion to elicit the desired
response from the intended audience.

In this section, you will learn how to determine whether two statements are logically equivalent using truth tables, and
then you will apply this knowledge to compose logically equivalent forms of the conditional statement. Developing this
skill will provide the additional skills and knowledge needed to construct well-reasoned, persuasive arguments that can
be customized to address specific audiences.

      An alternate way to think about logical equivalence is that the truth values have to match. That is, whenever is
      true, is also true, and whenever is false, is also false.

Determine Logical Equivalence

Two statements, and , are logically equivalent when  is a valid argument, or when the last column of the truth

table consists of only true values. When a logical statement is always true, it is known as a tautology. To determine

whether two statements and are logically equivalent, construct a truth table for  and determine whether it

valid. If the last column is all true, the argument is a tautology, it is valid, and is logically equivalent to ; otherwise, is

not logically equivalent to .

EXAMPLE 2.22

Determining Logical Equivalence with a Truth Table
Create a truth table to determine whether the following compound statements are logically equivalent.
98 2 · Logic

1.
2.

    Solution
1. Construct a truth table for the biconditional formed by using the first statement as the hypothesis and the second

     statement as the conclusion,

                                 TT     T     FF            T     T

                                 TF     F     FT            T     F

                                 FT     T     TF            F     F

                                 FF     T     TT            T     T

Because the last column it not all true, the biconditional is not valid and the statement      is not logically

equivalent to the statement          .

2. Construct a truth table for the biconditional formed by using the first statement as the hypothesis and the second
     statement as the conclusion,

                                 TT        T          F  T     T

                                 TF        F          F  F     T

                                 FT        T          T  T     T

                                 FF        T          T  T     T

Because the last column is true for every entry, the biconditional is valid and the statement  is logically

equivalent to the statement          . Symbolically,

        YOUR TURN 2.22

  Create a truth table to determine whether the following compound statements are logically equivalent.
      1.
      2.

Compose the Converse, Inverse, and Contrapositive of a Conditional Statement

The converse, inverse, and contrapositive are variations of the conditional statement,

  · The converse is if then , and it is formed by interchanging the hypothesis and the conclusion. The converse is
      logically equivalent to the inverse.

  · The inverse is if then , and it is formed by negating both the hypothesis and the conclusion. The inverse is
      logically equivalent to the converse.

  · The contrapositive is if then , and it is formed by interchanging and negating both the hypothesis and the
      conclusion. The contrapositive is logically equivalent to the conditional.

The table below shows how these variations are presented symbolically.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                      2.5 · Equivalent Statements 99

                                        Conditional Contrapositive Converse Inverse

              TT F F                    T                         T  T  T

              TF F T                    F                         F  T  T

              FT T F                    T                         T  F  F

              FF T T                    T                         T  T  T

EXAMPLE 2.23

Writing the Converse, Inverse, and Contrapositive of a Conditional Statement
Use the statements, : Harry is a wizard and : Hermione is a witch, to write the following statements:

1. Write the conditional statement,     , in words.

2. Write the converse statement,        , in words.

3. Write the inverse statement,         , in words.

4. Write the contrapositive statement,  , in words.

    Solution
1. The conditional statement takes the form, "if , then ," so the conditional statement is: "If Harry is a wizard, then

     Hermione is a witch." Remember the if ... then ... words are the connectives that form the conditional statement.
2. The converse swaps or interchanges the hypothesis, , with the conclusion, . It has the form, "if , then ." So, the

     converse is: "If Hermione is a witch, then Harry is a wizard."
3. To construct the inverse of a statement, negate both the hypothesis and the conclusion. The inverse has the form,

     "if , then ," so the inverse is: "If Harry is not a wizard, then Hermione is not a witch."
4. The contrapositive is formed by negating and interchanging both the hypothesis and conclusion. It has the form, "if

         , then ," so the contrapositive statement is: "If Hermione is not a witch, then Harry is not a wizard."

YOUR TURN 2.23

Use the statements, : Elvis Presley wore capes and : Some superheroes wear capes, to write the following

statements:

1. Write the conditional statement,     , in words.

2. Write the converse statement,        , in words.

3. Write the inverse statement,         , in words.

4. Write the contrapositive statement,               , in words.

  EXAMPLE 2.24

Identifying the Converse, Inverse, and Contrapositive
Use the conditional statement, "If all dogs bark, then Lassie likes to bark," to identify the following.

 1. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement and label it with a .
 2. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement and label it with a .
 3. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Lassie likes to bark, then all dogs

      bark."
 4. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Lassie does not like to bark, then

      some dogs do not bark."
 5. Which statement is logically equivalent to the conditional statement?
100 2 · Logic

Solution

1. The hypothesis is the phrase following the if. The answer is : All dogs bark. Notice, the word if is not included as

part of the hypothesis.

2. The conclusion of a conditional statement is the phrase following the then. The word then is not included when

stating the conclusion. The answer is: : Lassie likes to bark.

3. "Lassie likes to bark" is and "All dogs bark" is . So, "If Lassie likes to bark, then all dogs bark," has the form "if ,

then ," which is the form of the converse.

4. "Lassie does not like to bark" is and "Some dogs do not bark" is . The statement, "If Lassie does not like to bark,

then some dogs do not bark," has the form "if , then ," which is the form of the contrapositive.

5. The contrapositive            is logically equivalent to the conditional statement

      YOUR TURN 2.24

Use the conditional statement, "If Dora is an explorer, then Boots is a monkey," to identify the following:
    1. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement and label it with a .
    2. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement and label it with a .
    3. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Dora is not an explorer, then
         Boots is not a monkey."
    4. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Boots is a monkey, then Dora
         is an explorer."
    5. Which statement is logically equivalent to the inverse?

EXAMPLE 2.25

Determining the Truth Value of the Converse, Inverse, and Contrapositive

Assume the conditional statement,  "If Chadwick Boseman was an actor, then Chadwick Boseman did not star in

the movie Black Panther" is false, and use it to answer the following questions.

1. Write the converse of the statement in words and determine its truth value.
2. Write the inverse of the statement in words and determine its truth value.
3. Write the contrapositive of the statement in words and determine its truth value.

Solution

1. The only way the conditional statement can be false is if the hypothesis, : Chadwick Boseman was an actor, is true

and the conclusion, : Chadwick Boseman did not star in the movie Black Panther, is false. The converse is

and it is written in words as: "If Chadwick Boseman did not star in the movie Black Panther, then Chadwick Boseman

was an actor." This statement is true, because false true is true.

2. The inverse has the form "      " The written form is: "If Chadwick Boseman was not an actor, then Chadwick

Boseman starred in the movie Black Panther." Because is true, and is false, is false, and is true. This means

the inverse is false true, which is true. Alternatively, from Question 1, the converse is true, and because the

inverse is logically equivalent to the converse it must also be true.

3. The contrapositive is logically equivalent to the conditional. Because the conditional is false, the contrapositive is

also false. This can be confirmed by looking at the truth values of the contrapositive statement. The contrapositive

has the form "                   ." Because is false and is true, is true and is false. Therefore,  is true

false, which is false. The written form of the contrapositive is "If Chadwick Boseman starred in the movie Black

Panther, then Chadwick Boseman was not an actor."

YOUR TURN 2.25

Assume the conditional statement   "If my friend lives in San Francisco, then my friend does not live in

California" is false, and use it to answer the following questions.

1. Write the converse of the statement in words and determine its truth value.

2. Write the inverse of the statement in words and determine its truth value.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.5 · Equivalent Statements 101

3. Write the contrapositive of the statement in words and determine its truth value.

Check Your Understanding

25. Two statements and are logically equivalent to each other if the biconditional statement,  is

________________.

26. The _____ statement has the form, " then ."

27. The contrapositive is _____________ ___________ to the conditional statement, and has the form, "if , then ."

28. The _________________ of the conditional statement has the form, "if , then ."

29. The _________________ of the conditional statement is logically equivalent to the _______________ and has the form, "if
        then ."

     SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether the pair of compound statements are logically equivalent by

constructing a truth table.

1. Converse:       and inverse:

2. Conditional:              and contrapositive:

3. Inverse:        and contrapositive:

4. Conditional:              and converse:

5.   and

6.   and

7.           and

8.           and

9.            and

10.           and

For the following exercises, answer the following:

a. Write the conditional statement          in words.

b. Write the converse statement             in words.

c. Write the inverse statement              in words.

d. Write the contrapositive statement               in words.

11. : Six is afraid of Seven and : Seven ate Nine.
12. : Hope is eternal and : Despair is temporary.
13. : Tom Brady is a quarterback and : Tom Brady does not play soccer.
14. : Shakira does not sing opera and : Shakira sings popular music.
15. :The shape does not have three sides and : The shape is not a triangle.
16. : All birds can fly and : Emus can fly.
17. : Penguins cannot fly and : Some birds can fly.
18. : Some superheroes do not wear capes and : Spiderman is a superhero.
19. : No Pokémon are little ponies and : Bulbasaur is a Pokémon.
20. : Roses are red, and violets are blue and : Sugar is sweet, and you are sweet too.

For the following exercises,use the conditional statement: "If Clark Kent is Superman, then Lois Lane is not a reporter,"
to answer the following questions.

    21. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    22. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    23. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive, and determine its truth value: "If

          Clark Kent is not Superman, then Lois Lane is a reporter."
    24. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive, and determine its truth value: "If

          Lois Lane is a reporter, then Clark Kent is not Superman."
    25. Which form of the conditional is logically equivalent to the converse?

For the following exercises, use the conditional statement: "If The Masked Singer is not a music competition, then
Donnie Wahlberg was a member of New Kids on the Block," to answer the following questions.

    26. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
102 2 · Logic

27. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.

28. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive, and determine its truth value: "If

               Donnie Wahlberg was a member of New Kids on the Block, then The Masked Singer is not a music competition."

29. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive, and determine its truth value: "If

               The Masked Singer is a music competition, then Donnie Wahlberg was not a member of New Kids on the Block."

30. Which form of the conditional is logically equivalent to the contrapositive,  ?

For the following exercises, use the conditional statement: "If all whales are mammals, then no fish are whales," to
answer the following questions.

    31. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    32. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    33. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive, and determine its truth value: "If

          some fish are whales, then some whales are not mammals."
    34. Write the inverse in words and determine its truth value.
    35. Write the converse in words and determine its truth value.

For the following exercises, use the conditional statement: "If some parallelograms are rectangles, then some circles
are not symmetrical," to answer the following questions.

    36. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    37. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement, label it with a , and determine its truth value.
    38. Write the converse in words and determine its truth value.
    39. Write the contrapositive in words and determine its truth value.
    40. Write the inverse in words and determine its truth value.

2.6 De Morgan's Laws

Figure 2.12 De Morgan's Laws were key to the rise of logical mathematical expression and helped serve as a bridge for
the invention of the computer. (credit: modification of work "Golden Gate Bridge (San Francisco Bay, California, USA)" by
James St. John/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Use De Morgan's Laws to negate conjunctions and disjunctions.
 2. Construct the negation of a conditional statement.
 3. Use truth tables to evaluate De Morgan's Laws.

The contributions to logic made by Augustus De Morgan and George Boole during the 19th century acted as a bridge to
the development of computers, which may be the greatest invention of the 20th century. Boolean logic is the basis for
computer science and digital electronics, and without it the technological revolution of the late 20th and early 21st
centuries--including the creation of computer chips, microprocessors, and the Internet--would not have been possible.
Every modern computer language uses Boolean logic statements, which are translated into commands understood by
the underlying electronic circuits enabling computers to operate. But how did this logic get its name?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     2.6 · De Morgan's Laws 103

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
George Boole

  Figure 2.13 Boole's algebra of logic was foundational in the design of digital computer circuits. (credit: "Circuit Board"
  by Squeezyboy/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
  George Boole was born in Lincolnshire, England in 1815. He was the son of a cobbler who provided him some initial
  education, but Boole was mostly self-taught. He began teaching at 16 years of age, and opened his own school at the
  age of 20. In 1849, at the age of 34, he was appointed Professor of Mathematics at Queens College in Cork, Ireland. In
  1853, he published the paper, An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, on Which Are Founded the Mathematical
  Theories of Logic and Probabilities, which is the treatise that the field of Boolean algebra and digital circuitry was built
  on.
  Reference: Posamentier, Alfred and Spreitzer Christian, "Chapter 35 George Boole: English (1815-1864)" pp. 279-283,
  Math Makers: The Lives and Works of 50 Famous Mathematicians, Prometheus Books, 2019.

Negation of Conjunctions and Disjunctions

In Chapter 1, Example 1.37 used a Venn diagram to prove De Morgan's Law for set complement over union. Because the
complement of a set is analogous to negation and union is analogous to an or statement, there are equivalent versions
of De Morgan's Laws for logic.

  FORMULA

  De Morgan's Law for negation of a conjunction:
  De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction:
  Negation of a conditional:
  Writing conditional as a disjunction:

      Recall that the symbol for logical equivalence is:

De Morgan's Laws allow us to write the negation of conjunctions and disjunctions without using the phrase, "It is not the
case that ..." to indicate the parentheses. Avoiding this phrase often results in a written or verbal statement that is
clearer or easier to understand.

  EXAMPLE 2.26

Applying De Morgan's Law for Negation of Conjunctions and Disjunctions
Write the negation of each statement in words without using the phrase, "It is not the case that."
104 2 · Logic

1. Kristin is a biomedical engineer and Thomas is a chemical engineer.
2. A person had cake or they had ice cream.

Solution

1. Kristin is a biomedical engineer and Thomas is a chemical engineer has the form " ," where is the statement,

"Kristin is a biomedical engineer," and is the statement, "Thomas is a chemical engineer." By De Morgan's Law, the

negation of a conjunction,           , is logically equivalent to            is "Kristen is not a biomedical engineer,"

and is "Thomas is not a chemical engineer." By De Morgan's Law, the solution has the form "         ," so the

answer is: "Kristin is not a biomedical engineer or Tom is not a chemical engineer."

2. A person had cake or they had ice cream has the form "          " where is the statement, "A person had cake," and

is the statement, "A person had ice cream." By De Morgan's Law for the negations of a disjunction,

                            The solution is the statement: "A person did not have cake and they did not have ice cream."

      YOUR TURN 2.26

Write the negation of each statement in words without using the phrase, it is not the case that.
    1. Jackie played softball or she ran track.
    2. Brandon studied for his certification exam, and he passed his exam.

Negation of a Conditional Statement

The negation of any statement has the opposite truth values of the original statement. The negation of a conditional,

               , is the conjunction of and not ,     Consider the truth table below for the negation of the conditional.

                                                  TT  T               F

                                                  TF  F               T

                                                  FT  T               F

                                                  FF  T               F

The only time the negation of the conditional statement is true is when is true, and is false. This means that

is logically equivalent to       as the following truth table demonstrates.

                                 TT  T            F   F            F         T

                                 TF  F            T   T            T         T

                                 FT  T            F   F            F         T

                                 FF  T            F   T            F         T

  EXAMPLE 2.27

Constructing the Negation of a Conditional Statement
Write the negation of each conditional statement.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 2.6 · De Morgan's Laws 105

1. If Adele won a Grammy, then she is a singer.
2. If Henrik Lundqvist played professional hockey, then he did not win the Stanley Cup.

Solution

1. The negation of the conditional statement,           is the statement,        The hypothesis of the conditional

statement is : "Adele won a Grammy," and conclusion of the conditional statement is : "Adele is a singer." The

negation of the conclusion, , is the statement: "She is not a singer." Therefore, the answer is  "Adele won a

Grammy, and she is not a singer."

2. The hypothesis is : "Henrik Lundqvist played professional hockey," and the conclusion of the conditional statement

is : "He did not win the Stanley Cup." The negation of is the statement: "He won the Stanley Cup." The negation of

the conditional statement is equal to          "Henrick Lundqvist played professional hockey, and he won the Stanley

Cup."

      YOUR TURN 2.27

Write the negation of each conditional statement.
    1. If Edna Mode makes a new superhero costume, then it will not include a cape.
    2. If I had pancakes for breakfast, then I used maple syrup.

EXAMPLE 2.28

Constructing the Negation of a Conditional Statement with Quantifiers
Write the negation of each conditional statement.

1. If all cats purr, then my partner's cat purrs.
2. If a penguin is a bird, then some birds do not fly.

Solution

1. The negation of the conditional statement            is the statement   The hypothesis of the conditional

statement is : "All cats purr," and the conclusion of the conditional statement is : "My partner's cat purrs." The

negation of the conclusion, , is the statement: "My partner's cat does not purr." Therefore, the answer is

"All cats purr, but my partner's cat does not purr."

2. The hypothesis is : "A penguin is a bird," and the conclusion of the conditional statement is : "Some birds do not

fly." The negation of is the statement: "All birds fly." Therefore, the negation of the conditional statement is equal

to        "A penguin is a bird, and all birds fly."

      YOUR TURN 2.28

Write the negation of each conditional statement.
    1. If some people like ice cream, then ice cream makers will make a profit.
    2. If Raquel cannot play video games, then nobody will play video games.

Many of the properties that hold true for number systems and sets also hold true for logical statements. The following
table summarizes some of the most useful properties for analyzing and constructing logical arguments. These
properties can be verified using a truth table.

              Property                 Conjunction (AND)                   Disjunction (OR)

              Commutative

              Associative
106 2 · Logic

                 Property             Conjunction (AND)                     Disjunction (OR)
               Distributive
               De Morgan's
               Conditional

EXAMPLE 2.29

Negating a Conditional Statement with a Conjunction or Disjunction
Write the negation of each conditional statement applying De Morgan's Law.

1. If mom needs to buy chips, then Mike had friends over and Bob was hungry.
2. If Juan had pizza or Chris had wings, then dad watched the game.

Solution

1. The conditional has the form "If then or ," where is "Mom needs to buy chips," is "Mike had friends over," and

is "Bob was hungry." The negation of             is            Applying De Morgan's Law to the statement

               the result is     , so our conditional statement becomes               By the distributive property for

conjunction over disjunction, this statement is equivalent to                         Translating the statement

               into words, the solution is: "Mom needs to buy chips and Mike did not have friends over, or Mom

needs to buy chips and Bob was not hungry."

2. The conditional has the form "If or , then ," where is "Juan had pizza," is "Chris had wings," and is "Dad

watched the game." The negation of           is                By the distributive property for disjunction over

conjuction, the statement is equivalent to                     Translating the statement                         into

words, the solution is: "Juan had pizza or dad did not watch the game, and Chris had wings or dad did not watch the

game."

      YOUR TURN 2.29

Write the negation of each conditional statement applying De Morgan's Law.
    1. If Eric needs to replace the light bulb, then Marcus left the light on all night or Dan broke the bulb.
    2. If Trenton went to school and Regina went to work, then Merika cleaned the house.

Evaluating De Morgan's Laws with Truth Tables

In Chapter 1, you learned that you could prove the validity of De Morgan's Laws using Venn diagrams. Truth tables can
also be used to prove that two statements are logically equivalent. If two statements are logically equivalent, you can use
the form of the statement that is clearer or more persuasive when constructing a logical argument.

The next example will prove the validity of one of De Morgan's Laws using a truth table. The same procedure can be
applied to any two logical statement that you believe are equivalent. If the last column of the truth table is a tautology,
then the two statements are logically equivalent.

EXAMPLE 2.30

Verifying De Morgan's Law for Negation of a Conjunction                                            , is valid.
Construct a truth table to verify De Morgan's Law for the negation of a conjunction,

Solution

Step 1: To verify any logical equivalence, you must first replace the logical equivalence symbol,  , with the biconditional

symbol, . The statement                     becomes                                                 , and , the truth table
                                                                                                                              and
Step 2: Next, you create a truth table for the statement. Because we have two basic statements,

will have four rows to account for all the possible outcomes. The columns will be , , , ,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.6 · De Morgan's Laws 107

the biconditional statement is

     TT T                                      F  FF               F  T

     TF F                                      T  FT               T  T

     FT F                                      T  TF               T  T

     FF F                                      T  TT               T  T

Step 3: Finally, verify that the statement is valid by confirming it is a tautology. In this instance, the last column is all true.
Therefore, the statement is valid and De Morgan's Law for the negation of a conjunction is verified.

      YOUR TURN 2.30                                                                           , is valid.
1. Construct a truth table to verify De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction,

Check Your Understanding                                              is logically equivalent to ___________________.

30. De Morgan's Law for the negation of a conjunction states that

31. De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction states that     is logically equivalent to __________________.

32. The negation of the conditional statement,    , is logically equivalent to _____________.

33.  , which means the conditional statement is logically equivalent to                        Apply

     _______________________ to the statement     to show that the conditional statement

        SECTION 2.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use De Morgan's Laws to write each statement without parentheses.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.

For the following exercises, use De Morgan's Laws to write the negation of each statement in words without using the
phrase, "It is not the case that, ..."

     5. Sergei plays right wing and Patrick plays goalie.
     6. Mario is a carpenter, or he is a plumber.
     7. Luigi is a plumber, or he is not a video game character.
     8. Ralph Macchio was the original Karate Kid, and karate is not for defense only.
     9. Some people like broccoli, but my siblings did not like broccoli.
    10. Some people do not like chocolate or all people like pizza.

For the following exercises, write each statement as a conjunction or disjunction in symbolic form by applying the
property for the negation of a conditional.

    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
108 2 · Logic

           18.
       For the following exercises, write the negation of each conditional in words by applying the property for the negation of
       a conditional.

           19. If a student scores an 85 on the final exam, then they will receive an A in the class.
           20. If a person does not pass their road test, then they will not receive their driver's license.
           21. If a student does not do their homework, then they will not play video games.
           22. If a commuter misses the bus, then they will not go to work today.
           23. If a racecar driver gets pulled over for speeding, then they will not make it to the track on time for the race.
           24. If Rene Descartes was a philosopher, then he was not a mathematician.
           25. If George Boole invented Boolean algebra and Thomas Edison invented the light bulb, then Pacman is not the

                 best video game ever.
           26. If Jonas Salk created the polio vaccine, then his child received the vaccine or his child had polio.
           27. If Billie Holiday sang the blues or Cindy Lauper sang about true colors, then John Lennon was not a Beatle.
           28. If Percy Jackson is the lightning thief and Artemis Fowl is a detective, then Artemis Fowl will catch Percy Jackson.
           29. If all rock stars are men, then Pat Benatar is not a rock star.
           30. If Lady Gaga is a rock star, then some rock stars are women.
           31. If yellow combined with blue makes green, then all colors are beautiful.
           32. If leopards have spots and zebras have stripes, then some animals are not monotone in color.
       For the following exercises, construct a truth table to verify that the logical property is valid.
           33.
           34.
           35.
           36.

    2.7 Logical Arguments

       Figure 2.14 Not all logical arguments are valid, and the ongoing fight for equal rights proves that much progress has yet
       to be made. (credit: "The Steam Roller" by Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division, public domain)

    Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Apply the law of detachment to determine the conclusion of a pair of statements.
        2. Apply the law of denying the consequent to determine the conclusion for pairs of statements.
        3. Apply the chain rule to determine valid conclusions for pairs of true statements.
       The previous sections of this chapter provide the foundational skills for constructing and analyzing logical arguments. All
       logical arguments include a set of premises that support a claim or conclusion; but not all logical arguments are valid
       and sound. A logical argument is valid if its conclusion follows from the premises, and it is sound if it is valid and all of its
       premises are true. A false or deceptive argument is called a fallacy. Many types of fallacies are so common that they
       have been named.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.7 · Logical Arguments 109

      WHO KNEW?

In 1936, Dale Carnegie published his first book, titled How to Win Friends and Influence People. It was marketed as
training materials for the improvement of public speaking and negotiation skills, and the methods it presented are
still used today. Carnegie famously said, "When dealing with people, remember you are not dealing with creatures of
logic, but creatures of emotion."

People who put forth fallacious logical arguments often take advantage of our susceptibility to emotional appeals, to
try to convince us that what they are saying is true. The study of logic helps us combat this weakness through
recognition and learning to focus on the facts and structure of the argument.

This section focuses on the two main forms that logical arguments can take. While inductive arguments attempt to draw
a more general conclusion from a pattern of specific premises, deductive arguments attempt to draw specific
conclusions from at least one or more general premises. Deductive arguments can be proven to be valid using Venn
diagrams or truth tables.

Inductive arguments generally cannot be proven to be true. They are judged as being strong or weak, but, like any
opinion, whether you believe an argument is strong or weak often depends on your knowledge of the topic being
discussed along with the evidence being provided in the premises. Hasty generalization is the name given to any fallacy
that presents a weak inductive argument.

      Be careful! Premises may be true or false. If a premise is false, the claims made by the argument should be
      questioned.

Law of Detachment

The law of detachment is a valid form of a conditional argument that asserts that if both the conditional,  , and the

hypothesis, , are true, then the conclusion must also be true. The law of detachment is also called affirming the

hypothesis (or antecedent) and modus ponens. Symbolically, it has the form  .

                   Law of Detachment

                   Premise:

                   Premise:

                   Conclusion:

      The is read as the word, "therefore."

Looking at the truth table for the conditional statement, the only time the conditional is true is when the hypothesis is
also true. The only place this happens is in the first row, where is also true, confirming that the law of detachment is a
valid argument.

                   TT           T

                   TF           F

                   FT           T

                   FF           T
110 2 · Logic

      Another way to verify that the law of detachment is a valid argument is to construct a truth table for the argument
                                 and verify that it is a tautology.

                                 TT             T  T  T

                                 TF             F  F  T

                                 FT             T  F  T

                                 FF             T  F  T

Venn diagrams may also be used to verify deductive arguments, which include conditional premises. Consider the

statement     "If you play guitar, then you are a musician." The set of guitarists is a subset of the set of musicians,

To verify that an argument is valid using a Venn diagram, draw the Venn diagram representing all the premises in

the argument only, as shown in Figure 2.15. Then verify if the conclusion is also represented by the Venn diagram of the

premises. If it is, the argument is valid. If it is not, the argument is not valid. The set of guitarists is drawn as a subset of

the set of musicians to represent the premise,     The represents the premise: is true. This completes the

drawing of the premises.

                                                                             Figure 2.15

Now, examine the Venn diagram to verify if the conclusion is included in the picture. The conclusion is . Because the is
in the set , and is a subset of , is also in ; therefore, the law of detachment is a valid argument.

      Remember that an argument can be valid without being true. For the argument to be proven true, it must be both
      valid and sound. An argument is sound if all its premises are true.

VIDEO

Logic Part 14: Common Argument Forms like Modus Ponens and Tollens (https://openstax.org/r/
Modus_Ponens_and_Tollens)

EXAMPLE 2.31

Applying the Law of Detachment to Determine a Valid Conclusion
Each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the law of
detachment to determine a valid conclusion.

1. If Leonardo da Vinci was an artist, then he painted the Mona Lisa. Leonardo da Vinci was an artist.
2. If Michael Jordan played for the Chicago Bulls, then Michael Jordan was not a soccer player. Michael Jordan played

     for the Chicago Bulls.
3. If all fish have gills, then clown fish have gills. All fish have gills.

    Solution                     If Leonardo da Vinci was an artist, then he painted the Mona Lisa, and Leonardo da
1. The premises are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.7 · Logical Arguments 111

Vinci was an artist. This argument has the form of the law of detachment, so, the conclusion is Leonardo da Vinci

painted the Mona Lisa.

2. The premises follow the form of the law of detachment, so a valid conclusion would be . The premises are                 If

Michael Jordan played for the Chicago Bulls, then Michael Jordan was not a soccer player, and Michael Jordan

played for the Chicago Bulls. The conclusion that follows from the premises is Michael Jordan was not a soccer

player.

3. The premises are     If all fish have gills, then clown fish have gills, and All fish have gills. This argument has

the form of the law of detachment, so the conclusion is clown fish have gills.

      YOUR TURN 2.31

Each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the law of
detachment to determine a valid conclusion.

    1. If my classmate likes history, then some people like history. My classmate likes history.
    2. If you do not like to read, then some people do not like reading. You do not like to read.
    3. If the polygon has five sides, then it is not an octagon. The polygon has five sides.

Law of Denying the Consequent

Another form of a valid conditional argument is called the law of denying the consequent, or modus tollens. Recall,

that the conditional statement,  , is logically equivalent to the contrapositive,     So, if the conditional

statement is true, then the contrapositive statement is also true. By the law of detachment, if is also true, then it

follows that must also be true. Symbolically, it has the form                      .

                                 Law of Denying the Consequent

                                 Premise:

                                 Premise:

                                 Conclusion:

      The conditional statement can also be described as, "If antecedent, then consequent."This is where the law of
      denying the consequent gets its name.

To verify if the law of denying the consequent is a valid argument, construct a truth table for the argument,
                             , and verify that it is a tautology.

                        TT F F   T                             F                   T

                        TF F T   F                             F                   T

                        FT T F   T                             F                   T

                        FF T T   T                             T                   T

To verify an argument of this form using a Venn diagram, again consider the premise:  "If you play guitar, then

you are a musician." We will change the second premise to In this case, the represents the premise, So, it will be

placed inside the universal set of all people, but outside the set of musicians, as depicted in the Venn diagram in Figure
112 2 · Logic

      2.16.

Because the                                                            Figure 2.16
               is also outside the set of guitarists, the statement follows from the premises and the argument is valid.

EXAMPLE 2.32

Applying the Law of Denying the Consequent to Determine a Valid Conclusion
Each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the law of
denying the consequent to determine a valid conclusion.

1. If Leonardo da Vinci was an artist, then he painted the Mona Lisa. Leonardo da Vinci did not paint the Mona Lisa.
2. If Michael Jordan played for the Chicago Bulls, then Michael Jordan was not a soccer player. Michael Jordan was a

     soccer player.
3. If all fish have gills, then clown fish have gills. Clown fish do not have gills.

Solution

1. The premises are                  If Leonardo da Vinci was an artist, then he painted the Mona Lisa, and Leonardo da

     Vinci did not paint the Mona Lisa. This argument has the form of the law of denying the consequent, so the

     conclusion is Leonardo da Vinci was not an artist.

2. The premises follow the form of the law of denying the consequent, so a valid conclusion would be . The premises

     are:      If Michael Jordan played for the Chicago Bulls, then Michael Jordan was not a soccer player, and

     Michael Jordan was a soccer player. The conclusion that follows from the premises is Michael Jordan did not play

     for the Chicago Bulls.

3. The premises are                  If all fish have gills, then clown fish have gills, and Clown fish do not have gills. This

     argument has the form of the law denying the consequent, so the conclusion is Some fish do not have gills.

      YOUR TURN 2.32

Each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the law of
denying the consequent to determine a valid conclusion.

    1. If my classmate likes history, then some people like history. Nobody likes history.
    2. If Homer does not like to read, then some people do not like reading. All people like reading.
    3. If the polygon has five sides, then it is not an octagon. The polygon is an octagon.

Chain Rule for Conditional Arguments

The chain rule for conditional arguments is another form of a valid conditional argument. It is also called hypothetical

syllogism or the transitivity of implication. Recall that the conditional statement  can also be read as implies .

This is where the name transitivity of implication comes from. The transitive property for numbers states that, if

and            then it follows that  The chain rule extends this property to conditional statements. If the premises of

the argument consist of two conditional statements, with the form "  " and "         " then it follows that

Symbolically, it has the form                            .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2.7 · Logical Arguments 113

                                                         Chain Rule for Conditional Arguments
                                                                  Premise:
                                                                  Premise:

                                                                Conclusion:

To verify the chain rule for conditional arguments, construct a truth table for the argument,
                                           , and verify that it is a tautology.

       TTT                 T  T                    T  T                              T

       TTF                 T  F                    F  F                              T

       TFT                 F  T                    F  T                              T

       TFF                 F  T                    F  F                              T

       FTT                 T  T                    T  T                              T

       FTF                 T  F                    F  T                              T

       FFT                 T  T                    T  T                              T

       FFF                 T  T                    T  T                              T

To verify an argument of this form using a Venn diagram, again consider the premise            "If you play guitar, then you

are a musician," but change the second premise to     "If you are a musician, then you are an artist." In this case, the

set of guitarists is a subset of the set of artists, and it follows that if you are a guitarist, then you are an artist.

Therefore, the conclusion     follows from the premises and the chain rule for logical arguments is valid. See Figure

2.17.

                                                                             Figure 2.17

  EXAMPLE 2.33

Applying the Chain Rule for Conditional Arguments to Determine a Valid and Sound Conclusion
Each pair of statements represents true premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the chain rule
for conditional arguments to determine a valid and sound conclusion.
114 2 · Logic

1. If my roommate goes to work, then my roommate will get paid. If my roommate gets paid, then my roommate will
     pay their bills.

2. If robins can fly, then some birds can fly. If some birds can fly, then we will watch birds fly.
3. If Irma is a teacher, then Irma has a college degree. If Irma has a college degree, then Irma graduated from college.

Solution

1. The premises are              "If my roommate goes to work, then they will get paid," and  "If my roommate gets

paid, then my roommate will pay their bills." This argument has the form of the chain rule for conditional

arguments, so the valid conclusion will have the form "  " Because all the premises are true, the valid and

sound conclusion of this argument is: "If my roommate goes to work, then my roommate will pay their bills."

2. The premises are              "If robins can fly, then some birds can fly," and  "If some birds can fly, then we will

watch them fly." This argument has the form of the chain rule for conditional arguments, so, the valid conclusion

will have the form "             " Because all the premises are true, the valid and sound conclusion of this argument is: "If

robins can fly, then we will watch birds fly."

3. The premises are              (see line 1 of solution 1 and 2 above) "If Irma is a teacher, then Irma has a college degree,"

and            "If Irma has a college degree, then Irma graduated from college." This argument has the form of the

chain rule for conditional arguments, so the valid conclusion will have the form "            " Because all the premises

are true, the valid and sound conclusion of this argument is: "If Irma is a teacher, then Irma graduated from

college."

      YOUR TURN 2.33

Each pair of statements represent true premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, apply the chain
rule for conditional arguments to determine a valid and sound conclusion.

    1. If my roommate does not go to work, then my roommate will not get paid. If my roommate does not get paid,
         then they will not be able to pay their bills.

    2. If penguins cannot fly, then some birds cannot fly. If some birds cannot fly, then we will watch the news.
    3. If Marcy goes to the movies, then Marcy will buy popcorn. If Marcy buys popcorn, then she will buy water.

Check Your Understanding

34. A __________________ is a logical statement used as a fact to support the conclusion of an argument.
35. A logical argument is _______________ if its conclusion follows from the premises.
36. A logical argument that attempts to draw a more general conclusion from a pattern of specific premises is called

      an _______________________ argument.
37. A _______________________ argument draws specific conclusions from more general premises.
38. Not all arguments are true. A false or deceptive argument is called a ___________________.
39. If an argument is valid and all of its premises are true, then it is considered ________________.

               SECTION 2.7 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, analyze the argument and identify the form of the argument as the law of detachment, the

law of denying the consequent, the chain rule for conditional arguments, or none of these.

1. If Apple Inc. releases a new iPhone, then customers will buy it. Customers did not buy a new iPhone. Therefore,

               Apple Inc. did not release a new iPhone.

2. In the animated movie Toy Story, if Paul Newman turned down the role of voicing Woody, then Tom Hanks was

               chosen for the role. Tom Hanks was chosen as the voice for Woody, therefore, Paul Newman turned down the

               role of voicing Woody in Toy Story.

3.             and    .

4.             and

5.             and

6. If all people are created equal, then all people are the same with respect to the law. If all people are the same

               with respect to the law, then justice is blind. Therefore, if all people are created equal, then justice is blind.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     2.7 · Logical Arguments 115

7. If I mow the lawn, then my caregiver will pay me twenty dollars. I mowed the lawn. Therefore, my caregiver paid
    me twenty dollars.

8. If Robin Williams was a comedian, then some comedians are funny. No comedians are funny. Therefore, Robin
    Williams was not a comedian.

For the following exercises, each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these
premises, apply the law of detachment to determine and write a valid conclusion.

9.   and

10.  and

11. If Richard Harris played Dumbledore, then Daniel Radcliffe played Harry Potter. Richard Harris played

     Dumbledore.

12. If Emma Watson is an actor, then Emma Watson starred as Belle in the movie Beauty and the Beast. Emma

     Watson is an actor.

13. If some Granny Smiths are available, then we will make an apple pie. Some Granny Smiths are available.

14. If Peter Rabbit lost his coat, then all rabbits must avoid Mr. McGregor's garden. Peter Rabbit lost his coat.

For the following exercises, each pair of statements represents the premises in a logical argument. Based on these

premises, apply the law of denying the consequent to determine and write a valid conclusion.

15. If Greg and Ralph are friends, then Greg will not play a prank on Ralph. Greg played a prank on Ralph.

16. If Drogon is not a dragon, then Daenerys ruled Westeros. Daenerys did not rule Westeros.

17.  and

18.  and

19. If all dragons breathe fire, then rainwings are not dragons. Rainwings are dragons.

20. If some pirates have parrots as pets, then some parrots do not like crackers. All parrots like crackers.

For the following exercises, each pair of statements represent true premises in a logical argument. Based on these

premises, apply the chain rule for conditional arguments to determine a valid and sound conclusion.

21.  and

22.  and

23.  and

24.  and

25. If Mr. Spock is a science officer, then Montgomery Scott is an engineer. If Montgomery Scott is an engineer, then

     James T. Kirk is the captain.

26. If Prince Charles is a character from Star Wars, then Luke Skywalker is not a Jedi. If Luke Skywalker is not a Jedi,

     then Darth Vader is not his father.

For the following exercises, each pair of statements represent true premises in a logical argument. Based on these
premises, state a valid conclusion based on the form of the argument.

27. If my siblings drink milk out of the carton, then they will leave the carton on the counter. My siblings did not
      leave the carton on the counter.

28. If my friend likes to bowl, then my partner does not like to play softball. My friend likes to bowl.
29. If mathematics is fun, then students will study algebra. If students study algebra, then they will score a 100 on

      their final exam.
30. If all fleas bite and our dog has fleas, then our dog will scratch a lot. Our dog will not scratch a scratch a lot.
31. If the toddler is not tall, then they will use a stepladder to reach the cookie jar. If the toddler will use a

      stepladder to reach the cookie jar, then they will drop the jar. If they drop the cookie jar, then they will not eat
      any cookies.
32. If you do not like to dance, then you will not go to the club. You went to the club.

For the following exercises, use a truth table or construct a Venn diagram to prove whether the following arguments
are valid.

33. Denying the hypothesis:         and Therefore,
                                      and Therefore,
34. Affirming the consequent:

35.  and Therefore,

36.       and Therefore,
116 2 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

2.1 Statements and Quantifiers

  · logic
  · logical statement
  · truth values
  · symbolic form
  · negation of a logical statement
  · quantifier
  · premises
  · conclusion
  · inductive logical arguments

2.2 Compound Statements

  · compound statement
  · connective
  · conjunction
  · disjunction
  · conditional
  · hypothesis
  · conclusion
  · biconditional
  · dominance of connectives

2.3 Constructing Truth Tables

  · Truth table
  · Multiplication principle
  · Valid

2.5 Equivalent Statements

  · logically equivalent
  · tautology
  · inverse
  · converse
  · contrapositive

2.6 De Morgan's Laws

  · Boolean logic
  · negation of a conditional

2.7 Logical Arguments

  · sound
  · fallacy
  · deductive arguments
  · law of detachment
  · law of denying the consequent
  · chain rule for conditional arguments

Key Concepts

2.1 Statements and Quantifiers

  · Logical statements have the form of a complete sentence and make claims that can be identified as true or false.
  · Logical statements are represented symbolically using a lowercase letter.
  · The negation of a logical statement has the opposite truth value of the original statement.
  · Be able to

       Determine whether a sentence represents a logical statement.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2 · Chapter Summary 117

 Write and translate logical statements between words and symbols.
 Negate logical statements, including logical statements containing quantifiers of all, some, and none.

2.2 Compound Statements

· Logical connectives are used to form compound logical statements by using words such as and, or, and if ..., then.

· A conjunction is a compound logical statement formed by combining two statements with the words "and" or "but."

If the two independent clauses are represented by and , respectively, then the conjunction is written symbolically

as  . For the conjunction to be true, both and must be true.

· A disjunction joins two logical statements with the or connective. In, logic or is inclusive. For an or statement to be

true at least one statement must be true, but both may also be true.

· A conditional statement has the form if , then , where and are logical statements. The only time the

conditional statement is false is when is true, and is false.

· The biconditional statement is formed using the connective          for the biconditional statement to be true,

the true values of and , must match. If is true then must be true, if is false, then must be false.

· Translate compound statements between words and symbolic form.

                         Connective         Symbol                    Name

                         and                                          conjunction

                         but

                         or                                    disjunction, inclusive or

                         not                ~                         negation

                         if , then implies                     conditional, implication

                         if and only if                        biconditional

· The dominance of connectives explains the order in which compound logical statements containing multiple

    connectives should be interpreted.

· The dominance of connectives should be applied in the following order
    Parentheses
    Negations
    Disjunctions/Conjunctions, left to right
    Conditionals
    Biconditionals

                                                                                 Figure 2.18

2.3 Constructing Truth Tables

  · Determine the true values of logical statements involving negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions.
       The negation of a logical statement has the opposite true value of the original statement.
       A conjunction is true when both and are true, otherwise it is false.
118 2 · Chapter Summary

 A disjunction is false when both and are false, otherwise it is true.

· Know how to construct a truth table involving negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions and apply the dominance of
    connectives to determine the truth value of a compound logical statement containing, negations, conjunctions, and
    disjunctions.

                                 Negation  Conjunction (AND)  Disjunction (OR)

                                 TF        TT  T              TT        T
                                 FT
                                           TF  F              TF        T

                                           FT  F              FT        T

                                           FF  F              FF        F

  · A logical statement is valid if it is always true. Know how to construct a truth table for a compound statement and
      use it to determine the validity of compound statements involving negations, conjunctions, and disjunctions.

2.4 Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional

  · The conditional statement, if then , is like a contract. The only time it is false is when the contract has been
      broken. That is, when is true, and is false.

                                                                                Conditional

                                           TT     T

                                           TF     F

                                           FT     T

                                           FF     T

· The biconditional statement, if and only if , it true whenever and have matching true values, otherwise it is
    false.

                                                                            Biconditional

                                           TT     T

                                           TF     F

                                           FT     F

                                           FF     T

· Know how to construct truth tables involving conditional and biconditional statements.
· Use truth tables to analyze conditional and biconditional statements and determine their validity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 2 · Chapter Summary 119

2.5 Equivalent Statements

· Two statements and are logically equivalent if the biconditional statement,                 is a valid argument. That is, the

last column of the truth table consists of only true values. In other words,      is a tautology. Symbolically, is

logically equivalent to is written as:

· A logical statement is a tautology if it is always true.

· To be valid a local argument must be a tautology. It must always be true.

· Know the variations of the conditional statement, be able to determine their truth values and compose statements

with them.

· The converse of a conditional statement, if then , is the statement formed by interchanging the hypothesis and
    conclusion. It is the statement if then .

· The inverse of a conditional statement if formed by negating the hypothesis and the conclusion of the conditional
    statement.

· The contrapositive negates and interchanges the hypothesis and the conclusion.

                                        Conditional Contrapositive Converse Inverse

              TT F F                    T                         T            T              T

              TF F T                    F                         F            T              T

              FT T F                    T                         T            F              F

              FF T T                    T                         T            T              T

· The conditional statement is logically equivalent to the contrapositive.
· The converse is logically equivalent to the inverse.
· Know how to construct and use truth tables to determine whether statements are logically equivalent.

2.6 De Morgan's Laws

· De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction states that,     is logically equivalent to

· De Morgan's Law The negation of a conjunction states that,

· Use De Morgan's Laws to negate conjunctions and disjunctions.

· The negation of a conditional statement, if then is logically equivalent to the statement and not . Use this

property to write the negation of conditional statements.

· Use truth tables to evaluate De Morgan's Laws.

2.7 Logical Arguments

· A logical argument uses a series of facts or premises to justify a conclusion or claim. It is valid if its conclusion

follows from the premises, and it is sound if it is valid, and all of its premises are true.

· The law of detachment is a valid form of a conditional argument that asserts that if both the conditional,             is

true and the hypothesis, is true, then the conclusion must also be true.

                                                  Law of Detachment

                                                  Premise:

                                                  Premise:

                                                  Conclusion:

· Know how to apply the law of detachment to determine the conclusion of a pair of statements.

· The law of denying the consequent is a valid form of a conditional argument that asserts that if both the

conditional,  is true and the negation of the conclusion, is true, then the negation of the hypothesis
120 2 · Chapter Summary

must also be true.

                                 Law of Denying the Consequent
                                        Premise:
                                        Premise:

                                      Conclusion:

· Know how to apply the law of denying the consequent to determine the conclusion for pairs of statements.

· The chain rule for conditional arguments is a valid form of a conditional argument that asserts that if the premises

of the argument have the form,   and  , then it follows that

                                 Chain Rule for Conditional Arguments

                                      Premise:

                                      Premise:

                                      Conclusion:

  · Know how to apply the chain rule to determine valid conclusions for pairs of true statements.

Videos

2.1 Statements and Quantifiers

  · Logic Part 1A: Logic Statements and Quantifiers (https://openstax.org/r/Logic_Statements_and_Quantifiers)

2.2 Compound Statements

  · Logic Part 1B: Compound Statements, Connectives and Symbols (https://openstax.org/r/Compound_Statements)

2.3 Constructing Truth Tables

  · Logic Part 2: Truth Values of Conjunctions: Is an "AND" statement true or false? (https://openstax.org/r/
      Truth_Values_of_Conjunctions)

  · Logic Part 3: Truth Values of Disjunctions: Is an "OR" statement true or false? (https://openstax.org/r/
      Truth_Values_of_Disjunctions)

  · Logic Part 4: Truth Values of Compound Statements with "and", "or", and "not" (https://openstax.org/r/opL9I4tZCC0)
  · Logic Part 5: What are truth tables? How do you set them up? (https://openstax.org/r/-tdSRqLGhaw)
  · Logic Part 6: More on Truth Tables and Setting Up Rows and Column Headings (https://openstax.org/r/j3kKnUNIt6c)

2.4 Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional

  · Logic Part 8: The Conditional and Tautologies (https://openstax.org/r/Conditional_and_Tautologies)
  · Logic Part 11B Biconditional and Summary of Truth Value Rules in Logic (https://openstax.org/r/omKzui0Fytk)
  · Logic Part 13: Truth Tables to Determine if Argument is Valid or Invalid (https://openstax.org/r/AQB3svnxxiw)

2.7 Logical Arguments

  · Logic Part 14: Common Argument Forms like Modus Ponens and Tollens (https://openstax.org/r/
      Modus_Ponens_and_Tollens)

Projects

Logic Gates

Logic gates are the basis for all digital circuits.

 1. Research and document the following terms: logic gate, OR gate, AND gate, and NOT gate.
 2. Construct a diagram of a NAND gate, NOR gate, and a XOR gate by using at least two of the following gates: AND,

      OR, and NOT.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       2 · Chapter Summary 121

 3. Digital electronics use a 1 for true or on, and a 0 for false or off. Create a truth table documenting all possible cases
      using 0s and 1s for the NAND gate, NOR gate and XOR gate.

 4. Use a truth table to explain how XOR is related to the biconditional statement.

Logical Fallacies

Fallacies are false or deceptive logical arguments.

 1. Research and document the structure of five of the following named fallacies: hasty generalization, limited choice,
      false cause, appeal to popularity, appeal to emotion, appeal to authority, personal attack, gamblers' ruin, slippery
      slope, and circular reasoning.

 2. Create a presentation highlighting one of the five fallacies researched in the previous question. The presentation
      must include an introductory slide with the title of the fallacy and the form or structure of the argument. The second
      slide must include an example of this fallacy as used in a commercial, a political cartoon or a current event or new
      article. The third slide must include an explanation of why the example on slide to is a representative example of the
      fallacy. The last slide must include citations for any materials used. No textbooks should be used as reference.

Careers in Logic

Lawyers, mathematicians, and computer programmers are a few of the careers that require knowledge of logic.

 1. What career are you interested in? Research how knowledge of logic applies to your chosen field of study. Then,
      write a cover letter for a position in your field you'd like to apply to. In the cover letter, include how your knowledge
      of logic qualifies you for the position you are applying for. If you do not think logic is important for your given career
      choice, find a position where logic is an essential element of the position and complete the project by pretending
      you are writing a cover letter for that job.
122 2 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Statements and Quantifiers
Fill in the blanks to complete the following sentences.

1. The ______________ of a logical statement has the opposite truth value of the original statement.
2. _______________ are logical statements presented as the facts used to support the conclusion of a logical

    argument.

Determine whether each of the following sentences represents a logical statement, also called a proposition. If it is a
logical statement, determine whether it is true or false.

     3. Where is the restroom?
     4. No even numbers are odd numbers.
     5.

Write the negation of each following statement symbolically and in words.
     6. Pink Floyd's album The Wall is not a rock opera.
     7. Some dogs are Labrador retrievers.
     8. Some universities are not expensive.

Draw a logical conclusion to the following arguments, and include in both one of the following quantifiers: all, some, or
none.

     9. Spaghetti noodles are made with wheat, ramen noodles are made with wheat, and lo mein noodles are made
          with wheat.

    10. A Porsche Boxster does not have four doors, a Volkswagen Beetle does not have four doors, and a Mazda Miata
          does not have four doors.

Compound Statements
Fill in the blanks to complete the following sentences.

11. ___________________ are words or symbols used to join two or more logical statement together to from a
      compound statement.

12. __________________ and __________________ have equal dominance and are evaluated from left to right when no
      parentheses are present in a compound logical statement.

Translate each compound statement below into symbolic form.
Given: "Tweety Bird is a bird," "Bugs is a bunny," "Bugs says, `What's up, Doc?'," "Sylvester is a cat," and
"Sylvester chases Tweety Bird."

    13. If Tweety Bird is a bird, then Sylvester will not chase him.
    14. Tweety Bird is a bird and Sylvester chases him if and only if Bugs says, "What's up Doc?"

Translate the symbolic form of each compound logical statement below into words.    "Sylvester is a cat," and
Given: "Tweety Bird is a bird," "Bugs is a bunny," "Bugs says, `What's up, Doc?',"
"Sylvester chases Tweety Bird."

15.
16.

For each of the following compound logical statements, apply the proper dominance of connectives by adding
parentheses to indicate the order to evaluate the statement.

17.
18.

Constructing Truth Tables
Fill in the blanks to complete the sentences.

19. A ______________ is true if at least one of its component statements is true.
20. For a ____________________ to be true, all of its component statements must be true.

Given the statements, "No fish are mammals," "All lions are cats," and      "Some birds do not lay eggs," construct a
truth table to determine the truth value of each compound statement below.

    21.
    22.
    23.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               2 · Chapter Summary 123

Construct a truth table to analyze all the possible outcomes of the following statements, and determine whether the
statements are valid.

    24.
    25.

Truth Tables for the Conditional and Biconditional
Fill in the blanks to complete the following sentences.

26. If the ________, , of a conditional statement is true, then the conclusion, , must also be true for the conditional

statement                to be true.

27. The biconditional statement            is __________ whenever the truth value of matches the truth value of ,

otherwise it is _________.

Complete the truth tables below to determine the truth value of the proposition in the last column.

28.
                                                FFT

29.
                                       TF

Assume the following statements are true. "Poof is a baby fairy," "Timmy Turner has fairly odd parents," "Cosmo
and Wanda will grant Timmy's wishes," and "Timmy Turner is 10 years old." Translate each of the following
statements into symbolic form, then determine its truth value.

    30. If Timmy Turner is 10 years old and Poof is not a baby fairy, then Timmy Turner has fairly odd parents.
    31. Cosmos and Wanda will not grant Timmy's wishes if and only if Timmy Turner is 10 years old or he does not

          have fairly odd parents.

32. Construct a truth table to analyze all the possible outcomes and determine the validity of the following argument.

Equivalent Statements
Fill in the blanks to complete the sentences below.

    33. The _________________ is logically equivalent to the inverse
    34. The _________________ is logically equivalent to the conditional

Use the conditional statement,             "If Novak makes the basket, then Novak's team will win the game," to answer the

following questions.

35. Write the conclusion of the conditional statement in words and label it appropriately.

36. Write the hypothesis of the conditional statement in words and label it appropriately.

37. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Novak does not make the

basket, then his team will not win the game."

38. Identify the following statement as the converse, inverse, or contrapositive: "If Novak's team wins the game,

then he made the basket."

De Morgan's Laws

Fill in the blanks to complete the sentences.

39. De Morgan's Law for the negation of a disjunction states that          ____________.

40. De Morgan's Law for the negation of a conjunctions states that _____________

41. Apply De Morgan's Law to write the statement without parentheses:             .

42. Apply the property for the negation of a conditional to write the statement as a conjunction or disjunction:

                      .

43. Write the negation of the conditional statement in words: If Thomas Edison invented the phonograph, then

albums are made of vinyl, or the transistor radio was the first portable music device.

44. Construct a truth table to verify that the logical property is valid:                   .
124 2 · Chapter Summary

Logical Arguments                                                            and , used to support the conclusion,
Fill in the blanks to complete the sentences below.

    45. The _____ ___ __________ is a valid logical argument with premises,

46. The chain rule for conditional arguments states that the ___________________ property applies to conditional
      arguments, so that:

Assume each pair of statements represents true premises in a logical argument. Based on these premises, state a valid
conclusion that is consistent with the form of the argument.

    47. If the Tampa Bay Buccaneers did not win Super Bowl LV, then Tom Brady was not their quarterback. Tom Brady
          was the Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback.

    48. If , then and if , then .
    49. If Kamala Harris is the vice president of the United States, then Kamala Harris is the president of the U.S.

          Senate. Kamala Harris is the vice president of the United States.

50. Construct a truth table or Venn diagram to prove whether the following argument is valid. If the argument is valid,
      determine whether it is sound.
      If all frogs are brown, then Kermit is not a frog. Kermit is a frog. Therefore, some frogs are not brown.

Chapter Test

Determine whether each of the following sentences represent a logical statement. If it is a logical statement, determine
whether it is true or false.

     1.
     2. Please, sit down over there.
     3. All mammals lay eggs.

Write the negation of each statement below.

4. Some monkeys do not have tails.
5.
6. If the plumber does not remove the clog, then the homeowner will not pay the plumber.

Given: Frodo is a hobbit, Gandalf is a wizard, Frodo and Samwise will take the ring to Mordor, and  Gollum will
help Frodo get into Mordor.
Translate the symbolic form of each compound logical statement into words.

     7.
     8.

Translate the written form of each compound logical statement into symbolic form.
     9. Frodo and Samwise will take the ring to Mordor or Gandalf is not a wizard and Frodo is a hobbit.
    10. If Gollum will not help Frodo get into Mordor, then Gandalf is not a wizard and Frodo is not a hobbit.

For each of the following compound logical statements, apply the proper dominance of connectives by adding
parentheses to indicate the order in which the statement must be evaluated.

    11.
    12.

13. Complete the truth table to determine the truth value of the proposition in the last column.

                                 FT

Given the true statements "A right triangle has one 90-degree angle," "The triangle is a right triangle," "

            " and "The longest side of a triangle is implies  must be ." Write each of the following

compound statements in symbolic form, then construct a truth table to determine the truth value of the compound

statement.

14. If a triangle is a right triangle, then it does not have one 90-degree angle or

15. The triangle is a right triangle, or a right triangle does not have a 90-degree angle, if and only if it is not the

case that the longest side of a triangle is implies           must be .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   2 · Chapter Summary 125

Use the conditional statement,  "If Phil Mickelson is 50 years old, then Phil Mickelson won the Player's

Championship," to answer the following questions.

16. Write the converse statement in words.

17. If the conditional statement is true, and the hypothesis is true, what is a valid conclusion to the argument?

18. If the conditional statement is true, and the conclusion is false, what is a valid conclusion to the argument?

19. Construct a truth table to analyze all the possible outcomes and determine the validity of the following argument.

20. Construct a truth table or Venn diagram to prove whether the following argument is valid. If the argument is valid,
      determine whether it is sound.
      If John Mayer played MTV unplugged, then some guitars are acoustic. John Mayer played MTV unplugged.
      Therefore, some guitars are acoustic.
126 2 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                            3 · Introduction 127

3  REAL NUMBER SYSTEMS AND
   NUMBER THEORY

Figure 3.1 Encryption of computers and messages use very large prime numbers. (credit: modification of work "Jefferson
cylinder cipher (replica)" by Daderot/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers
  3.2 The Integers
  3.3 Order of Operations
  3.4 Rational Numbers
  3.5 Irrational Numbers
  3.6 Real Numbers
  3.7 Clock Arithmetic
  3.8 Exponents
  3.9 Scientific Notation
  3.10 Arithmetic Sequences
  3.11 Geometric Sequences

      Introduction

Encryption is used to secure online banking, for secure online shopping, and for browsing privately using VPNs (Virtual
Private Networks). We need encryption (using prime numbers) for a secure exchange of information. For a prime
number to be useful for encryption, though, it has to be large. Encryption uses a composite number that is the product
of two very large primes. In order to break the encryption, one must determine the two primes that were used to form
the composite number. If the two prime numbers used are sufficiently large, even the fastest computer cannot
determine those two prime numbers in a reasonable amount of time. It would take a computer 300 trillion years to crack
the current encryption standard.
128 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers

Figure 3.2 Computers are protected using encryption based on prime numbers. (credit: "Data Security" by
Blogtrepreneur/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Apply divisibility rules.
 2. Define and identify numbers that are prime or composite.
 3. Find the prime factorization of composite numbers.
 4. Find the greatest common divisor.
 5. Use the greatest common divisor to solve application problems.
 6. Find the least common multiple.
 7. Use the least common multiple to solve application problems.

Encryption, which is needed for the secure exchange of information (i.e., online banking or shopping) is based on prime
numbers. Encryption uses a composite number that is the product of two very large prime numbers. To break the
encryption, the two primes that were used to form the composite number need to be determined. If the two prime
numbers used are sufficiently large, even the fastest computer cannot determine those two prime numbers in a
reasonable amount of time. It would take a computer 300 trillion years to crack the current encryption standard.

Applying Divisibility Rules

Before we begin our investigation of divisibility, we need to know some facts about important sets of numbers:

· The counting numbers are referred to as the natural numbers. This set of numbers,  , is denoted with

   the symbol  .

· Another important set of numbers is the integers. The integers are the natural numbers, along with 0, and the

negatives of the natural numbers. This set is often written as                       . We denote the integers

    with the symbol .
· Notice that  is a proper subset of , or,   . All the ideas of this section apply to the natural numbers, while only

some apply to all the integers.

Divisibility is when the integer is divisible by , if can be written as times another integer. Equivalently, there is no
remainder when is divided by . There are many occasions when separating items into equal groups comes into play
to ensure an equal distribution of whole items. For example, Francis, a preschool art teacher, has 15 students in one
class. Francis has 225 sheets of construction paper and wants to provide each student with an equal number of pieces.
To know if he will use all the construction paper, Francis is really asking if 225 can be evenly divided into 15 groups.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 129

EXAMPLE 3.1

Determining if a Number Divides Another Number
Determine if 36 is divisible by 4.

Solution

We could divide 36 by 4 and see if there is a remainder, or we could see if we can write 36 as 4 times another integer. If

we divide 36 by 4, we see              with no remainder. We see that 36 is divisible by 4. We can write 36 as 4 times

another integer,           . By the definition of divisibility, 36 is divisible by 4.

      YOUR TURN 3.1
1. Determine if 54 is divisible by 9.

You can quickly check if a number is divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, and 12. Each has an easy-to-identify feature, or rule,
that indicates the divisibility by those numbers, as shown in the following table.

Divisor                                                              Rule

2                                               Last digit is even

3                 Add the digits of the number together. If that sum is divisible by 3, then so is the original number

4                 Look at only the last two digits. If this number is divisible by 4, so is the original number

5                 Look at only the last digit. If it is a 5 or a 0, then the original number is divisible by 5

6                 If the number passes the rule for divisibility by 2 and for 3, then the number is divisible by 6

9            Add the digits of the number together. If that number is divisible by 9, then so is the original number

10                         Look at only the last digit. If it is a 0, then the original number is divisible by 10

12                         If the number passes the rule for 3 and 4, the number is divisible by 12

  EXAMPLE 3.2

Using Divisibility Rules
Using divisibility rules, determine if 245 is divisible by 5.

     Solution
Since the last digit is a 5, the number 245 is divisible by 5 because the rule states if the last digit of the number is a 5 or a
0, then the original number is divisible by 5.

      YOUR TURN 3.2
1. Using divisibility rules, determine if 45,730 is divisible by 5.
130 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

  EXAMPLE 3.3

Using Divisibility Rules
Using divisibility rules, determine if 25,983 is divisible by 9.

     Solution
The divisibility rule for 9 is when the digits of the number are added, the sum is divisible by 9. So, we calculate the sum of
the digits.

                                . Since 27 is divisible by 9, so is the original number 25,983.

      YOUR TURN 3.3
1. Using divisibility rules, determine if 342,887 is divisible by 9.

EXAMPLE 3.4

Using Divisibility Rules
Can 298 coins be stacked into 6 stacks with an equal number of coins in each stack?

Solution

In order for the coins to be in equal-sized stacks, 298 would need to be divisible by 6. The divisibility rule for 6 is that the

number passes the divisibility rules for both 2 and 3. Since the last digit is even, 298 is divisible by 2. To determine if 298

is divisible by 3, we first add the digits of the number:             . Since 19 is not divisible by 3, neither is 298.

Because 298 is not divisible by 3, it is also not divisible by 6, which means they cannot be put into 6 equal stacks of coins.

        YOUR TURN 3.4

  1. Can 43,568 pieces of mail be separated into 6 bins with the same number of pieces of mail per bin?

  EXAMPLE 3.5

Using Divisibility Rules
Using divisibility rules, determine if 4,259 is divisible by 10.

     Solution
The divisibility rule for 10 is that the last digit of the number is 0. Since the last digit of 4,259 is not 0, then 4,259 is not
divisible by 10.

        YOUR TURN 3.5

  1. Using divisibility rules, determine if 87,762 is divisible by 10.

  EXAMPLE 3.6

Using Divisibility Rules
Using divisibility rules, determine if 936,276 is divisible by 4.

     Solution
The divisibility rule for 4 is to check the last two digits of the number. If the number formed by the last two digits of the
original number is divisible by 4, then so is the original number. The last two digits make the number 76 and 76 is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 131

divisible by 4, since  . Since 76 is divisible by 4, so is 936,276.

        YOUR TURN 3.6

  1. Using divisibility rules, determine if 43,568 is divisible by 4.

       VIDEO
      Divisibility Rules (https://openstax.org/r/Divisibility_Rules)

Prime and Composite Numbers

Sometimes, a natural number has only two unique divisors, 1 and itself. For instance, 7 and 19 are prime. In other
words, there is no way to divide a prime number into groups with an equal number of things, unless there is only one
group, or those groups have one item per group. Other natural numbers have more than two unique divisors, such as 4,
or 26. These numbers are called composite. The number 1 is special; it is neither prime nor composite.
To determine if a number is prime or composite, you have to determine if the number has any divisors other than 1 and
itself. The divisibility rules are useful here, and can quickly show you if a number has a divisor on that list.
However, if none of those divide the number, you still have to check all other possible prime divisors. What are the prime
numbers that are possibly divisors of the number you are checking? You need only check the prime numbers up to the
square root of the number in question. For instance, if you want to know if 2,117 is prime, you need to determine if any
primes up to the square root of 2,117 (which is 46.0 when rounded to one decimal place) divide 2,117. If any of those
primes are divisors of the number in question, then the number is composite. If none of those primes work, then the
number is itself prime.
We can check divisibility with whatever tool we wish. Divisibility rules are quick for some prime divisors (2 and 5 come to
mind) but aren't quick for other values (like 11). In place of divisibility rules, we could just use a calculator. If the prime
number divides the number evenly (that is, there is no decimal or fractional part), then the number is divisible by that
prime. Table 3.1 is a quick list of the prime numbers up to 50. There are 15 prime numbers less than 50.

                                                                    2 3 5 7 11

                                                                   13 17 19 23 29

                                                                   31 37 41 43 47

                                                                 Table 3.1 Prime Numbers
                                                                 Less than 50

  EXAMPLE 3.7

Determining If a Number Is Prime or Composite
Determine if 2,117 is prime or composite.

     Solution
The square root of 2,117 is 46.0 (rounded to one decimal place). So, we need to check if 2,117 is divisible by any prime up
to 46.
Step 1: First we'll use the rules of divisibility we learned earlier:

  · We can tell 2,117 is not divisible by 2, as the last digit isn't even.
  · 2,117 is not divisible by 5 (the last digit isn't 0 or 5).
  · Add the digits of 2,117 to get 11, which is not divisible by 3. So, 2,117 is also not divisible by 3.
Step 2: Now we repeat the process for all the primes up to 46.
132 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Using a calculator, we find that 2,117 divided by the prime numbers 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, and 23 results in a remainder, a
decimal part. So, we know that 2,117 is not divisible by these prime numbers. (You should check these results yourself.)

Moving on, we check the next prime: 29. Using the calculator to divide 2,117 by 29 results in 73. Since there is no decimal
part, 2,117 is divisible by 29.

This means that 2,117 is not a prime number, but rather, a composite number. Writing 2,117 as the product of 29 and

another natural number,                        .

        YOUR TURN 3.7

  1. Determine if 1,429 is prime or composite.

  EXAMPLE 3.8

Determining if a Number Is Prime or Composite
Determine if 423 is prime or composite.

     Solution
The square root of 423 is 20.57 (rounded to two decimal places). So, we need to check if 423 is divisible by any prime up
to 20.
Step 1: Check 2. We can tell 423 is not divisible by 2, as the last digit isn't even.
Step 2: Check 5. It is not divisible by 5 (the last digit isn't 0 or 5).
Step 3: Check 3. To check if 423 is divisible by 3, we use the divisibility rule for 3. When we take the sum of the digits of
423, the result is 9. Since 9 is divisible by 3, so is 423.
Since 423 is divisible by 3, then 423 is a composite number. Writing 423 as the product of 3 and another natural number,

                    .

        YOUR TURN 3.8

  1. Determine if 859 is prime or composite.

  EXAMPLE 3.9
Determining if a Number Is Prime or Composite
Determine if 1,034 is prime or composite

     Solution
A quick inspection of 1,034 shows it is divisible by 2 since the last digit is even, and so 1,034 is a composite number.

        YOUR TURN 3.9
  1. Determine if 5,067,322 is prime or composite.

  EXAMPLE 3.10
Determining if a Number Is Prime or Composite
Determine if 2,917 is prime or composite.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 133

     Solution
The square root of 2,917 is 50.01 (rounded to two decimal places). So, we need to check if 2,917 is divisible by any prime
up to 50.
Step 1: Check 2. We can tell 2,917 is not divisible by 2, as the last digit isn't even.
Step 2: Check 5. It is it divisible by 5 (the last digit isn't 0 or 5).
Step 3: Check 3. Using the divisibility rule for 3, we take the sum of the digits of 2,917, which is 19. Since 19 is not
divisible by 3, neither is 2,917.
Step 4: Check the rest of the primes up to 50 using a calculator. When 2,917 is divided by every prime number up to 50,
the result has a decimal part.
Since no prime up to 50 divides 2,917, it is a prime number.

        YOUR TURN 3.10

  1. Determine if 1,477 is prime.

        WHO KNEW?

  ILLEGAL PRIMES
  Large primes are a hot commodity. Using two very large primes (some have more than 22 million digits!) is necessary
  for secure encryption. Anyone who has a new prime that is large enough can use that prime to create a new
  encryption. Of course, whoever discovers a large prime could sell it to a security company. These primes are so useful
  for encryption, it is necessary to protect that intellectual property. In fact, at least one prime number was declared
  illegal.

       VIDEO
      Illegal Prime Number (https://openstax.org/r/Illegal_Prime_Number)
134 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
         Sophie Germain

Figure 3.3 Sophie Germain (credit: "Sophie Germain at 14 years," Illustration from histoire du socialisme, approx.
1880, Wikimedia Commons, public domain)

Born into a wealthy French family in 1776, Sophie Germain discovered and fell in love with mathematics by browsing

her father's books. Clandestine study, hard and tenacious work, and a mathematical mindset did not lead to college,

however, as she was not allowed to attend. She did manage, through friends, to obtain problem sets and submit

brilliant solutions under the name Monsieur LaBlanc. One of her great interests was number theory, which is the

study of properties of integers. One of her theorems, titled "Sophie Germain's Theorem," partially solved one of the

great mathematical mysteries, Fermat's Last Theorem. From this she discovered what are now known as Sophie

Germain Primes. A Sophie Germain Prime is a prime number that can be written in the form  , where is a

prime number. For instance, 23 is prime:                   , which is prime, so 47 is a Sophie Germain Prime. It should be

noted that        , where is a prime number, may or may not be prime (check for  !).

Finding the Prime Factorization of Composite Numbers

Before we can start with prime factorization, let's remind ourselves what it means to factor a number. We factor a

number by identifying two (or more) numbers that, when multiplied, result in the original number. For instance, 3 and

24, when multiplied, give 72. So, 72 can be factored into     . Notice that we could have factored the 72 differently, say

as          , or                 , or even as              .

Finding the prime factorization of a composite number means writing the number as the product of all of its prime

factors. For example,                          . Notice that all the numbers being multiplied on the right-hand side are

prime numbers. Sometimes prime numbers repeat themselves in the factorization. When prime factors do repeat, we

may write the prime factorization using exponents, as in      . In that equation, the 2 is raised to the 4th power.

The 4 is the exponent, and the 2 is the base. More generally, in the exponent notation , the number represented by

is the base, and the number represented by is the exponent.

One has to wonder if finding the prime factorization could result in different factorizations. The Fundamental Theorem
of Arithmetic tells us that there is only one prime factorization for a given natural number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 135

Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic

Every natural number, other than 1, can be expressed in exactly one way, apart from the arrangement, as a product of
primes.

The process of finding the prime factorization of a number is iterative, which means we do a step, then repeat it until we
cannot do the step any longer. The step we use is to identify one prime factor of the number, then write the number as
the prime factor times another factor. We repeat this step on the other, newly found, factor. This step is repeated until no
more primes can be factored from the remaining factor. This is easier to see and explain with an example.

EXAMPLE 3.11

Finding the Prime Factorization
Find the prime factorization of 140.

Solution

Step 1: Identify a prime number that divides 140. Since 140 is even (the last digit is even), 2 divides 140. We then factor

the 2 out of the 140, giving us          .

Step 2: With the other factor, 70, find a prime factor of 70. Since 70 is also even, 2 divides 70. We factor the 2 out of the

70 and the factorization is now                     .

Notice that we expressed the two factors of 2 as .

Step 3: Look to the remaining factor, 35. The last digit of 35 is 5, so 5 is a factor of 35. We factor the 5 out of the 35. The

factorization is now                  .

Step 4: Look to the remaining factor, 7. Since 7 is prime, the process is complete.

The prime factorization of 140 is        .

      YOUR TURN 3.11
1. Find the prime factorization of 90.

Factor Trees                                                                                                         (where

A useful tool for helping with prime factorization is a factor tree. To create a factor tree for the natural number
  is not 1), perform the following steps:

Step 1: If is prime, you're done. If is composite, continue to the next step.

Step 2: Identify two divisors of , call them and .

Step 3: Write the number down, and draw two branches extending down (or to the right) of the number .

Step 4: Label the end of one branch , the other as . See Figure 3.4.

                                                                              Figure 3.4
Step 5: If and are prime, the tree is complete. When a number at this step is a prime number, we refer to it as a leaf
of the tree diagram.
Step 6: If either or are composite, repeat Steps 2 through 4 for and .
Step 7: The process stops when the leaves are all prime.
Step 8: The prime factorization is then the product of all the leaves.
This is best seen in an example.
136 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory         . The factor tree is shown in Figure 3.5.

         EXAMPLE 3.12
      Finding the Prime Factorization
      Find the prime factorization of 66.

            Solution
      Since 66 is even, 2 is a factor.
      Step 1: Factor out the 2. The factorization is

                                                                              Figure 3.5
Since 2 is a factor, that branch is done, and 2 is a leaf.
Step 2: The 33, though, is divisible by 3, and is the product of 3 and 11. We attach that to the factor tree (Figure 3.6).

                                                                              Figure 3.6  . The factorization is complete.
Since the 2, 3 and 11 are all prime, the factor tree is done.
The prime factorization of 66 is the product of the leaves, so

      YOUR TURN 3.12
1. Find the prime factorization of 85.

VIDEO
Using a Factor Tree to Find the Prime Factorization (https://openstax.org/r/Prime_Factorization)

EXAMPLE 3.13

Finding the Prime Factorization
Find the prime factorization of 135.

     Solution
The number 135 is divisible by 3, and so 3 is a factor of 135.

Step 1: Factor out the 3. The factorization is        . Using the factor tree (Figure 3.7),

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 137

                                                                              Figure 3.7
45 is also divisible by 3.
Step 2: Factor out a 3 from 45. The other factor is 15. The factor tree is shown in Figure 3.8.

                                                                              Figure 3.8
15 is also divisible by 3.
Step 3: The factors of 15 are 3 and 5. The factor tree is shown in Figure 3.9.

Figure 3.9

All the leaves are prime, so the process is complete. The prime factorization of 135 is  .

        YOUR TURN 3.13

  1. Find the prime factorization of 280.

  EXAMPLE 3.14

Identifying Prime Factors
How many different prime factors does 10,241 have?

     Solution
To know how many different prime factors 10,241 has, we need the prime factorization of 10,241.
Step 1: Use divisibility rules, to see that the number 10,241 is not divisible by 2 or by 3 (the sum of the digits is 8), or by 5.
However, it is divisible by 7.
138 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Step 2: After factoring the 7, the factorization is             ; 1,463 is also divisible by 7.

Step 3: After factoring the 7, the factorization is                . The number 209 is not divisible by 7.

Step 4: Check the next prime number: 11; 11 does divide 1,463.

Step 5: After factoring the 11, the factorization is            .

Since 19 is prime, the prime factorization of 10,241 is complete. We see that 10,241 has three different prime factors: 7,
11, and 19.

      YOUR TURN 3.14
1. Find the number of different prime factors of 180.

VIDEO
Finding the Prime Factorization of 168 (https://openstax.org/r/Prime_Factorization_of_168)

TECH CHECK

Using Wolfram Alpha to Find Prime Factorizations

The Wolfram Alpha website (https://openstax.org/r/wolframalpha) is a powerful resource available for free to use. It is

designed using AI so that it understands natural language requests. For instance, typing the question "What is the

prime factorization of 543,390?" gets a rather quick answer of     . So, if you want to find the prime

factorization of a number, you can simply ask Wolfram Alpha to find the prime factorization of the number.

Finding the Greatest Common Divisor

Two numbers often have more than one divisor in common (all pairs of natural numbers have the common divisor 1).
When listing the common divisors, it's often the case that the largest is of interest. This divisor is called the greatest
common divisor and is denoted GCD. It is also sometimes referred to as the greatest common factor (GCF).
For instance, 6 is the greatest common divisor of 12 and 18. We can see this by listing all the divisors of each number
and, by inspection, select the largest value that shows up in each list.

                                                             The divisors of 12 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12

                                                             The divisors of 18 1, 2, 3, 6, 9

It is easy to see that 6 is the largest value that appears in both lists.

  EXAMPLE 3.15

Finding the Greatest Common Divisor Using Lists
Find the greatest common divisor of 1,400 and 250 by listing all divisors of each number.

     Solution
We create a list of all the divisors of 1,400 and of 250, and choose the largest one.
The divisors of 1,400 are
1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 14, 20, 25, 28, 35, 40, 50, 56, 70, 100, 140, 175, 200, 280, 350, 700, 1,400.
The divisors of 250 are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 139

1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 125, 250.
The largest value that appears on both lists is 50, so the greatest common divisor of 1,400 and 250 is 50.

      YOUR TURN 3.15
1. Find the greatest common divisor of 270 and 99 by listing all divisors of each number.

Listing all the divisors of the numbers in the set will always work, but for some relatively small numbers, the set of all
divisors can become pretty big, and finding them all can be a chore. Another approach to finding the greatest common
divisor is to use the prime factorization of the numbers. To do so, use the following steps:

Step 1: Find the prime factorization of the numbers.

Step 2: Identify the prime factors that appear in every number's prime factorization. These are called the common prime
factors.

Step 3: Identify the smallest exponent of each prime factor identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

Step 4: Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3. The result is the greatest
common divisor.

EXAMPLE 3.16

Finding the Greatest Common Divisor Using Prime Factorization
Find the greatest common divisor of 1,400 and 250 by using their prime factorizations.

     Solution
Step 1: Find the prime factorizations of the numbers.

The prime factorization of 1,400 is    .

The prime factorization of 250 is      .

Step 2: Identify the prime factors that appear in every number's prime factorization.

The common prime factors are 2 and 5.

Step 3: Identify the smallest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

The exponent of common prime factor 2 in the prime factorization of 1,400 is 3, and in the prime factorization of 250 is
1. The smallest of those exponents is 1.

The exponent of the common prime factor 5 in the prime factorization of 1,400 is 2 and is in the prime factorization of
250 is 3. The smallest of these exponents is 2.

Step 4: Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

This gives    . The greatest common divisor of 1,400 and 250 is                        .

Notice that the answer matches the one we found in Example 3.15.

        YOUR TURN 3.16
  1. Using prime factorization, determine the greatest common divisor of 36 and 128.

  EXAMPLE 3.17
Finding the Greatest Common Divisor Using Prime Factorization
Find the greatest common divisor of 600 and 784 by using their prime factorizations.
140 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

     Solution
Step 1: Find the prime factorizations of the numbers.

The prime factorization of 600 is                 .

The prime factorization of 784 is              .

Step 2: Identify the prime factors that appear in every number's prime factorization.

There is only one common prime factor, 2.

Step 3: Identify the smallest exponent of each prime from identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

The exponent of 2 in the prime factorization of 600 is 3. The exponent of 2 in the prime factorization of 784 is 4. So, the
smallest exponent of 2 is 3.

Step 4: Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

This gives  . The greatest common divisor of 600 and 784 is 8.

      YOUR TURN 3.17
1. Using prime factorization, determine the greatest common divisor of 120 and 200.

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Srinivasa Ramanujan

  Figure 3.10 Srinivasa Ramanujan (credit: Srinivasa Ramanujan, photo by Konrad Jacobs/Oberwolfach Photo
  Collection/public domain)
  Ramanujan was born in southern India in 1887, during British rule. He was a self-taught mathematician, who, while in
  high school, began working through a two-volume text of mathematical theorems and results. His work included
  examination of the distribution of primes. He eventually came to the attention of British mathematician, G.H. Hardy.
  During one visit, Hardy mentioned to Ramanujan that his taxicab number was 1,729, remarking that 1,729 appeared
  to be a rather dull number. To which Ramanujan responded, "It is a very interesting number; it is the smallest number
  expressible as the sum of two cubes in two different ways."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 141

        TECH CHECK

Using Desmos to Find the GCD
To find the GCD of a set of numbers in Desmos, type gcd(first_number,second_number...) and Desmos will display the
GCD of the numbers, as the numbers are typed!

VIDEO
Using Desmos to Find the GCD (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_Find_the_GCD)

Applications of the Greatest Common Divisor

The greatest common divisor has uses that are related to other mathematics (reducing fractions) but also in everyday
applications. We'll look at two such applications, which have very similar underlying structures. In each case, something
must divide the groups or measurements equally.

EXAMPLE 3.18

Calculating Floor Tile Size
Suppose you have a rectangular room that is 570 cm wide and 450 cm long. You wish to cover the floor of the room with
square tiles. What's the largest size square tile that can be used to cover this floor?

     Solution
Using squares means that the length and width of the tiles are equal. To ensure we are using full tiles, the side length of
the square tiles must divide the length of the room and the width of the room. Since we want the largest square tiles, we
need the GCD of the width and length of the room or the GCD of 570 and 450.

Step 1: Find the prime factorizations of the numbers.

The prime factorization of 570 is             .

The prime factorization of 450 is          .

Step 2: Identify the prime factors that appear in every number's prime factorization.

The common prime factors are 2, 3, and 5.

Step 3: Identify the smallest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

The exponents of 2 in the prime factorizations of 570 and 450 are 1 and 1. So the smallest exponent for 2 is 1.

The exponents of 3 in the prime factorizations of 570 and 450 are 1 and 2, so the smallest exponent for 3 is 1.

The exponents of 5 in the prime factorizations of 570 and 450 are 1 and 2, so the smallest exponent for 5 is 1.

Step 4: Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

This gives                . The GCD of 450 and 570 is 30, so the largest size square tile that can be used to cover the
floor is 30 cm by 30 cm.

      YOUR TURN 3.18

1. You are designing a brick patio made of square bricks 5 cm thick, but you need to determine the width and
    length of those bricks. The patio will be 400 cm by 540 cm. What are the largest size square bricks that can be
    used so that you do not need to cut any bricks?
142 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.19

Organizing Books Per Shelf
Suppose you want to organize books onto shelves, and you want the shelves to hold the same number of books. Each
shelf will only contain one genre of book. You have 24 sci-fi, 42 fantasy, and 30 horror books. How many books can go on
each shelf?

     Solution
Since we want shelves that hold an equal number of books, and a shelf can only hold one genre of book, we need a
number that will equally divide 24, 42, and 30. So, we need the GCD of the number of books of each genre or the GCD of
24, 42, and 30.

Step 1: Find the prime factorizations of the numbers.

The prime factorization of 24 is  .

The prime factorization of 42 is               .

The prime factorization of 30 is               .

Step 2: Identify the prime factors that appear in every number's prime factorization.

The common prime factors are 2 and 3.

Step 3: Identify the smallest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

The smallest exponent of 2 and 3 in the factorizations is 1.

Step 4: Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

This gives    . The GCD of 24, 42, and 30 is 6, so the largest number of books that can go on a shelf is 6.

        YOUR TURN 3.19

  1. There are three gym classes. The number of students in the classes is 21, 35, and 28. What is the largest team
      size that can be formed if teams from every class must have the same number of students?

       VIDEO
      Applying the GCD (https://openstax.org/r/Applying_the_GCD)

Finding the Least Common Multiple

The flip side to a divisor of a number is a multiple of a number. For example, 5 is a divisor of 45 and so 45 is a multiple of
5. More generally, if the number divides the number , then is a multiple of .
This drives the idea of the least common multiple of a set of numbers. A common multiple of a set of numbers is a
multiple of each of those numbers. For instance, 45 is a common multiple of 9 and 5, because 45 is a multiple of 9 (9
divides 45) and 45 is also a multiple of 5 (5 divides 45). The least common multiple (LCM) of a set of number is the
smallest positive common multiple of that set of numbers.
There are (at least) three ways to find the LCM of a set of numbers, and we will explore two of them. One way is to create
a list of multiples of each number in the set, and then identify the smallest multiple that appears in those lists.

  EXAMPLE 3.20

Finding the Least Common Multiple Using Lists
Find the LCM of 24 and 90 by listing multiples and choosing the smallest common multiple.

     Solution
Create a list of the multiples of each number.
Step 1: The first 15 multiples for 24:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 143

24, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, 168, 192, 216, 240, 264, 288, 312, 336, 360.
Step 2: The first 15 multiples for 90:
90, 180, 270, 360, 450, 540, 630, 720, 810, 900, 990, 1,080, 1,170, 1,260, 1,350.
There is one multiple common to these lists, which is 360. So, 360 is the LCM of 24 and 90.

        YOUR TURN 3.20

  1. Use lists to find the LCM of 12 and 15.

The second method we can use is to find the prime factorizations of the number in the set to build the LCM of the
numbers based on the prime divisors of the numbers. The LCM can be built from the prime factorization of the numbers
in the set in a similar way as when finding the greatest common divisor. Here are the steps for using the prime
factorization process for finding the LCM.
Step 1: Find the prime factorization of each number.
Step 2: Identify each prime that is present in any of the prime factorizations.
Step 3: Identify the largest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.
Step 4:. Multiply the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

  EXAMPLE 3.21
Finding the Least Common Multiple Using Prime Factorization
Use the prime factorizations of 24 and 90 to identify their LCM.

     Solution
Step 1: Find the prime factorization of each number.

Step 2: Identify each prime that is present in any of the prime factorizations.
The prime numbers present in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, and 5.
Step 3: Identify the largest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

                          Prime                           235

                          Largest exponent 3 2 1

Step 4: Compute the LCM by multiplying the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

The LCM for 24 and 90 is                                  .

      YOUR TURN 3.21
1. Use prime factorization to find the LCM of 20 and 28.
144 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

         EXAMPLE 3.22
       Finding the Least Common Multiple Using Prime Factorization
       Use the prime factorizations of 36, 66, and 250 to identify the LCM.

            Solution
       Step 1: Find the prime factorization of each number.

Step 2: Identify each prime that is present in any of the prime factorizations.
The prime numbers present in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5, and 11.
Step 3: Identify the largest exponent of each prime identified in Step 2 in the prime factorizations.

                                     Prime  2 3 5 11

                                     Largest exponent 2 2 3 1

Step 4: Compute the LCM by multiplying the prime factors identified in Step 2 raised to the powers identified in Step 3.

The LCM for 36, 66, and 250 is                                                                 .

      YOUR TURN 3.22
1. Use the prime factorization method to find the LCM of 150, 240, and 462.

Using lists for three or more numbers, particularly larger numbers, could take quite a bit of time. Frequently, as in this
example, the prime factorization process is much quicker. In practice, you can use either listing or prime factorization to
find the LCM.

  EXAMPLE 3.23

Finding the Least Common Multiple Using Both Methods
Find the LCM of 20, 36, and 45 using lists and prime factorization.

     Solution
Step 1: Use listing. List the multiples:

                                 20  20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 220

                                 36  36, 72, 108, 144, 180, 216, 252, 288, 324, 360

                                 45 45, 90, 135, 180, 225, 270, 315, 360, 405, 450, 495, 540

The smallest value that appears on all the lists is 180, so 180 is the LCM of 20, 36, and 45.
Step 2: Find the prime factorization of each number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 145

Step 3: Identify each prime that is present in any of the prime factorizations.
The prime numbers present in the prime factorizations are 2, 3, 5.
Step 4: Identify the largest exponent of each prime identified in Step 3 in the prime factorizations.

                                  Prime  235

                               Largest exponent 2 2 1

Step 5: Compute the LCM by multiplying the prime factors identified in Step 3 raised to the powers identified in Step 4.

The LCM for 20, 36, and 45 is  .

Both listing and prime factorization produced the same result: the LCM is 180.

        YOUR TURN 3.23

  1. Find the LCM of 18, 24, and 40 using lists and prime factorization.

       VIDEO
      Finding the LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_the_LCM)

          TECH CHECK

  Using Desmos to Find the LCM
  To find the LCM of a set of numbers in Desmos, type lcm(first_number,second_number...) and Desmos will display the
  LCM of the numbers, as the numbers are typed!

       VIDEO
      Using Desmos to find the LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_find_the_LCM)

Applications of the Least Common Multiple

Some applications of LCM involve events that repeat at fixed intervals, such as visits to a location. Other applications
involve getting things to be of equal magnitude when using parts that are different sizes (see Example 3.25, for
instance). In each case, we may be looking to determine when two processes "line up."

  EXAMPLE 3.24

Determining Scheduling Overlap Using the Least Common Multiple
Two students, João, and Amelia, meet one day at an assisted living facility where they volunteer. João volunteers every 6
days. Amelia volunteers every 10 days. How many days will it be until they are both volunteering on the same day again?

     Solution
If we list the days that each student will volunteer, it becomes clear that we could solve this problem using the LCM of 6
and 10.
João will be at the assisted living facility 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, and 48 days later.
Amelia will be at the assisted living facility 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 days later.
146 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

       The smallest number appearing on both lists is 30. João and Amelia will once more be volunteering together 30 days
       later.

               YOUR TURN 3.24

         1. The sun, Venus, and Jupiter all line up on a given day. Venus orbits the sun once every 255 days. Jupiter orbits the
             sun every 4,330 days (we'll ignore the decimal values of days for each orbit). How many days will it be until they
             line up again?

         EXAMPLE 3.25
       Determining the Minimum Height Using the LCM
       A team-building exercise has teams build a house of cards as high as possible. However, the cards for different teams are
       of different sizes. Team 1 uses 10 cm × 10 cm cards, while Team 2 uses 8 cm × 8 cm cards. What is the minimum height
       when the two teams will be tied? Ignore the width of the cards.

            Solution
       This is an example where we want to put together objects with different sizes. We want to know the minimum height
       when they are tied, or when the houses of cards line up the first time. The heights of the towers built using the 10 cm ×
       10 cm cards will be 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm tall. When the 8 cm × 8 cm cards are used, the tower will be 8, 16, 24, 32,
       40, 48, and 56 cm tall. The smallest number appearing on both lists is 40. The first time they are tied is when the two
       towers are 40 cm tall.

               YOUR TURN 3.25

         1. In an Internet giveaway, every 130th person who submits a survey receives $250, and every 900th person
             receives a free cell phone. How many submissions must be received for the first person to receive both prizes?

              VIDEO
             Application of LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Application_of_LCM)

         WORK IT OUT

         Prime Number Life Cycles--Cicadas
         Cicadas are known to have life cycles of 13 or 17 years, which are prime numbers. Why would a prime number life
         cycle be an evolutionary advantage? To figure this out, we have to explore how common multiples work with prime
         numbers.
         Make a conjecture regarding the LCM of a prime number and another number. Test this conjecture with a few
         examples of your own making.

    Check Your Understanding

        1. Identify which of the following numbers are prime and which are composite.
             31, 56, 213, 48, 701

        2. Find the prime factorization of 4,570.
        3. Find the greatest common divisor of 410 and 144.
        4. Find the least common multiple of 45 and 70.
        5. You want to fill gift bags for children in the after-school program where you volunteer. You have 30 crayons, 20

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           3.1 · Prime and Composite Numbers 147

      sticker sheets, and 70 bite-sized candies. If each gift bag must contain the same number of crayons, sticker sheets,
      and bite-sized candies, what is the maximum number of bags that can be filled?

        SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use divisibility rules to determine if each of the following is divisible by 2.
     1. 24
     2. 37
     3. 1,345,321

For the following exercises, use divisibility rules to determine if each of the following is divisible by 3.
     4. 48
     5. 210
     6. 5,345,324

For the following exercises, use divisibility rules to determine if each of the following is divisible by 5.
     7. 130
     8. 237
     9. 1,345,321

For the following exercises, use divisibility rules to determine if each of the following is divisible by 9.
    10. 48
    11. 210
    12. 5,345,325

For the following exercises, use divisibility rules to determine if each of the following is divisible by 12.
    13. 48
    14. 210
    15. 5,355,324

16. Determine which of the following numbers are prime: {3, 27, 77, 131, 457}

17. Determine which of the following numbers are prime: {31, 97, 188, 389}

For the following exercises, find the prime factorization of the given number.
    18. 12
    19. 53
    20. 72
    21. 345
    22. 938
    23. 36,068
    24. 8,211,679

For the following exercises, find the greatest common divisor of the given set of numbers.
    25. {45, 245}
    26. {11, 24}
    27. {56, 44}
    28. {150, 600}
    29. {1,746, 28,324}
    30. {30, 40, 75}
    31. {19, 45, 70}
    32. {293, 7,298, 19,229}
    33. {3,927,473, 82,709, 1,210,121}
    34. Make a list of the common divisors of 12 and 18. What is the GCD of 12 and 18? Which of the other common
          divisors of 12 and 18 divide the GCD?
    35. Make a list of the common divisors of 20 and 84. What is the GCD? Which of the other common divisors of 20
          and 84 also divide the GCD?
    36. Make a list of the common divisors of 120 and 88. What is the GCD? Which of the other common divisors of 120
          and 88 also divide the GCD?
    37. Based on the answers to 34, 35, and 36, make a conjecture about the GCD of two numbers, and the other
          common divisors of those numbers.
    38. Rebecca wants to cut two lengths of board into equal length pieces, with no leftover piece. The two boards are
148 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                 230 cm long and 370 cm long. What is the longest length that Rebecca can cut from these boards so that all the
                 cut boards are the same length?
           39. Yasmin is playing with her younger brother, Cameron. They are grouping Skittles by color. They have 14 green,
                 10 yellow, and 8 purple Skittles. Each group must have the same number of green, the same number of yellow,
                 and the same number of purple Skittles. What's the maximum number of piles that Sophia can build with
                 Cameron?
           40. Gathii is creating a tile backsplash for his kitchen. He wants to use square tiles to cover a 330 cm × 12 cm area.
                 What is the largest size square tile he can use to create this backsplash?
           41. Deiji is designing a contest where teams will be given the same number of toothpicks, 5 oz. paper cups, and 2
                 cm length pieces of string. She has 420 pieces of string, 300 paper cups, and 1,610 toothpicks. What is the
                 maximum number of teams she can have so that every team gets an equal number of pieces of string, paper
                 cups, and toothpicks?
       For the following exercises, find the least common multiple of the given set of numbers.
           42. {30, 40}
           43. {11, 24}
           44. {14, 45}
           45. {200, 450}
           46. {38,077, 9,088,687}
           47. {36, 42, 70}
           48. {7, 13, 36}
           49. {4,450,864, 339,889, 157,339}
           50. Benjamin and Mia both work at the Grease Fire diner, a local eatery. Benjamin has every 4th day off, and Mia
                 has every 6th day off. How many days pass until they have another day off together?
           51. A lunar month is 30 days (rounding off). A new lunar month begins on a Saturday. How many days is it until a
                 lunar month begins on a Saturday again?
           52. Isabella is creating a collage for a project and wants a horizontal cut in the collage. The cut will be made by
                 using purple strips of cloth that are 28 mm long, and yellow strips of paper that are 36 mm long. What is the
                 minimum length of the cut can she make using strips with those lengths?
           53. Asteroids are objects that orbit the sun. The smallest distance that an asteroid gets to the sun during its orbit is
                 called the perihelion. Asteroids also have orbital periods, or the time it takes to go around the sun exactly one
                 time. The asteroid Ceres has an orbital period (number of days to circle the sun) of 1,680 days. The asteroid
                 Hygiea has an orbital period of 2,031 days. Suppose they are at their perihelion on the same day. How many
                 days will it be before Ceres and Hygiea are at their perihelion on the same day again?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   3.2 · The Integers 149

3.2 The Integers

Figure 3.11 A ledger comparing assets to debts, resulting in net wealth. (credit: modification of work "Reviewing
Financial Statements" by Mary Cullen/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Define and identify numbers that are integers.
 2. Graph integers on a number line.
 3. Compare integers.
 4. Compute the absolute value of an integer.
 5. Add and subtract integers.
 6. Multiply and divide integers.

Positive net wealth is when the total value of a person's assets, such as their home, their 401(k), their car, and savings
account balance, exceed that of their debts, such as car loans, mortgages, or credit card debt. However, when the total
value of debt exceeds the total value of assets, then the person has negative net wealth. Expressing the negative net
wealth as a negative number allows people to work with the positive net values and negative net values with the same
mathematical processes, and in the same applications. This section introduces the integers and operations with integers.

Defining and Identifying Integers

Extending the counting numbers to include negative numbers and zero forms the integers. Any other number that

cannot be written as               is not an integer.

EXAMPLE 3.26

Identifying Integers
Which of the following are integers and which are not?

-3                    Is an integer, as it is the negative of a counting number

      This is not written as an integer. Entering the square root of 24 in a calculator, such as desmos, the result is

                      4.899 (rounded off). Since this is not an integer, then  is not an integer.

36/4                  Since 36 divided by 4 is 9, and 9 is an integer, then 36/4 is an integer.

45                    Is an integer, as it is a counting number

63.9          Is not an integer, because it is not a counting number and not the negative of a counting number.
150 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

 2/7   Dividing 2 by 7 results in a number less than 1, but greater than 0, so is between two consecutive integers.
-16.0                                                            So, 2/7 is not an integer.

                                                      Is an integer, since the decimal part is 0

        YOUR TURN 3.26

  Which of the following are integers?
      1. -214
      2. 38/11
      3.
      4.
      5. 420/35

Graphing Integers on a Number Line

Integers are often imagined as steps along a path. You start at 0, and going to the left is going backward, or in the
negative direction, while going to the right is going forward, or in the positive direction. A number line (Figure 3.12)
helps envision the integers. This also means that an integer gives magnitude (size) and direction (positive is to the right,
negative is to the left). Graphing an integer on the number line means placing a solid dot at the integer on the number
line.

                                                                             Figure 3.12
       VIDEO
      Graphing Integers on the Number Line (https://openstax.org/r/Graphing_Integers)

  EXAMPLE 3.27
Graphing Numbers on the Number Line
Graph the following on the number line:
 1. 1
 2. -4
 3. 3

     Solution
 1.

                                                                                Figure 3.13
 2.

                                                                                Figure 3.14
 3.

                                                                                Figure 3.15

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          3.2 · The Integers 151

      YOUR TURN 3.27

Graph the following numbers on the number line:
    1. -10
    2. 4
    3. 0

Comparing Integers

When determining if one quantity or size is larger than another, we know it means there is more of whatever is being

discussed. In terms of positive integers, we can envision that larger integers are further to the right on the number line.

This idea applies to negative integers also. This means that is greater than when is to the right of on the number

line. We write  . When is greater than , we can also say that is less than . On the number line, would be to

the left of . We write     .

We need to recognize that     means the same thing as  . This can be seen on the number line in Figure 3.16. On

this number line, is to the right of , so     . But this means is to the left of , so  .

                                                                             Figure 3.16
       VIDEO
      Comparing Integers Using the Number Line (https://openstax.org/r/the_Number_Line)

  EXAMPLE 3.28

Comparing Integers Using a Number Line
Determine which of -6 and 4 is larger using a number line, and express that using both the greater than and the less
than notations.

     Solution
To illustrate this, we use a number line (Figure 3.17).

                                                 Figure 3.17

Since -6 is to the left of 4, then -6 is less than 4. We can write this as -6 < 4. Another way of expressing this is that 4 is

greater than -6. So we can also write      .

        YOUR TURN 3.28

  1. Determine which of -38 and 27 is larger using a number line, and express that using both the greater than and
      the less than notations.

  EXAMPLE 3.29
Comparing Negative Integers
Determine which of -6 and -2 is larger, and express that using both the greater than and the less than notations.

     Solution
To illustrate this, we use a number line (Figure 3.18).
152 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                                               Figure 3.18

Since -6 is to the left of -2, then -6 is less than -2. We can write this as  .

Another way of expressing this is that -2 is greater than -6. So we can also write  .

    Warning: People often ignore the negative signs, and think than since 6 is greater than 2, -6 is greater than -2. To
    avoid that error, remember that the greater number is to the right on the number line.

      YOUR TURN 3.29

1. Determine which of -63 and -213 is larger, and express that using both the greater than and the less than
    notations.

EXAMPLE 3.30

Comparing Integers by Quantity
Determine which of 27 and 410 is larger, and express that using both the greater than and the less than notations.

    Solution

When thinking about quantity, 410 is more than 27. So, 410 is greater than 27 and 27 is less than 410. We can write this

as            or as              .

        YOUR TURN 3.30

  1. Determine which of 101 and 98 is larger, and express that using both the greater than and the less than
      notations.

The Absolute Value of an Integer

When talking about graphing integers on the number line, one interpretation suggests it is like walking along a path.
Negative is going to the left of 0, and positive going to the right. If you take 30 steps to the right, you are 30 steps away
from 0. On the other hand, when you take 30 steps to the left, you are still 30 steps away from 0. So, in a way, even
though one is negative and the other positive, these two numbers, 30 and -30, are equal since both are 30 steps away
from 0. The absolute value of an integer is the distance from to 0, regardless of the direction. The notation for
absolute value of the integer is .

If we think of an integer as both direction and magnitude (size), absolute value is the magnitude part.

Calculating the absolute value of an integer is very straightforward. If the integer is positive, then the absolute value of
the integer is just the integer itself. If the integer is negative, then to compute the absolute value of the integer, simply
remove the negative sign. Keeping in mind the number line as a path, when you've gone 10 steps to the left of 0, you
have still taken 10 steps, and the direction does not matter.

       VIDEO

      Evaluating the Absolute Value of an Integer (https://openstax.org/r/Absolute_Value_of_an_Integer)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     3.2 · The Integers 153

  EXAMPLE 3.31
Calculating the Absolute Value of a Positive Integer
Calculate |19|.

     Solution
Since the number inside the absolute value symbol is positive, the absolute value is just the number itself. So |19| = 19.

        YOUR TURN 3.31

  1. Calculate |38|.

  EXAMPLE 3.32
Calculating the Absolute Value of a Negative Integer
Calculate |-435|.

     Solution
Since the number inside the absolute value is negative, the absolute value removes the negative sign. So |-435| = 435.

        YOUR TURN 3.32

  1. Calculate |-81|.

Adding and Subtracting Integers

You may recall having approached adding and subtracting integers using the number line from earlier in your academic
life. Adding a positive integer results in moving to the right on the number line. Adding a negative integer results in
moving to the left. Subtracting a positive integer results in a move to the left on the number line. But subtracting a
negative integer results in a move to the right.
This leads to a few adding and subtracting rules, such as:
Rule 1: Subtracting a negative is the same as adding a positive.
Rule 2: Adding two negative integers always results in a negative integer.
Rule 3: Adding two positive integers always results in a positive integer.
Rule 4: The sign when adding integers with opposite signs is the same as the integer with the larger absolute value.
These rules are good to keep in the back of your mind, as they can serve as a quick error check when you use a
calculator.

  EXAMPLE 3.33
Adding Integers
Use your calculator to calculate 4 + (-7). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

     Solution
Using a calculator, we find that 4 + (-7) = -3. Since we are adding integers with opposite signs, the sign of the answer
matches the sign of the integer with the larger absolute value which |-7|=7.
154 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

               YOUR TURN 3.33
         1. Use your calculator to calculate (-18) + 11. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

         EXAMPLE 3.34
      Subtracting Positive Integers
      Use your calculator to calculate 18 - 9. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

            Solution
      Using a calculator, we find that 18 - 9 = 9. Since 18 was larger than 9, we expected the difference to be positive.

               YOUR TURN 3.34
         1. Use your calculator to calculate 38 - 100. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

         EXAMPLE 3.35
      Subtracting with Negative Integers
      Use your calculator to calculate 27 - (-13). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

            Solution
      Using a calculator, we find that 27 - (-13) = 40. Since we're subtracting a negative number, it is the same as adding a
      positive, so this is the same as 27 + 13 = 40.

               YOUR TURN 3.35
         1. Use your calculator to calculate 45 - (-26). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

         EXAMPLE 3.36
      Adding Integers with Opposite Signs
      Use your calculator to calculate (-13) + 90. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

            Solution
      Using a calculator, we find that (-13) + 90 = 77. Since we are adding integers with opposite signs, the sign of the answer
      matches the sign of the integer with the larger absolute value, which is positive since 90 is positive.

               YOUR TURN 3.36
         1. Use your calculator to calculate 19 + (-36). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

      One use of negative numbers is determining net worth, which is all the weath someone owns less all that someone
      owes. Sometimes net worth is positive (which is good), and sometimes net worth is negative (which can be stressful).

         EXAMPLE 3.37
      Calculating Net Worth
      Jennifer is owed $50 from her friend Janice, but owes her friend Pat $87. What is Jennifer's net worth?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     3.2 · The Integers 155

     Solution
Net worth is the amount that one is owed minus the amount one owes. Jennifer is owed $50 but owes $87. So, her net
worth is $50 - $87 = -$37. The negative indicates that Jennifer owes more than she is owed.

        YOUR TURN 3.37

  1. Christian is owed $180 from his friend Chanel, but owes his friend Jeff $91. What is Christian's net worth?

Multiplying and Dividing Integers

Similar to addition and subtraction, the signs of the integers impact the results when multiplying and dividing integers.
The rules are fairly straightforward, but again rely on the direction on the number line. There are only two rules.
Rule 1: When multiplying or dividing two integers with the same sign, the result is positive.
Rule 2: When multiplying or dividing two integers with opposite signs, the result is negative.
Just as before, these rules can serve as a quick error check when using a calculator.

  EXAMPLE 3.38
Multiplying Positive Integers
Use your calculator to calculate 4 × 8. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

     Solution
Entering 4 × 8 into your calculator, the result is 32. This agrees with our expectation. The numbers have the same signs,
so the result is positive.

        YOUR TURN 3.38

  1. Use your calculator to calculate 81 × 26. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

  EXAMPLE 3.39
Multiplying Integers with Different Signs
Use your calculator to calculate 9 × (-10). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

     Solution
Entering 9 × (-10) into your calculator, the result is -90. This agrees with our expectation. The numbers have opposite
signs, so the result is negative.

        YOUR TURN 3.39

  1. Use your calculator to calculate (-18) × 13. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

  EXAMPLE 3.40
Dividing Integers with Different Signs
Use your calculator to calculate 400/(-25). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

     Solution
Entering 400/(-25) into your calculator, the result is -16. This agrees with our expectation. The numbers have opposite
156 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

      signs, so the result is negative.

               YOUR TURN 3.40

         1. Use your calculator to calculate (-116)/4. Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

         EXAMPLE 3.41
      Dividing Negative Integers
      Use your calculator to calculate -750/(-3). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

            Solution
      Entering -750/(-3) into your calculator, the result is 250. This agrees with our expectation. The numbers have the same
      signs, so the result is positive.

               YOUR TURN 3.41

         1. Use your calculator to calculate (-77)/(-11). Explain how the answer agrees with what was expected.

      At the end of a season, a team may wish to buy their coach an end-of season gift. It makes sense to share the cost
      equally among the members. To do so, the team would need to find the average (or mean) cost per member. The
      average (or mean) of a set of numbers is the sum of the numbers divided by the number values that are being
      averaged.

         EXAMPLE 3.42
      Finding the Average of a Set of Numbers
      The daily low temperatures in Barrie, Ontario, for the week of February 14, 2021, were -20°, -12°, -15°, -23°, -17°, -13°,
      and -19° degrees Celsius. What was the average daily temperature for the week of February 14, 2021, in Barrie?

            Solution
      Step 1: To find the average daily temperature, we first need to add the temperatures.
      (-20) + (-12) + (-15) + (-23) + (-17) + (-13) + (-19) = -119
      Step 2: That sum will then be divided by 7 since we are averaging over seven days, giving -119/7 = -17. So, the average
      daily temperature in Barrie, Ontario the week of February 14, 2021, was -17° Celsius.

               YOUR TURN 3.42

         1. Banks and credit cards often base their interest on the average daily balance of an account, which is the average
             of the balance from each day of the period. The account balance of Jada's checking account on each day of the
             week of December 13, 2020, was $1,250, $673, -$1,500, $1,000, $785, $785, and $710. What was Jada's average
             daily balance for the week of December 13, 2020? Assume Jada pays no fees for a negative balance.

    Check Your Understanding

        6. Identify which of the following numbers are integers:
             -4, 15.2, , , 430

        7. Graph the following integers on the number line: 4, -2, 7.
        8. Place these integers in increasing order: 4, -2, -7, 10, -13.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.2 · The Integers 157

9. Calculate |-7|.

10. Calculate 4 - (-9).

11. Calculate            .

      SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES                                          , , -300.

1. Identify all the integers in the following list: 4, -17, 8, 0.5,

 2. Identify all integers in the following list: -9.2, 13, -1, , , 567, -300.

For the following exercises, plot the integers on the same number line.
     3. 4, -2, 10, 0
     4. -6, -3, 10, 1, 4
     5. -3, -10, 7, 2
     6. 2, 4, 8, -2, -5

For the following exercises, determine if the comparison is true or false.
     7. -3 < -10
     8. -10 > -3
     9. 7 > -6
    10. -6 < 7
    11. 18 < 20
    12. 20 < 18
    13. What are two numbers with an absolute value of 76?
    14. What are two numbers with an absolute value 87?
    15. Determine |-67|.
    16. Determine |98|.
    17. Determine |61|.
    18. Determine |-903|.
    19. What are two numbers that are 23 away from 0?
    20. What are two numbers 13 away from 0?

For the following exercises, complete the indicated calculation.
    21. 47 + 200
    22. 67 + (-86)
    23. (-86) + 104
    24. 13 - (-54)
    25. (-45) - (-26)
    26. (-13) + (-102)
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.
    34.
    35.
    36.
    37. The daily low temperatures, in degrees centigrade, in Fargo for the week of January 17, 2021, were -9, -17, -18,
          -14, -17, -19, and -11. What was the average low temperature in Fargo that week?
    38. Riley collects checks for a fundraiser supporting the homeless in town. Through Venmo, they collect the
          following amounts: $20, $20, $50, $75, $250, $10, $15, $65, $30, $15. What was the average donation that Riley
          collected?
    39. Heath has $495 in an account. They will collect two paychecks this week, one for $150 and the other for $250.
          Heath also will pay three bills, one for $50, one for $110, and one for $300. After all those transactions, how
          much will Heath have in their account?
    40. Five diners decide to split the check evenly. The total bill comes to $475. How much does each diner owe?
158 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

           41. There are many people who are single-issue voters, which means that they will vote for (or against!) a candidate
                 based on one issue and one issue only. Suppose a politician wants to earn votes based on single issues: Issue 1,
                 Issue 2, and Issue 3. By publicly supporting issue 1, the politician gains 127 voter but loses 154. By publicly
                 supporting issue 2, the politician gains 350 voters but loses 83. By publicly denouncing Issue 3, the politician
                 gains 306 voters but loses 158. By publicly taking those stances, what is the politician's net gain or loss in
                 number of voters?

    3.3 Order of Operations

Figure 3.19 Calculators may automatically apply order of operations to calculations. (credit: "Precision" by Leonid
Mamchenkov/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

After completing this module, you should be able to:
 1. Simplify expressions using order of operations.
 2. Simplify expressions using order of operations involving grouping symbols.

Calculates else sure someone be rules expect explicit we what that needs to need make, we to that them what be
calculate to calculated first.

You probably read that sentence and couldn't make heads or tails of it. Seems like it might concern calculations, but
maybe it concerns needs? You may even be attempting to unscramble the sentence as you read it, placing words in the
order you might expect them to appear in. The reason that the sentence makes no sense is that the words don't follow
the order you expect them to follow. Unscrambled, the sentence was intended to be "To be sure that someone else
calculates when we expect them to calculate, we need rules that make explicit what needs to be calculated first."

Similarly, when working with math expressions and equations, if we don't follow the rules for order of operations,

arithmetic expressions make no sense. Just a simple expression would be problematic if we didn't have some rules to tell

us what to calculate first. For instance,     can be calculated in many ways. You could get 5,184. Or, you

could get 80. Or, 96. The issue is that without following a set of rules for calculation, the same expression will give various

results. In case you are curious, using the appropriate order of operations, we find  .

Simplify Expressions Using Order of Operations

The order in which mathematical operations is performed is a convention that makes it easier for anyone to correctly
calculate. They follow the acronym EMDAS:

                                           E  Exponents

                                           M/D Multiplication and division

                                           A/S Addition and Subtraction

So, what does EMDAS tell us to do? In an equation, moving left to right, we begin by calculating all the exponents first.
Once the exponents have been calculated, we again move left to right, calculating the multiplications and divisions, one
at a time. Multiplication and division hold the same position in the ordering, so when you encounter one or the other at
this step, do it. Once the multiplications and divisions have been calculated, we again move left to right, calculating the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.3 · Order of Operations 159

additions and subtractions, one at a time. Additions and subtractions hold the same position in the ordering, so when
you encounter one or the other at this step, do it. (You may have previously learned the order of operations as PEMDAS,
with parentheses first; we will add that aspect later on.) We'll explore this as we work an example.

EXAMPLE 3.43

Using Two Order of Operations

Calculate                 .

     Solution
There are no exponents in this expression, so the next operations to check are multiplication and division.

Step 1: Moving left to right, the first multiplication encountered is 4 multiplied by 13. We perform that operation first.

Step 2: The only operation remaining is the subtraction.

              .

So,                          .

     YOUR TURN 3.43

1. Calculate                    .

EXAMPLE 3.44

Using Two Order of Operations

Calculate        .

     Solution
Step 1: Moving left to right, we see there is an exponent. We calculate the exponent first.

Step 2: The only operation remaining is the multiplication.

So,                 .

     YOUR TURN 3.44

1. Calculate              .

EXAMPLE 3.45

Using Three Order of Operations

Calculate              .

     Solution
Step 1: To calculate this, move left to right, and compute all the exponents first. The only exponent we see is the
squaring of the 3, so that is calculated first.
160 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Step 2: Since the exponents are all calculated, now calculate all the multiplications and divisions moving left to right. The
only multiplication or division present is 9 times 4.

Step 3: Moving left to right, perform the additions and subtractions. There is only one such operation, 2 plus 36.

So,           .

     YOUR TURN 3.45

1. Calculate                     .

Even if the expression being calculated gets more complicated, we perform the operations in the order: EMDAS.
       VIDEO
      Order of Operations 1 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_1)

  EXAMPLE 3.46

Using Eight Order of Operations
Correctly apply the order of operations to compute the following:

                                       .

     Solution
Step 1: To do so, calculate the exponents first, moving left to right. There are two occurrences of exponents in the
expression, 3 squared and 2 cubed.

Step 2: Now that the exponents are calculated, perform the multiplication and division, moving left to right. The first is
the product of 25 and 6.

Step 3: Next is the 150 divided by 10.

Step 4: Next is 15 multiplied by 9.

Step 5: Finally, multiply the 7 and 8.

As all the multiplications and divisions have been calculated, the additions and subtractions are performed, moving left
to right.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.3 · Order of Operations 161

The computed value is -75.

        YOUR TURN 3.46
  1. Correctly apply the order of operations to compute the following:

                                            .

       VIDEO
      Order of Operations 2 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_2)
  EXAMPLE 3.47
Using Six Order of Operations
Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:

                               .
     Solution
Step 1: Calculate exponents first, moving left to right:

Step 2: Multiply and divide, moving left to right:

Step 3: Add and subtract, moving left to right:

        YOUR TURN 3.47

  1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:
                                                            .

  EXAMPLE 3.48
Using Order of Operations
Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:

                                                      .
     Solution
Step 1: Calculate the exponents first, moving left to right:
162 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

       Step 2: Multiply and divide, moving left to right:

Step 3: Add and subtract, moving left to right:

      YOUR TURN 3.48
1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:

                                                   .

Using the Order of Operations Involving Grouping Symbols

We have examined how to use the order of operations, denoted by EMDAS, to correctly calculate expressions. However,
there may be expressions where a multiplication should happen before an exponent, or a subtraction before a division.
To indicate an operation should be performed out of order, the operation is placed inside parentheses. When
parentheses are present, the operations inside the parentheses are performed first. Adding the parentheses to our list,
we now have PEMDAS, as shown below.

              P                  Parentheses

              E                  Exponents

              M/D Multiplication and division (division is just the multiplication by the reciprocal)

              A/S Addition and subtraction                 (subtraction is just the addition of the negative)

As said previously, parentheses indicate that some operation or operations will be performed outside the standard order

of operation rules. For instance, perhaps you want to multiply 4 and 7 before squaring. To indicate that the multiplication

happens before the exponent, the multiplication is placed inside parentheses:  .

This means operations inside the parentheses take precedence, or happen before other operations. Now, the first step in
calculating arithmetic expressions using the order of operations is to perform operations inside parentheses first. Inside
the parentheses, you follow the order of operation rules EMDAS.

EXAMPLE 3.49

Prioritizing Parentheses in the Order of Operations
Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           3.3 · Order of Operations 163

                  .
     Solution
Step 1: Perform all calculations within the parentheses before all other operations.

Step 2: Since all parentheses have been cleared, move left to right, and compute all the exponents next.

Step 3: Perform all multiplications and divisions moving left to right.

        YOUR TURN 3.49
  1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:

                            .

Be aware that there can be more than one set of parentheses, and parentheses within parentheses. When one set of
parentheses is inside another set, do the innermost set first, and then work outward.

       VIDEO
      Order of Operations 3 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_3)
  EXAMPLE 3.50
Working Innermost Parentheses in the Order of Operations
Correctly apply the rules for order of operations to accurately compute the following:

                                                 .
     Solution
Step 1: Perform all calculations within the parentheses before other operations. Evaluate the innermost parentheses
first. We can work separate parentheses expressions at the same time. The innermost set of parentheses has the 2 + 5
inside. The 3 + 8 is in a separate set of parentheses, so that addition can occur at the same time as the 2 + 5.

Step 2: Now that those parentheses have been handled, move on to the next set of parentheses. Applying the order of
operation rules inside that set of parentheses, the exponent is evaluated first, then the multiplication, and then the
addition.

Step 3: Since all parentheses have been cleared, apply the EMDAS rules to finish the calculation.

        YOUR TURN 3.50
  1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute the following:
164 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                                               .

VIDEO
Order of Operations 4 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_4)

Check Your Understanding

12. Which operation has highest precedence?

13. Which is performed first, exponents or addition?

14. Calculate                    .

15. What is used to indicate operations that should be performed out of order?

16. Calculate                       .

        SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES

 1. Which operations have the lowest precedence in order of operations?

 2. If many operations have the same precedence in an expression, in what order should the operations be
      performed?

 3. Which operations have the same precedence in order of operations?

 4. After all operations in parentheses have been performed, which operations should be performed next?

For the following exercises, perform the indicated calculation.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.
    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.
    34.

Access for free at openstax.org
                      3.4 · Rational Numbers 165

    35.
    36.
    37.
    38.
    39.
    40.

3.4 Rational Numbers

Figure 3.20 Stock gains and losses are often represented as percentages.(credit: "stock market quotes in newspaper" by
Andreas Poike/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Define and identify numbers that are rational.
 2. Simplify rational numbers and express in lowest terms.
 3. Add and subtract rational numbers.
 4. Convert between improper fractions and mixed numbers.
 5. Convert rational numbers between decimal and fraction form.
 6. Multiply and divide rational numbers.
 7. Apply the order of operations to rational numbers to simplify expressions.
 8. Apply density property of rational numbers.
 9. Solve problems involving rational numbers.
10. Use fractions to convert between units.
11. Define and apply percent.
12. Solve problems using percent.

We are often presented with percentages or fractions to explain how much of a population has a certain feature. For
example, the 6-year graduation rate of college students at public institutions is 57.6%, or 72/125. That fraction may be
unsettling. But without the context, the percentage is hard to judge. So how does that compare to private institutions?
There, the 6-year graduation rate is 65.4%, or 327/500. Comparing the percentages is straightforward, but the fractions
are harder to interpret due to different denominators. For more context, historical data could be found. One study
reported that the 6-year graduation rate in 1995 was 56.4%. Comparing that historical number to the recent 6-year
graduation rate at public institutions of 57.6% shows that there hasn't been much change in that rate.

Defining and Identifying Numbers That Are Rational

A rational number (called rational since it is a ratio) is just a fraction where the numerator is an integer and the
denominator is a non-zero integer. As simple as that is, they can be represented in many ways. It should be noted here
that any integer is a rational number. An integer, , written as a fraction of two integers is .

In its most basic representation, a rational number is an integer divided by a non-zero integer, such as . Fractions may
166 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

       be used to represent parts of a whole. The denominator is the total number of parts to the object, and the numerator is
       how many of those parts are being used or selected. So, if a pizza is cut into 8 equal pieces, each piece is of the pizza.
       If you take three slices, you have of the pizza (Figure 3.21). Similarly, if in a group of 20 people, 5 are wearing hats,
       then of the people are wearing hats (Figure 3.22).

                                                     Figure 3.21 Pizza cut in 8 slices, with 3 slices highlighted

                                 Figure 3.22 Group of 20 people, with 5 people wearing hats

Another representation of rational numbers is as a mixed number, such as  (Figure 3.23). This represents a whole
number (2 in this case), plus a fraction (the ).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.4 · Rational Numbers 167

                           Figure 3.23 Two whole pizzas and one partial pizza

Rational numbers may also be expressed in decimal form; for instance, as 1.34. When 1.34 is written, the decimal part,

0.34, represents the fraction , and the number 1.34 is equal to  . However, not all decimal representations are

rational numbers.

A number written in decimal form where there is a last decimal digit (after a given decimal digit, all following decimal
digits are 0) is a terminating decimal, as in 1.34 above. Alternately, any decimal numeral that, after a finite number of
decimal digits, has digits equal to 0 for all digits following the last non-zero digit.

All numbers that can be expressed as a terminating decimal are rational. This comes from what the decimal represents.
The decimal part is the fraction of the decimal part divided by the appropriate power of 10. That power of 10 is the
number of decimal digits present, as for 0.34, with two decimal digits, being equal to .

Another form that is a rational number is a decimal that repeats a pattern, such as 67.1313... When a rational number is
expressed in decimal form and the decimal is a repeated pattern, we use special notation to designate the part that
repeats. For example, if we have the repeating decimal 4.3636..., we write this as . The bar over the 36 indicates that
the 36 repeats forever.

If the decimal representation of a number does not terminate or form a repeating decimal, that number is not a rational
number.

One class of numbers that is not rational is the square roots of integers or rational numbers that are not perfect

squares, such as      and  . More generally, the number is the square root of the number if  . The

notation for this is       , where the symbol is the square root sign. An integer perfect square is any integer that

can be written as the square of another integer. A rational perfect square is any rational number that can be written as a
fraction of two integers that are perfect squares.

Sometimes you may be able to identify a perfect square from memory. Another process that may be used is to factor the
number into the product of an integer with itself. Or a calculator (such as Desmos) may be used to find the square root
of the number. If the calculator yields an integer, the original number was a perfect square.

TECH CHECK

Using Desmos to Find the Square Root of a Number

When Desmos is used, there is a tab at the bottom of the screen that opens the keyboard for Desmos. The keyboard

is shown below. On the keyboard (Figure 3.24) is the square root symbol  . To find the square root of a number,

click the square root key, and then type the number. Desmos will automatically display the value of the square root as
you enter the number.
168 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                                 Figure 3.24 Desmos keyboard with square root key

EXAMPLE 3.51

Identifying Perfect Squares
Which of the following are perfect squares?

1. 45
2. 144

    Solution

1. We could attempt to find the perfect square by factoring. Writing all the factor pairs of 45 results in                ,

    and       . None of the pairs is a square, so 45 is not a perfect square. Using a calculator to find the square root of

    45, we obtain 6.708 (rounded to three decimal places). Since this was not an integer, the original number was not a

    perfect square.

2. We could attempt to find the perfect square by factoring. Writing all the factor pairs of 144 results in

                                               , and  . Since the last pair is an integer multiplied by itself, 144 is a

    perfect square. Alternately, using Desmos to find the square root of 144, we obtain 12. Since the square root of 144

    is an integer, 144 is a perfect square.

      YOUR TURN 3.51

Determine if the following are perfect squares:
    1. 94
    2. 441

    VIDEO
    Introduction to Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Equivalent_Fractions)

EXAMPLE 3.52

Identifying Rational Numbers
Determine which of the following are rational numbers:

1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

    Solution

1. Since 73 is not a perfect square, its square root is not a rational number. This can also be seen when a calculator is

    used. Entering   into a calculator results in 8.544003745317 (and then more decimal values after that). There is

    no repeated pattern, so this is not a rational number.

2. Since 4.556 is a decimal that terminates, this is a rational number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          3.4 · Rational Numbers 169

3.  is a mixed number, so it is a rational number.

4.  is an integer divided by an integer, so it is a rational number.

5.            is a decimal that repeats a pattern, so it is a rational number.

        YOUR TURN 3.52

  Determine which of the following are rational numbers:
      1.
      2.
      3.
      4.
      5.

Simplifying Rational Numbers and Expressing in Lowest Terms

A rational number is one way to express the division of two integers. As such, there may be multiple ways to express the
same value with different rational numbers. For instance, and are the same value. If we enter them into a
calculator, they both equal 0.8. Another way to understand this is to consider what it looks like in a figure when two
fractions are equal.

In Figure 3.25, we see that of the rectangle and of the rectangle are equal areas.

                                       Figure 3.25 Two Rectangles with Equal Areas

They are the same proportion of the area of the rectangle. The left rectangle has 5 pieces, three of which are shaded. The

right rectangle has 15 pieces, 9 of which are shaded. Each of the pieces of the left rectangle was divided equally into

three pieces. This was a multiplication. The numerator describing the left rectangle was 3 but it becomes      , or 9, as

each piece was divided into three. Similarly, the denominator describing the left rectangle was 5, but became  , or

15, as each piece was divided into 3. The fractions and are equivalent because they represent the same portion

(often loosely referred to as equal).

This understanding of equivalent fractions is very useful for conceptualization, but it isn't practical, in general, for
determining when two fractions are equivalent. Generally, to determine if the two fractions and are equivalent, we

check to see that  . If those two products are equal, then the fractions are equal also.

EXAMPLE 3.53

Determining If Two Fractions Are Equivalent
Determine if and are equivalent fractions.
170 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    Solution

Applying the definition,                       and        . So               . Also,                             . Since

these values are equal, the fractions are equivalent.

          YOUR TURN 3.53
    1. Determine if and are equivalent fractions.

That           indicates the fractions and are equivalent is due to some algebra. One property of natural

numbers, integers, and rational numbers (also irrational numbers) is that for any three numbers and with              , if

      , then          . In other words, when two numbers are equal, then dividing both numbers by the same non-zero

number, the two newly obtained numbers are also equal. We can apply that to  and          , to show that and are

equivalent if              .

If             , and             , we can divide both sides by and obtain the following:  . We can divide out

the on the right-hand side of the equation, resulting in        . Similarly, we can divide both sides of the equation by

and obtain the following:        . We can divide out the on the left-hand side of the equation, resulting in          . So,

the rational numbers and are equivalent when                    .

      VIDEO
      Equivalent Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Equivalent_Fractions)

Recall that a common divisor or common factor of a set of integers is one that divides all the numbers of the set of
numbers being considered. In a fraction, when the numerator and denominator have a common divisor, that common
divisor can be divided out. This is often called canceling the common factors or, more colloquially, as canceling.

To show this, consider the fraction . The numerator and denominator have the common factor 3. We can rewrite the

fraction as           . The common divisor 3 is then divided out, or canceled, and we can write the fraction as

              . The 3s have been crossed out to indicate they have been divided out. The process of dividing out two

factors is also referred to as reducing the fraction.

If the numerator and denominator have no common positive divisors other than 1, then the rational number is in lowest
terms.

The process of dividing out common divisors of the numerator and denominator of a fraction is called reducing the
fraction.

One way to reduce a fraction to lowest terms is to determine the GCD of the numerator and denominator and divide out
the GCD. Another way is to divide out common divisors until the numerator and denominator have no more common
factors.

  EXAMPLE 3.54

Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms
Express the following rational numbers in lowest terms:

 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. One process to reduce to lowest terms is to identify the GCD of 36 and 48 and divide out the GCD. The GCD of 36

      and 48 is 12.
      Step 1: We can then rewrite the numerator and denominator by factoring 12 from both.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.4 · Rational Numbers 171

Step 2: We can now divide out the 12s from the numerator and denominator.

So, when is reduced to lowest terms, the result is .

Alternately, you could identify a common factor, divide out that common factor, and repeat the process until the
remaining fraction is in lowest terms.
Step 1: You may notice that 4 is a common factor of 36 and 48.

Step 2: Divide out the 4, as in  .

     Step 3: Examining the 9 and 12, you identify 3 as a common factor and divide out the 3, as in  . The 3
     and 4 have no common positive factors other than 1, so it is in lowest terms.
     So, when is reduced to lowest terms, the result is .
2. Step 1: To reduce to lowest terms, identify the GCD of 100 and 250. This GCD is 50.
     Step 2: We can then rewrite the numerator and denominator by factoring 50 from both.

                      .
     Step 3: We can now divide out the 50s from the numerator and denominator.

     So, when is reduced to lowest terms, the result is .
3. Step 1: To reduce to lowest terms, identify the GCD of 51 and 136. This GCD is 17.

     Step 2: We can then rewrite the numerator and denominator by factoring 17 from both.

     Step 3: We can now divide out the 17s from the numerator and denominator.

    So, when is reduced to lowest terms, the result is .

      YOUR TURN 3.54
1. Express in lowest terms.

     VIDEO
    Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms (https://openstax.org/r/Reducing_Fractions_to_Lowest_Terms)

        TECH CHECK
Using Desmos to Find Lowest Terms
Desmos is a free online calculator (https://openstax.org/r/calculator). Desmos supports reducing fractions to lowest
terms. When a fraction is entered, Desmos immediately calculates the decimal representation of the fraction.
172 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

         However, to the left of the fraction, there is a button that, when clicked, shows the fraction in reduced form.

              VIDEO
             Using Desmos to Reduce a Fraction (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_Reduce_a_Fraction)

    Adding and Subtracting Rational Numbers

      Adding or subtracting rational numbers can be done with a calculator, which often returns a decimal representation, or
      by finding a common denominator for the rational numbers being added or subtracted.

                 TECH CHECK

         Using Desmos to Add Rational Numbers in Fractional Form
         To create a fraction in Desmos, enter the numerator, then use the division key (/) on your keyboard, and then enter
         the denominator. The fraction is then entered. Then click the right arrow key to exit the denominator of the fraction.
         Next, enter the arithmetic operation (+ or -). Then enter the next fraction. The answer is displayed dynamically
         (calculates as you enter). To change the Desmos result from decimal form to fractional form, use the fraction button
         (Figure 3.26) on the left of the line that contains the calculation:

                                 Figure 3.26 Fraction button on the Desmos keyboard

EXAMPLE 3.55

Adding Rational Numbers Using Desmos

Calculate     using Desmos.

Solution

Enter         in Desmos. The result is displayed as  (which is    ). Clicking the fraction button to the

left on the calculation line yields .

       YOUR TURN 3.55

1. Calculate           .

Performing addition and subtraction without a calculator may be more involved. When the two rational numbers have a

common denominator, then adding or subtracting the two numbers is straightforward. Add or subtract the numerators,

and then place that value in the numerator and the common denominator in the denominator. Symbolically, we write

this as       . This can be seen in the Figure 3.27, which shows  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        3.4 · Rational Numbers 173

                                                          Figure 3.27 Partially Shaded Rectangle
It is customary to then write the result in lowest terms.

  FORMULA

If is a non-zero integer, then  .

EXAMPLE 3.56

Adding Rational Numbers with the Same Denominator

Calculate     .

     Solution                                                                                           , and then
Since the rational numbers have the same denominator, we perform the addition of the numerators,
place the result in the numerator and the common denominator, 28, in the denominator.

Once we have that result, reduce to lowest terms, which gives                                     .

YOUR TURN 3.56

1. Calculate        .

EXAMPLE 3.57

Subtracting Rational Numbers with the Same Denominator

Calculate        .

     Solution                                                                                           , and
Since the rational numbers have the same denominator, we perform the subtraction of the numerators,
then place the result in the numerator and the common denominator, 136, in the denominator.

Once we have that result, reduce to lowest terms, this gives                                         .
174 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

YOUR TURN 3.57

1. Calculate             .

When the rational numbers do not have common denominators, then we have to transform the rational numbers so
that they do have common denominators. The common denominator that reduces work later in the problem is the LCM
of the numerator and denominator. When adding or subtracting the rational numbers and , we perform the

following steps.

Step 1: Find             .

Step 2: Calculate                and            .

Step 3: Multiply the numerator and denominator of by , yielding .

Step 4: Multiply the numerator and denominator of by , yielding .

Step 5: Add or subtract the rational numbers from Steps 3 and 4, since they now have the common denominators.

You should be aware that the common denominator is                     . For the first denominator, we have

                                       , since we multiply and divide       by the same number. For the same reason,

                                       .

EXAMPLE 3.58

Adding Rational Numbers with Unequal Denominators

Calculate          .

     Solution                                                     and       .
The denominators of the fractions are 18 and 15, so we label
                                                                 yields            .
Step 1: Find LCM(18,15). This is 90.                          yields            .
                                                              .
Step 2: Calculate and .                   and       .

Step 3: Multiplying the numerator and denominator of by

Step 4: Multiply the numerator and denominator of by

Step 5: Now we add the values from Steps 3 and 4:

This is in lowest terms, so we have found that         .

YOUR TURN 3.58

1. Calculate          .

EXAMPLE 3.59

Subtracting Rational Numbers with Unequal Denominators

Calculate          .

Solution

The denominators of the fractions are 25 and 70, so we label           and  .

Step 1: Find LCM(25,70). This is 350.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          3.4 · Rational Numbers 175

Step 2: Calculate and :  and                    .

Step 3: Multiplying the numerator and denominator of by     yields          .

Step 4: Multiplying the numerator and denominator of by     yields       .

Step 5: Now we subtract the value from Step 4 from the value in Step 3:        .

This is in lowest terms, so we have found that           .

YOUR TURN 3.59

1. Calculate    .

VIDEO

Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Different Denominators (https://openstax.org/r/
Adding_and_Subtracting_Fractions)

Converting Between Improper Fractions and Mixed Numbers

One way to visualize a fraction is as parts of a whole, as in of a pizza. But when the numerator is larger than the

denominator, as in , then the idea of parts of a whole seems not to make sense. Such a fraction is an improper

fraction. That kind of fraction could be written as an integer plus a fraction, which is a mixed number. The fraction

rewritten as a mixed number would be . Arithmetically, is equivalent to  , which is read as "one and 11

twelfths."

Improper fractions can be rewritten as mixed numbers using division and remainders. To find the mixed number
representation of an improper fraction, divide the numerator by the denominator. The quotient is the integer part, and
the remainder becomes the numerator of the remaining fraction.

EXAMPLE 3.60

Rewriting an Improper Fraction as a Mixed Number
Rewrite as a mixed number.

     Solution
When 48 is divided by 13, the result is 3 with a remainder of 9. So, we can rewrite as .

        YOUR TURN 3.60

  1. Rewrite as a mixed number.

       VIDEO
      Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number Using Desmos (https://openstax.org/r/
      Improper_Fraction_to_Mixed_Number)

Similarly, we can convert a mixed number into an improper fraction. To do so, first convert the whole number part to a
fraction by writing the whole number as itself divided by 1, and then add the two fractions.
Alternately, we can multiply the whole number part and the denominator of the fractional part. Next, add that product to
the numerator. Finally, express the number as that product divided by the denominator.
176 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.61

Rewriting a Mixed Number as an Improper Fraction
Rewrite as an improper fraction.

Solution

Step 1: Multiply the integer part, 5, by the denominator, 9, which gives  .

Step 2: Add that product to the numerator, which gives        .

Step 3: Write the number as the sum, 49, divided by the denominator, 9, which gives .

      YOUR TURN 3.61
1. Rewrite as an improper fraction.

TECH CHECK

Using Desmos to Rewrite a Mixed Number as an Improper Fraction

Desmos can be used to convert from a mixed number to an improper fraction. To do so, we use the idea that a mixed

number, such as , is another way to represent           . If     is entered in Desmos, the result is the decimal

form of the number. However, clicking the fraction button to the left will convert the decimal to an improper fraction,

. As an added bonus, Desmos will automatically reduce the fraction to lowest terms.

Converting Rational Numbers Between Decimal and Fraction Forms

Understanding what decimals represent is needed before addressing conversions between the fractional form of a

number and its decimal form, or writing a number in decimal notation. The decimal number 4.557 is equal to               .

The decimal portion, .557, is 557 divided by 1,000. To write any decimal portion of a number expressed as a terminating

decimal, divide the decimal number by 10 raised to the power equal to the number of decimal digits. Since there were

three decimal digits in 4.557, we divided 557 by        .

Decimal representations may be very long. It is convenient to round off the decimal form of the number to a certain
number of decimal digits. To round off the decimal form of a number to (decimal) digits, examine the ( )st decimal
digit. If that digit is 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4, the number is rounded off by writing the number to the th decimal digit and no
further. If the ( )st decimal digit is 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9, the number is rounded off by writing the number to the th digit,
then replacing the th digit by one more than the th digit.

EXAMPLE 3.62

Rounding Off a Number in Decimal Form to Three Digits
Round 5.67849 to three decimal digits.

     Solution
The third decimal digit is 8. The digit following the 8 is 4. When the digit is 4, we write the number only to the third digit.
So, 5.67849 rounded off to three decimal places is 5.678.

      YOUR TURN 3.62
1. Round 5.1082 to three decimal places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.4 · Rational Numbers 177

  EXAMPLE 3.63

Rounding Off a Number in Decimal Form to Four Digits
Round 45.11475 to four decimal digits.

     Solution
The fourth decimal digit is 7. The digit following the 7 is 5. When the digit is 5, we write the number only to the fourth
decimal digit, 45.1147. We then replace the fourth decimal digit by one more than the fourth digit, which yields 45.1148.
So, 45.11475 rounded off to four decimal places is 45.1148.

        YOUR TURN 3.63

  1. Round 18.6298 to two decimal places.

To convert a rational number in fraction form to decimal form, use your calculator to perform the division.
  EXAMPLE 3.64

Converting a Rational Number in Fraction Form into Decimal Form
Convert into decimal form.

     Solution
Using a calculator to divide 47 by 25, the result is 1.88.

      YOUR TURN 3.64
1. Convert into decimal form.

Converting a terminating decimal to the fractional form may be done in the following way:

Step 1: Count the number of digits in the decimal part of the number, labeled .

Step 2: Raise 10 to the th power.

Step 3: Rewrite the number without the decimal.

Step 4: The fractional form is the number from Step 3 divided by the result from Step 2.

This process works due to what decimals represent and how we work with mixed numbers. For example, we could

convert the number 7.4536 to fractional from. The decimal part of the number, the .4536 part of 7.4536, has four digits.

By the definition of decimal notation, the decimal portion represents            . The decimal number 7.4536 is

equal to the improper fraction         . Adding those to fractions yields  .

EXAMPLE 3.65

Converting from Decimal Form to Fraction Form with Terminating Decimals
Convert 3.2117 to fraction form.

Solution

Step 1: There are four digits after the decimal point, so  .

Step 2: Raise 10 to the fourth power,            .

Step 3: When we remove the decimal point, we have 32,117.

Step 4: The fraction has as its numerator the result from Step 3 and as its denominator the result of Step 2, which is the
178 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

fraction      .

      YOUR TURN 3.65
1. Convert 17.03347 to fraction form.

The process is different when converting from the decimal form of a rational number into fraction form when the
decimal form is a repeating decimal. This process is not covered in this text.

Multiplying and Dividing Rational Numbers

Multiplying rational numbers is less complicated than adding or subtracting rational numbers, as there is no need to find

common denominators. To multiply rational numbers, multiply the numerators, then multiply the denominators, and

write the numerator product divided by the denominator product. Symbolically,            . As always, rational

numbers should be reduced to lowest terms.

FORMULA

If and are non-zero integers, then             .

EXAMPLE 3.66

Multiplying Rational Numbers

Calculate        .

     Solution
Multiply the numerators and place that in the numerator, and then multiply the denominators and place that in the
denominator.

This is not in lowest terms, so this needs to be reduced. The GCD of 120 and 525 is 15.

YOUR TURN 3.66

1. Calculate        .

       VIDEO
      Multiplying Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Multiplying_Fractions)

As with multiplication, division of rational numbers can be done using a calculator.

  EXAMPLE 3.67

Dividing Decimals with a Calculator
Calculate 3.45 ÷ 2.341 using a calculator. Round to three decimal places if necessary.

     Solution
Using a calculator, we obtain 1.473729175565997. Rounding to three decimal places we have 1.474.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.4 · Rational Numbers 179

      YOUR TURN 3.67              using a calculator. Round to three decimal places, if necessary.
1. Calculate

Before discussing division of fractions without a calculator, we should look at the reciprocal of a number. The reciprocal
of a number is 1 divided by the number. For a fraction, the reciprocal is the fraction formed by switching the numerator
and denominator. For the fraction , the reciprocal is . An important feature for a number and its reciprocal is that

their product is 1.

When dividing two fractions by hand, find the reciprocal of the divisor (the number that is being divided into the other

number). Next, replace the divisor by its reciprocal and change the division into multiplication. Then, perform the

multiplication. Symbolically,       . As before, reduce to lowest terms.

FORMULA

If and are non-zero integers, then                       .

EXAMPLE 3.68

Dividing Rational Numbers

1. Calculate     .

2. Calculate  .

    Solution
1. Step 1: Find the reciprocal of the number being divided by . The reciprocal of that is .

Step 2: Multiply the first fraction by that reciprocal.

The answer,   is not in lowest terms. The GCD of 140 and 126 is 14. Factoring and canceling gives
                 .

2. Step 1: Find the reciprocal of the number being divided by, which is . The reciprocal of that is .

Step 2: Multiply the first fraction by that reciprocal:

The answer,   , is not in lowest reduced form. The GCD of 28 and 40 is 4. Factoring and canceling gives
                .

YOUR TURN 3.68

1. Calculate                   .

2. Calculate          .

       VIDEO

      Dividing Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Dividing_Fractions)

Applying the Order of Operations to Simplify Expressions

The order of operations for rational numbers is the same as for integers, as discussed in Order of Operations. The order
of operations makes it easier for anyone to correctly calculate and represent. The order follows the well-known acronym
PEMDAS:
180 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

                                               P       Parentheses

                                               E       Exponents

                                               M/D Multiplication and division

                                               A/S Addition and subtraction

The first step in calculating using the order of operations is to perform operations inside the parentheses. Moving down
the list, next perform all exponent operations moving from left to right. Next (left to right once more), perform all
multiplications and divisions. Finally, perform the additions and subtractions.

EXAMPLE 3.69

Applying the Order of Operations with Rational Numbers

Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute     .

     Solution
Step 1: To calculate this, perform all calculations within the parentheses before other operations.

Step 2: Since all parentheses have been cleared, we move left to right, and compute all the exponents next.

Step 3: Now, perform all multiplications and divisions, moving left to right.

YOUR TURN 3.69

1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute                       .

EXAMPLE 3.70

Applying the Order of Operations with Rational Numbers

Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute                             .

     Solution
To calculate this, perform all calculations within the parentheses before other operations. Evaluate the innermost
parentheses first. We can work separate parentheses expressions at the same time.

Step 1: The innermost parentheses contain         . Calculate that first, dividing after finding the common denominator.

Step 2: Calculate the exponent in the parentheses,  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.4 · Rational Numbers 181

Step 3: Subtract inside the parentheses is done, using a common denominator.

Step 4: At this point, evaluate the exponent and divide.

Step 5: Add.

Had this been done on a calculator, the decimal form of the answer would be 4.0232 (rounded to four decimal places).

YOUR TURN 3.70

1. Correctly apply the rules for the order of operations to accurately compute                    .

VIDEO
Order of Operations Using Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Operations_Using_Fractions)

Applying the Density Property of Rational Numbers

Between any two rational numbers, there is another rational number. This is called the density property of the rational
numbers.

Finding a rational number between any two rational numbers is very straightforward.

Step 1: Add the two rational numbers.

Step 2: Divide that result by 2.

The result is always a rational number. This follows what we know about rational numbers. If two fractions are added,
then the result is a fraction. Also, when a fraction is divided by a fraction (and 2 is a fraction), then we get another
fraction. This two-step process will give a rational number, provided the first two numbers were rational.

EXAMPLE 3.71

Applying the Density Property of Rational Numbers                                          and .
Demonstrate the density property of rational numbers by finding a rational number between
182 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

     Solution                      and :
To find a rational number between

Step 1: Add the fractions.

Step 2: Divide the result by 2. Recall that to divide by 2, you multiply by the reciprocal of 2. The reciprocal of 2 is , as
seen below.

So, one rational number between and is .

We could check that the number we found is between the other two by finding the decimal representation of the
numbers. Using a calculator, the decimal representations of the rational numbers are 0.363636..., 0.473484848..., and
0.5833333.... Here it is clear that is between and .

      YOUR TURN 3.71
1. Demonstrate the density property of rational numbers by finding a rational number between and .

Solving Problems Involving Rational Numbers

Rational numbers are used in many situations, sometimes to express a portion of a whole, other times as an expression
of a ratio between two quantities. For the sciences, converting between units is done using rational numbers, as when
converting between gallons and cubic inches. In chemistry, mixing a solution with a given concentration of a chemical
per unit volume can be solved with rational numbers. In demographics, rational numbers are used to describe the
distribution of the population. In dietetics, rational numbers are used to express the appropriate amount of a given
ingredient to include in a recipe. As discussed, the application of rational numbers crosses many disciplines.

EXAMPLE 3.72

Mixing Soil for Vegetables
James is mixing soil for a raised garden, in which he plans to grow a variety of vegetables. For the soil to be suitable, he
determines that of the soil can be topsoil, but needs to be peat moss and has to be compost. To fill the raised

garden bed with 60 cubic feet of soil, how much of each component does James need to use?

     Solution
In this example, we know the proportion of each component to mix, and we know the total amount of the mix we need.
In this kind of situation, we need to determine the appropriate amount of each component to include in the mixture. For
each component of the mixture, multiply 60 cubic feet, which is the total volume of the mixture we want, by the fraction
required of the component.

Step 1: The required fraction of topsoil is , so James needs  cubic feet of topsoil. Performing the multiplication,

James needs                      (found by treating the fraction as division, and 120 divided by 5 is 24) cubic feet of

topsoil.

Step 2: The required fraction of peat moss is also  , so he also needs   cubic feet, or               cubic feet
of peat moss.

Step 3: The required fraction of compost is . For the compost, he needs                  cubic feet.

      YOUR TURN 3.72
1. Ashley wants to study for 10 hours over the weekend. She plans to spend half the time studying math, a quarter

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.4 · Rational Numbers 183

of the time studying history, an eighth of the time studying writing, and the remaining eighth of the time
studying physics. How much time will Ashley spend on each of those subjects?

EXAMPLE 3.73

Determining the Number of Specialty Pizzas
At Bella's Pizza, one-third of the pizzas that are ordered are one of their specialty varieties. If there are 273 pizzas
ordered, how many were specialty pizzas?

     Solution                                                                                        , found by
One-third of the whole are specialty pizzas, so we need one-third of 273, which gives
dividing 273 by 3. So, 91 of the pizzas that were ordered were specialty pizzas.

      YOUR TURN 3.73

1. Danny, a nutritionist, is designing a diet for her client, Callum. Danny determines that Callum's diet should be
    30% protein. If Callum consumes 2,400 calories per day, how many calories of protein should Danny tell Callum
    to consume?

VIDEO
Finding a Fraction of a Total (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_Fraction_of_Total)

Using Fractions to Convert Between Units

A common application of fractions is called unit conversion, or converting units, which is the process of changing from
the units used in making a measurement to different units of measurement.

For instance, 1 inch is (approximately) equal to 2.54 cm. To convert between units, the two equivalent values are made
into a fraction. To convert from the first type of unit to the second type, the fraction has the second unit as the
numerator, and the first unit as the denominator.

From the inches and centimeters example, to change from inches to centimeters, we use the fraction   . If, on the

other hand, we wanted to convert from centimeters to inches, we'd use the fraction                   . This fraction is multiplied by

the number of units of the type you are converting from, which means the units of the denominator are the same as the
units being multiplied.

EXAMPLE 3.74

Converting Liters to Gallons
It is known that 1 liter (L) is 0.264172 gallons (gal). Use this to convert 14 liters into gallons.

     Solution
We know that 1 liter = 0.264172 gal. Since we are converting from liters, when we create the fraction we use, make sure
the liter part of the equivalence is in the denominator. So, to convert the 14 liters to gallons, we multiply 14 by

              . Notice the gallon part is in the numerator since we're converting to gallons, and the liter part is in the

denominator since we are converting from liters. Performing this and rounding to three decimal places, we find that 14

liters is     .

      YOUR TURN 3.74
1. One mile is equal to 1.60934 km. Convert 200 miles to kilometers. Round off the answer to three decimal places.
184 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.75

Converting Centimeters to Inches
It is known that 1 inch is 2.54 centimeters. Use this to convert 100 centimeters into inches.

    Solution

We know that 1 inch = 2.54 cm. Since we are converting from centimeters, when we create the fraction we use, make

sure the centimeter part of the equivalence is in the denominator,  . To convert the 100 cm to inches, multiply 100

by      . Notice the inch part is in the numerator since we're converting to inches, and the centimeter part is in the

denominator since we are converting from centimeters. Performing this and rounding to three decimal places, we obtain
                                          . This means 100 cm equals 39.370 in.

      YOUR TURN 3.75

1. It is known that 4 quarts equals 3.785 liters. If you have 25 quarts, how many liters do you have? Round off to
    three decimal places.

       VIDEO
      Converting Units (https://openstax.org/r/Converting_Units)

Defining and Applying Percent

A percent is a specific rational number and is literally per 100. percent, denoted %, is the fraction .

EXAMPLE 3.76

Rewriting a Percentage as a Fraction
Rewrite the following as fractions:

1. 31%
2. 93%

    Solution                         , 31% in fraction form is .
1. Using the definition and          , 93% in fraction form is .
2. Using the definition and

      YOUR TURN 3.76

Rewrite the following as fractions:
    1. 4%
    2. 50%

EXAMPLE 3.77

Rewriting a Percentage as a Decimal
Rewrite the following percentages in decimal form:

1. 54%
2. 83%

    Solution                         , 54% in fraction form is  . Dividing a number by 100 moves the decimal two
1. Using the definition and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            3.4 · Rational Numbers 185

places to the left; 54% in decimal form is then 0.54.

2. Using the definition and   , 83% in fraction form is     . Dividing a number by 100 moves the decimal two

places to the left; 83% in decimal form is then 0.83.

      YOUR TURN 3.77

Rewrite the following percentages in decimal form:
    1. 14%
    2. 7%

You should notice that you can simply move the decimal two places to the left without using the fractional definition of
percent.

Percent is used to indicate a fraction of a total. If we want to find 30% of 90, we would perform a multiplication, with 30%

written in either decimal form or fractional form. The 90 is the total, 30 is the percentage, and 27 (which is     ) is

the percentage of the total.

FORMULA

     of items is     . The is referred to as the total, the is referred to as the percent or percentage, and the
value obtained from         is the part of the total and is also referred to as the percentage of the total.

  EXAMPLE 3.78

Finding a Percentage of a Total
 1. Determine 40% of 300.
 2. Determine 64% of 190.

     Solution
 1. The total is 300, and the percentage is 40. Using the decimal form of 40% and multiplying we obtain

                               .
 2. The total is 190, and the percentage is 64. Using the decimal form of 64% and multiplying we obtain

                                  .

  YOUR TURN 3.78

1. Determine 25% of 1,200.
2. Determine 53% of 1,588.

In the previous situation, we knew the total and we found the percentage of the total. It may be that we know the
percentage of the total, and we know the percent, but we don't know the total. To find the total if we know the
percentage the percentage of the total, use the following formula.

  FORMULA

If we know that % of the total is , then the total is    .
186 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.79

Finding the Total When the Percentage and Percentage of the Total Are Known
 1. What is the total if 28% of the total is 140?
 2. What is the total if 6% of the total is 91?

    Solution                     . 28% of the total is 140, so  . Using those we find that the total was
1. 28 is the percentage, so
                                 . 6% of the total is 91, so    . Using those we find that the total was
                          .

2. 6 is the percentage, so
                              .

  YOUR TURN 3.79

1. What is the total if 25% of the total is 30?
2. What is the total if 45% of the total is 360?

The percentage can be found if the total and the percentage of the total is known. If you know the total, and the
percentage of the total, first divide the part by the total. Move the decimal two places to the right and append the
symbol %. The percentage may be found using the following formula.

FORMULA

The percentage, , of that is is                .

  EXAMPLE 3.80

Finding the Percentage When the Total and Percentage of the Total Are Known
Find the percentage in the following:

 1. Total is 300, percentage of the total is 60.
 2. Total is 440, percentage of the total is 176.

     Solution
 1. The total is 300; the percentage of the total is 60. Calculating yields 0.2. Moving the decimal two places to the right

      gives 20. Appending the percentage to this number results in 20%. So, 60 is 20% of 300.
 2. The total is 440; the percentage of the total is 176. Calculating yields 0.4. Moving the decimal two places to the right

      gives 40. Appending the percentage to this number results in 40%. So, 176 is 40% of 440.

        YOUR TURN 3.80

  Find the percentage in the following:
      1. Total is 1,000, percentage of the total is 70.
      2. Total is 500, percentage of the total is 425.

Solve Problems Using Percent

In the media, in research, and in casual conversation percentages are used frequently to express proportions.
Understanding how to use percent is vital to consuming media and understanding numbers. Solving problems using
percentages comes down to identifying which of the three components of a percentage you are given, the total, the
percentage, or the percentage of the total. If you have two of those components, you can find the third using the
methods outlined previously.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3.4 · Rational Numbers 187

EXAMPLE 3.81

Percentage of Students Who Are Sleep Deprived
A study revealed that 70% of students suffer from sleep deprivation, defined to be sleeping less than 8 hours per night. If
the survey had 400 participants, how many of those participants had less than 8 hours of sleep per night?

Solution

The percentage of interest is 70%. The total number of students is 400. With that, we can find how many were in the

percentage of the total, or, how many were sleep deprived. Applying the formula from above, the number who were

sleep deprived was     ; 280 students on the study were sleep deprived.

      YOUR TURN 3.81

1. Riley has a daily calorie intake of 2,200 calories and wants to take in 20% of their calories as protein. How many
    calories of protein should be in their daily diet?

EXAMPLE 3.82

Amazon Prime Subscribers
There are 126 million users who are U.S. Amazon Prime subscribers. If there are 328.2 million residents in the United
States, what percentage of U.S. residents are Amazon Prime subscribers?

     Solution
We are asked to find the percentage. To do so, we divide the percentage of the total, which is 126 million, by the total,

which is 328.2 million. Performing this division and rounding to three decimal places yields  . The decimal is

moved to the right by two places, and a % sign is appended to the end. Doing this shows us that 38.4% of U.S. residents
are Amazon Prime subscribers.

      YOUR TURN 3.82

1. A small town has 450 registered voters. In the primaries, 54 voted. What percentage of registered voters in that
    town voted in the primaries?

EXAMPLE 3.83

Finding the Percentage When the Total and Percentage of the Total Are Known
Evander plays on the basketball team at their university and 73% of the athletes at their university receive some sort of
scholarship for attending. If they know 219 of the student-athletes receive some sort of scholarship, how many student-
athletes are at the university?

     Solution
We need to find the total number of student-athletes at Evander's university.

Step 1: Identify what we know. We know the percentage of students who receive some sort of scholarship, 73%. We also
know the number of athletes that form the part of the whole, or 219 student-athletes.

Step 2: To find the total number of student-athletes, use         , with  and  . Calculating with those values

yields              .

So, there are 300 total student-athletes at Evander's university
188 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

        YOUR TURN 3.83

  1. A store declares a deep discount of 40% for an item, which they say will save $30. What was the original price of
      the item?

Check Your Understanding

17. Identify which of the following are rational numbers.

18. Express in lowest terms.

19. Calculate  and express in lowest terms.

20. Convert 0.34 into fraction form.
21. Convert into a mixed number.

22. Calculate  and express in lowest terms.

23. Calculate                    .

24. Identify a rational number between and .

25. Convert into a mixed number.

26. Lina decides to save of her take-home pay every paycheck. Her most recent paycheck was for $882. How much
      will she save from that paycheck?

27. Determine 38% of 600.

28. A microchip factory has decided to increase its workforce by 10%. If it currently has 70 employees, how many new
      employees will the factory hire?

        SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, identify which of the following are rational numbers.
     1. 4.598
     2.
     3.

For the following exercises, reduce the fraction to lowest terms
     4.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.

For the following exercises, do the indicated conversion. If it is a repeating decimal, use the correct notation.
     9. Convert to a mixed number.

10. Convert to a mixed number.

11. Convert to an improper fraction.

12. Convert    to an improper fraction.

13. Convert to decimal form.

14. Convert to decimal form.

15. Convert to decimal form.

16. Convert to decimal form.

17. Convert 0.23 to fraction form and reduce to lowest terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.4 · Rational Numbers 189

18. Convert 3.8874 to fraction form and reduce to lowest terms.

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operations. Reduce to lowest terms.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.
    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33. Find a rational number between and

34. Find a rational number between and .

35. Find two rational numbers between and .

36. Find three rational numbers between and .

37. Convert 24% to fraction form and reduce completely.                                 say their favorite movie genre is
38. Convert 95% to fraction form and reduce completely.
39. Convert 0.23 to a percentage.
40. Convert 1.22 to a percentage.
41. Determine 30% of 250.
42. Determine 75% of 600.
43. If 25% of a group is 41 members, how many members total are in the group?
44. If 80% of the total is 60, how much is in the total?
45. 13 is what percent of 20?
46. 80 is what percent of 320?
47. Professor Donalson's history of film class has 60 students. Of those students,

      comedy. How many of the students in Professor Donalson's class name comedy as their favorite movie genre?
48. Naia's dormitory floor has 80 residents. Of those, play Fortnight for at least 15 hours per week. How many

      students on Naia's floor play Fortnight at least 15 hours per week?
49. In Tara's town there are 24,000 people. Of those, are food insecure. How many people in Tara's town are

      food insecure?
50. Roughly of air is nitrogen. If an enclosure holds 2,000 liters of air, how many liters of nitrogen should be

      expected in the enclosure?                                    mayonnaise and      apple cider vinegar. If
51. To make the dressing for coleslaw, Maddie needs to mix it with

      Maddie wants to have 8 cups of dressing, how many cups of mayonnaise and how many cups of apple cider
      vinegar does Maddie need?
52. Malika is figuring out their schedule. They wish to spend of their time sleeping, of their time studying and

     going to class, of their time at work, and of their time doing other activities, such as entertainment or

     exercising. There are 168 hours in a week. How many hours in a week will Malika spend:
      a. Sleeping?
     b. Studying and going to class?
      c. Not sleeping?

53. Roughly 20.9% of air is oxygen. How much oxygen is there in 200 liters of air?
54. 65% of college students graduate within 6 years of beginning college. A first-year cohort at a college contains

      400 students. How many are expected to graduate within 6 years?
190 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

55. A 20% discount is offered on a new laptop. How much is the discount if the new laptop originally cost $700?
56. Leya helped at a neighborhood sale and was paid 5% of the proceeds. If Leya is paid $171.25, what were the

      total proceeds from the neighborhood sale?
57. Unit Conversion. 1 kilogram (kg) is equal to 2.20462 pounds. Convert 13 kg to pounds. Round to three decimal

      places, if necessary.
58. Unit Conversion. 1 kilogram (kg) is equal to 2.20462 pounds. Convert 200 pounds to kilograms. Round to three

      decimal places, if necessary.
59. Unit Conversion. There are 12 inches in a foot, 3 feet in a yard, and 1,760 yards in a mile. Convert 10 miles to

      inches. To do so, first convert miles to yards. Next, convert the yards to feet. Last, convert the feet to inches.
60. Unit Conversion. There are 1,000 meters (m) in a kilometer (km), and 100 centimeters (cm) in a meter. Convert

      4 km to centimeters.
61. Markup. In this exercise, we introduce the concept of markup. The markup on an item is the difference

      between how much a store sells an item for and how much the store paid for the item. Suppose Wegmans (a
      northeastern U.S. grocery chain) buys cereal at $1.50 per box and sells the cereal for $2.29.
       a. Determine the markup in dollars.
       b. The markup is what percent of the original cost? Round the percentage to one decimal place.

62. In this exercise, we explore what happens when an item is marked up by a percentage, and then marked down
      using the same percentage.
      Wegmans purchases an item for $5 per unit. The markup on the item is 25%.
       a. Calculate the markup on the item, in dollars.
       b. What is the price for which Wegmans sells the item? This is the price Wegmans paid, plus the markup.
       c. Suppose Wegmans then offers a 25% discount on the sale price of the item (found in part b). In dollars,
             how much is the discount?
       d. Determine the price of the item after the discount (this is the sales price of the item minus the discount).
             Round to two decimal places.
       e. Is the new price after the markup and discount equal to the price Wegmans paid for the item? Explain.

63. Repeated Discounts. In this exercise, we explore applying more than one discount to an item.
      Suppose a store cuts the price on an item by 50%, and then offers a coupon for 25% off any sale item. We will
      find the price of the item after applying the sale price and the coupon discount.
       a. The original price was $150. After the 50% discount, what is the price of the item?
       b. The coupon is applied to the discount price. The coupon is for 25%. Find 25% of the sale price (found in
             part a).
       c. Find the price after applying the coupon (this is the value from part a minus the value from part b).
       d. The total amount saved on the item is the original price after all the discounts. Determine the total amount
             saved by subtracting the final price paid (part c) from the original price of the item.
       e. Determine the effective discount percentage, which is the total amount saved divided by the original price
             of the item.
        f. Was the effective discount percentage equal to 75%, which would be the 50% plus the 25%? Explain.

Converting Repeating Decimals to a Fraction

It was mentioned in the section that repeating decimals are rational numbers. To convert a repeating decimal to a

rational number, perform the following steps:

Step 1: Label the original number .

Step 2: Count the number of digits, , in the repeating part of the number.

Step 3: Multiply by , and label this as        .

Step 4: Determine                .

Step 5: Calculate                   . If done correctly, the repeating part of the number will cancel out.

Step 6: If the result from Step 5 has decimal digits, count the number of decimal digits in the number from Step 5.

Label this .

Step 7: Remove the decimal from the result of Step 5.

Step 8: Add zeros to the end of the number from Step 4.

Step 9: Divide the result from Step 7 by the result from Step 8. This is the fraction form of the repeating decimal.

64. Convert to fraction form.

65. Convert        to fraction form.

66. Convert        to fraction form.

67. Convert        to fraction form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                        3.5 · Irrational Numbers 191

3.5 Irrational Numbers

Figure 3.28 The Pythagoreans were a philosophical sect of ancient Greece, often associated with mathematics. (credit:
Fedor Andreevich Bronnikov (1827-1902) "Hymn of the Pythagoreans to the Rising Sun," 1877, oil on canvas/Wikimedia,
public domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Define and identify numbers that are irrational.
 2. Simplify irrational numbers and express in lowest terms.
 3. Add and subtract irrational numbers.
 4. Multiply and divide irrational numbers.
 5. Rationalize fractions with irrational denominators.

The Pythagoreans were a philosophical sect in ancient Greece. Their philosophy included reincarnation and purifying the
mind through the study and contemplation of mathematics and science. One of their principles was the cosmos is ruled
by order, specifically mathematics and music. They even held mystic beliefs about specific numbers and figures. For
example, the number 1 was associated with the mind and essence. Four represented justice, as it is the first product of
two even numbers. Most famously, though, is the association with the Pythagorean Theorem, which states that in a right
triangle, the sum of the squares of the shorter sides of the triangle (the legs) equals the square of the longer side (the
hypotenuse). Even the ancient Egyptians used this relationship, as triangles with side measures 3, 4, and 5 were often
used in surveying following the flooding of the Nile.

There is a story of a Pythagorean, Hippasus, discovering that not all numbers could be expressed as fractions. In other
words, not all numbers were rational numbers. The story ends with Hippasus, who shared this, or in some versions
discovered it, put to death by drowning for sharing this fact, that not all quantities could be expressed as the ratio of two
natural numbers.

As colorful as that story may be, it is most likely false, as there are no contemporary sources to corroborate it. But it does
seem to mark the discovery that not all quantities or measures were fractions of numbers. And so, irrational numbers
were discovered.

       VIDEO

      The Philosophy of the Pythagoreans (https://openstax.org/r/Philosophy_of_Pythagoreans)

Defining and Identifying Numbers That Are Irrational

We defined rational numbers in the last section as numbers that could be expressed as a fraction of two integers.
Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be expressed as a fraction of two integers. Recall that rational numbers
could be identified as those whose decimal representations either terminated (ended) or had a repeating pattern at
some point. So irrational numbers must be those whose decimal representations do not terminate or become a
repeating pattern.
192 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

One collection of irrational numbers is square roots of numbers that aren't perfect squares.  is the square root of the
                                                                                              . The rational number
number , denoted , if            . The number is the perfect square of the integer if

is a perfect square if both and are perfect squares.

One method of determining if an integer is a perfect square is to examine its prime factorization. If, in that factorization,
all the prime factors are raised to even powers, the integer is a perfect square. Another method is to attempt to factor
the integer into an integer squared. It is possible that you recognize the number as a perfect square (such as 4 or 9). Or,
if you have a calculator at hand, use the calculator to determine if the square root of the integer is an integer.

EXAMPLE 3.84

Identifying Perfect Squares
Determine which of the following are perfect squares.

 1. 45
 2. 81
 3.
 4.

Solution

1. The prime factorization of 45 is            . Since the 5 is not raised to an even power, 45 is not a perfect square.

2. The prime factorization of 81 is . All the prime factors are raised to even powers, so 81 is a perfect square.

3. We must determine if both the numerator and denominator of are perfect squares for the rational number to be

a perfect square. The numerator is 9, and as mentioned above, 9 is a perfect square (it is 3 squared). Now we check

the prime factorization of the denominator, 28, which is  . Since 7 is not raised to an even power, 28 is not

a perfect square. Since the denominator is not a perfect square, is not a perfect square.

4. We must determine if both the numerator and denominator of are perfect squares for the rational number to

be a perfect square. The numerator is 144. The prime factorization of 144 is                  . Since all the prime

factors of 144 are raised to even powers, 144 is a perfect square. Now we check the prime factorization of the

denominator, 400, which is                     . Since all the prime factors of 400 are raised to even powers, 400 is a

perfect square. Since the numerator and denominator of are perfect squares, is a perfect square.

      YOUR TURN 3.84

Determine which of the following are perfect squares.
    1. 36
    2. 27
    3.
    4.

        TECH CHECK

Using Desmos to Determine if a Number Is a Perfect Square
Desmos may be used to determine if a number is a perfect square by using its square root function. When Desmos is
opened, there is a tab in the lower left-hand corner of the Desmos screen. This tab opens the Desmos keypad, shown
in Figure 3.29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           3.5 · Irrational Numbers 193

                                            Figure 3.29 Desmos keyboard with square root key circles
  There you find the key for the square root, which is circled in Figure 3.29. To find the square root of a number, click the
  square root key, which begins a calculation, and then enter the value for which you want a square root. If the result is
  an integer, then the number is a perfect square.

       VIDEO
      Using Desmos to Find the Square Root of a Number (https://openstax.org/r/square_root_of_a_number)
Another collection of irrational numbers is based on the special number, pi, denoted by the Greek letter , which is the
ratio of the circumference of the diameter of the circle (Figure 3.30).

                                      Figure 3.30 Circle with radius, diameter, and circumference labeled

Any multiple or power of is an irrational number.

Any number expressed as a rational number times an irrational number is an irrational number also. When an irrational
number takes that form, we call the rational number the rational part, and the irrational number the irrational part. It
should be noted that a rational number plus, minus, multiplied by, or divided by any irrational number is an irrational
number.

EXAMPLE 3.85

Identifying Irrational Numbers
Identify which of the following numbers are irrational.

1.
2.
3.
4.

    Solution

1. 35 can be factored as  , showing that 35 is not the square of an integer or a rational number. This mean its

    square root is an irrational number.

2. Since      is a decimal with a repeating pattern, it is rational, so it is not an irrational number.

3.            . Since 121 is the square of an integer, its square root is a rational number.

4. Since is a multiple of pi, it is irrational. In this case, the rational part of the number is 4, while the irrational part is

    .
194 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

      YOUR TURN 3.85

Identify which of the following numbers are irrational.
    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.

      WHO KNEW?

Euler-Mascheroni Constant

Determining if a number is rational or irrational is not trivial. There are numbers that defied such classification for
quite a long time. One such is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. The Euler-Mascheroni constant is used in mathematics,
and is primarily associated with the natural logarithm, which is a mathematical function. The constant has been
around since around 1790. However, it was unknown if this constant was rational or irrational until 2013, at which
point it was proven to be irrational.

Simplifying Square Roots and Expressing Them in Lowest Terms

To simplify a square root means that we rewrite the square root as a rational number times the square root of a
number that has no perfect square factors. The act of changing a square root into such a form is simplifying the square
root.

The number inside the square root symbol is referred to as the radicand. So in the expression     the number is
referred to as the radicand.

Before discussing how to simplify a square root, we need to introduce a rule about square roots. The square root of a

product of numbers equals the product of the square roots of those number. Written symbolically,                       .

FORMULA

For any two numbers and ,                      .

Using this formula, we can factor an integer inside a square root into a perfect square times another integer. Then the
square root can be applied to the perfect square, leaving an integer times the square root of another integer. If the
number remaining under the square root has no perfect square factors, then we've simplified the irrational number into
lowest terms. To simplify the irrational number into lowest terms when is an integer:

Step 1: Determine the largest perfect square factor of , which we denote .

Step 2: Factor into              .

Step 3: Apply                       .

Step 4: Write in its simplified form, .

When a square root has been simplified in this manner, is referred to as the rational part of the number, and is
referred to as the irrational part.

EXAMPLE 3.86

Simplifying a Square Root              and express in lowest terms. Identify the rational and irrational parts.
Simplify the irrational number

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.5 · Irrational Numbers 195

     Solution
Begin by finding the largest perfect square that is a factor of 180. We can do this by writing out the factor pairs of 180:

Looking at the list of factors, the perfect squares are 4, 9, and 36. The largest is 36, so we factor the into               .

In the formula,  and            . Apply                  .

The simplified form of  is . In this example, the 6 is the rational part, and the is the irrational part.

      YOUR TURN 3.86                     and express in lowest terms. Identify the rational and irrational parts.
1. Simplify the irrational number

VIDEO
Simplifying Square Roots (https://openstax.org/r/Simplifying_Square_Roots)

EXAMPLE 3.87

Simplifying a Square Root           and express in lowest terms. Identify the rational and irrational parts.
Simplify the irrational number

     Solution
Begin by finding the largest perfect square that is a factor of 330. We can do this by writing out the factor pairs of 330:

Looking at the list of factors, there are no perfect squares other than 1, which means       is already expressed in

lowest terms. In this case, 1 is the rational part, and  is the irrational part. Though we could write this as               ,

but the product of 1 and any other number is just the number.

      YOUR TURN 3.87                     and express in lowest terms. Identify the rational and irrational parts.
1. Simplify the irrational number

EXAMPLE 3.88

Simplifying a Square Root                and express in lowest terms. Identify the rational and irrational parts.
Simplify the irrational number

     Solution
Begin by finding the largest perfect square that is a factor of 2,548. We can do this by writing out the factor pairs of
2,548:

Looking at the list of factors, the perfect squares are 4, 49, and 196. The largest is 196, so we factor the 2,548 into

                 . In the formula,       and             . Apply                          .

The simplified form of          is       . In this example, 14 is the rational part, and     is the irrational part.
196 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

        YOUR TURN 3.88

1. Simplify the irrational number                 .

       VIDEO

      Simplifying Square Roots (https://openstax.org/r/Simplifying_Square_Roots)

Adding and Subtracting Irrational Numbers

Just like any other number we've worked with, irrational numbers can be added or subtracted. When working with a
calculator, enter the operation and a decimal representation will be given. However, there are times when two irrational
numbers may be added or subtracted without the calculator. This can happen only when the irrational parts of the
irrational numbers are the same.

To add or subtract two irrational numbers that have the same irrational part, add or subtract the rational parts of the
numbers, and then multiply that by the common irrational part.

FORMULA

Let our first irrational number be             , where is the rational and the irrational parts.
                                                , where is the rational and the irrational parts.
Let the other irrational number be

Then                             .

  EXAMPLE 3.89

Subtracting Irrational Numbers with Similar Irrational Parts
If possible, subtract the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

     Solution
Since these two irrational numbers have the same irrational part, , we can subtract without using a calculator. The
rational part of the first number is 3. The rational part of the second number is 8. Using the formula yields

                                                      .

      YOUR TURN 3.89
1. If possible, subtract the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

  EXAMPLE 3.90

Adding Irrational Numbers with Similar Irrational Parts
If possible, add the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

Solution

Since these two irrational numbers have the same irrational part, , the addition can be performed without using a

calculator. The rational part of the first number is 35. The rational part of the second number is 17. Using the formula

yields                                         .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         3.5 · Irrational Numbers 197

      YOUR TURN 3.90
1. If possible, add the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

  EXAMPLE 3.91
Subtracting Irrational Numbers with Different Irrational Parts
If possible, subtract the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

     Solution
The two numbers being subtracted do not have the same irrational part, so the operation cannot be performed.

      YOUR TURN 3.91
1. If possible, subtract the following irrational numbers without using a calculator. If this is not possible, state why.

Multiplying and Dividing Irrational Numbers

Just like any other number that we've worked with, irrational numbers can be multiplied or divided. When working with a
calculator, enter the operation and a decimal representation will be given. Sometimes, though, you may want to retain
the form of the irrational number as a rational part times an irrational part. The process is similar to adding and
subtracting irrational numbers when they are in this form. We do not need the irrational parts to match. Even though
they need not match, they do need to be similar, such as both irrational parts are square roots, or both irrational parts
are multiples of pi. Also, if the irrational parts are square roots, we may need to reduce the resulting square root to
lowest terms.

When multiplying two square roots, use the following formula. It is the same formula presented during the discussion of
simplifying square roots.

  FORMULA

For any two positive numbers and ,                          .

When dividing two square roots, use the following formula.
  FORMULA

For any two positive numbers and , with not equal to 0,        .

To multiply or divide irrational numbers with similar irrational parts, do the following:
Step 1: Multiply or divide the rational parts.
Step 2: If necessary, reduce the result of Step 1 to lowest terms. This becomes the rational part of the answer.
Step 3: Multiply or divide the irrational parts.
Step 4: If necessary, reduce the result from Step 3 to lowest terms. This becomes the irrational part of the answer.
Step 5: The result is the product of the rational and irrational parts.
198 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.92

Dividing Irrational Numbers with Similar Irrational Parts
Perform the following operations without a calculator. Simplify if possible.

1.

2.            .

    Solution

1. In this division problem,                   , notice that the irrational parts of these numbers are similar. They are both

    square roots, so follow the steps given above.
    Step 1: Divide the rational parts.

    Step 2: If necessary, reduce the result of Step 1 to lowest terms. The 3 and 8 have no common factors, so is
    already in lowest terms.

    Step 3: Divide the irrational parts.

    Step 4: If necessary, reduce the result from Step 3 to lowest terms. The radicand can be reduced, which yields .

    Step 5: The result is the product of the rational and irrational parts, which is  .

2. In this division problem,                   , notice that the irrational parts of these numbers are similar. They are

    both square roots, so follow the steps given above.
    Step 1: Divide the rational parts.

    Step 2: If necessary, reduce the result of Step 1 to lowest terms. This rational number is expressed as a decimal so
    will not be reduced.

    Step 3: Divide the irrational parts.

    Step 4: If necessary, reduce the result from Step 3 to lowest terms. The radicand can be reduced, which yields
                                                  .

    Step 5: The result is the product of the rational and irrational parts, which is     .

        YOUR TURN 3.92

  Perform the following operations without a calculator. Simplify if possible.
      1.
      2.

  EXAMPLE 3.93
Multiplying Irrational Numbers with Similar Irrational Parts
Perform the following operations without a calculator. Simplify if possible.
 1.
 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  3.5 · Irrational Numbers 199

Solution

1. In this multiplication problem,                 , notice that the irrational parts of these numbers are similar.

They are both square roots. Follow the process above.
Step 1: Multiply the rational parts.

Step 2: If necessary, reduce the result of Step 1 to lowest terms. This rational number is expressed as a decimal and
will not be reduced.

Step 3: Multiply the irrational parts.

Step 4: If necessary, reduce the result from Step 3 to lowest terms. The radicand is 36, which is the square of 6. The

irrational part reduces to            .

Step 5: The result is the product of the rational and irrational parts, which is               .

Notice that sometimes multiplying or dividing irrational numbers can result in a rational number.

2. In this multiplication problem,       , notice that the irrational parts of these numbers are the same, . Follow
     the process above.

Step 1: Multiply the rational parts.

Step 2: If necessary, reduce the result of Step 1 to lowest terms. That result is an integer.

Step 3: Multiply the irrational parts.

Step 4: If necessary, reduce the result from Step 3 to lowest terms. This cannot be reduced.

Step 5: The result is the product of the rational and irrational parts, which is  .

      YOUR TURN 3.93

Perform the following operations without a calculator. Simplify if possible.
    1.
    2.

Rationalizing Fractions with Irrational Denominators

Fractions often represent that some amount is being equally divided into some number of parts. But to conceptualize a
fraction in that manner, the denominator needs to be an integer. An irrational number in the denominator interferes with
that interpretation of a fraction. Fractions that have denominators that are just the square root of an integer can be
altered into fractions with integer denominators using a process called rationalizing the denominator. The process

relies on the following property of square roots:      and the following property of fractions:    for any

non-zero number .

Using these two properties, when a fraction has a square root in the denominator, we can eliminate that square root.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by that square root from the denominator,                  . Then apply

          to the denominator, yielding                 . Notice that there is no longer a square root in the

denominator, which allows for interpreting the fraction as dividing a whole into equal parts.

VIDEO

Rationalizing the Denominator (https://openstax.org/r/Rationalizing_Denominator)
200 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

  EXAMPLE 3.94

Rationalizing the Denominator
Rationalize the denominator of the following:
 1.

2.

    Solution                                   . In order to rationalize the denominator of  , we need to multiply the
1. The square root in the denominator is

    numerator and denominator by and simplify.

     The square root is in simplified form, so the final answer is .
2. The square root in the denominator is .

    Step 1: In order to rationalize the denominator of     , we need to multiply the numerator and denominator by

    and simplify.

    Step 2: The 60 under the square root can be factored into the following factor pairs:

    Step 3: The largest square factor of 60 is 4, so we simplify the  in the numerator into  . We also cancel any
    common factors.

    This is completely simplified.

      YOUR TURN 3.94

Rationalize the denominator of the following:
    1.

    2.

There are occasions when the denominator is irrational but is the sum of two numbers where one or both involve square

roots. For instance,             . The process used earlier required that the denominator was the square root of a number

and would not work here. However, this type of denominator can be rationalized. In order to rationalize such a

denominator, we will multiply the numerator and denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the denominator. The

conjugate of  is . We say that                 and      are conjugate numbers.

So, the conjugate of             is just       . But why is this of interest? The reason is because it leads to the

difference of squares formula, which is used to factor the difference of two squares. Or, for our purposes, in reverse it

allows us to eliminate a square root.

FORMULA

For any two numbers, and ,                              .

Looking at that formula, you should see that the two factors on the right-hand side of the equals sign are conjugates of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.5 · Irrational Numbers 201

one another. So, for our purposes, we're interested in                         . This tells us that when we multiply

by its conjugate, we get squared minus squared, or          . But how is this useful? Let's return to the fraction above,

. The denominator is               . Its conjugate is       . According to the formula, and letting      and          ,

we see that                                          . But     is just 3. That means the product is      or 13. This no

longer has a square root. We use this to rationalize the denominator.
We will also need the distributive property of numbers.

FORMULA

For any three numbers , , and ,                             . This is called the distributive property.

EXAMPLE 3.95

Rationalizing the Denominator Using Conjugates

Rationalize the denominator of        .

     Solution
Step 1: We recognize that the denominator is the sum of two numbers where one or both involve square roots. This
means the conjugate can be used to remove the square root from the denominator.

Step 2: To do so, we multiply the numerator and the denominator each by the conjugate of the denominator. Since the

denominator is  , the conjugate we will use is              .

Step 3: The conjugate is multiplied by the numerator and the denominator.

Step 4: Remembering how a number times its conjugate works, this becomes
                                                   .

Step 5: In the numerator, we apply the distributive property. Using it yields
                                                          .

Step 6: Notice that the denominator no longer contains a square root. It has been rationalized. If desired, this can then

be written as a rational number minus an irrational number, by recalling that     .

Applying that to the answer, we have                                   .

Step 7: With a bit of cancellation, this reduces to                            .

YOUR TURN 3.95

1. Rationalize the denominator of        .

VIDEO
Rationalizing the Denominator (https://openstax.org/r/Rationalizing_Denominator)
202 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Check Your Understanding

29. Simplify the following square root:        .

30. Perform the following operation:              .

31. Perform the following operation:              .

32. Rationalize the denominator of the following: .

      SECTION 3.5 EXERCISES

1. Identify which of the following numbers are irrational:
             , 4.33, ,

2. Identify which of the following numbers are irrational:

,  ,  ,

For the following exercises, simplify the square root by expressing it in lowest terms.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.

For the following exercises, perform the arithmetic operations without a calculator, if possible. If it is not possible, state
why.

    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.

    24.

    25.

    26.

For the following exercises, rationalize the denominators of the fractions, and then simplify.
    27.

    28.

    29.

    30.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           3.6 · Real Numbers 203

31.

32.

33. Determine the conjugate of  .

34. Determine the conjugate of        .

35. Determine the conjugate of     .

36. Determine the conjugate of           .

37. Find the product of         and its conjugate.

38. Find the product of         and its conjugate.

For the following exercises, rationalize the denominator of the fraction, and then simplify the fraction.
    39.

40.

41.

42.

3.6 Real Numbers

                         Figure 3.31 Quick mental math involves using the known properties of real numbers.

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Define and identify numbers that are real numbers.
 2. Identify subsets of the real numbers.
 3. Recognize properties of real numbers.

Have you ever been impressed by the speed at which someone can do math in their head? Most of us at one time or
another have witnessed a person speed through mental math, an impressive feat that often bests calculators. One such
person is Neelkantha Bhanu Prakash. As of September 20, 2020, he is considered the world's fastest human calculator.
He currently holds four world records. How does someone do that, though? Have they memorized lots of arithmetic
facts? Are they simply brilliant?

The answer isn't simple so much as it is about knowledge. Real numbers behave in some very regular ways, following
rules that can be learned. In this section, those rules are explored.

Watch the video of Arthur Benjamin's TED Talk to learn about another mathematician with remarkable mental abilities.

       VIDEO

      Arthur Benjamin TED Talk, Faster Than a Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/
      Arthur_Benjamin_TED_talk,_Faster_than_a_Calculator)
204 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Defining and Identifying Real Numbers

Real numbers are the rational and irrational numbers combined. The real numbers represent the collection of all
physical distances that exist, along with 0 and the negatives of those physical distances. For example, if you take a
measure of three units, and divide that distance into eight (8) equal lengths, the distance you have formed is units.

Also, if you draw a right triangle (a triangle with one angle equal to 90 degrees) with one side length of 1, and the other

side length of 3, the long side of the triangle will have length  units, as shown in Figure 3.32.

                                               Figure 3.32 Right triangle

Of course, if we name something the real numbers, there must be numbers that aren't real. Otherwise, they'd just be

called the numbers. One such not real number, one that cannot be a length, is  . It is part of a collection of numbers

called the complex numbers, it is denoted with the letter . As an extension, the square root of any negative number is

not a real number, but instead a complex number.

To determine if a number is real, check to see if there are any negatives under a square root or any  . If there are any
present, the number is not real.

EXAMPLE 3.96

Identifying Real Numbers
Determine if each of the following are real numbers:

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1.  is a real number, as there are no negatives under the square roots, nor is there any factor of .

2.            is a rational number, and so it is a real number.

3.            is not a real number, as there is a negative number under the square root.

        YOUR TURN 3.96

  Determine if each of the following are real numbers:
      1.
      2.
      3.

Identifying Subsets of Real Numbers

The real numbers were built out of pieces, including integers, rational numbers, and irrational numbers. As such, the real
numbers have named subsets, as shown in the table below.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      3.6 · Real Numbers 205

    Set Name         Set                                                           Set Description
                  Symbol                                                       The counting numbers
      Natural
    Numbers                                                               The counting numbers and 0
Whole Numbers                                                   The natural numbers, their negatives, and 0
     Integers        
                                                                                Fractions of integers
    Rational      
                                                       Numbers that cannot be written as a fraction of integers
    Numbers
                                     The union of the rational and irrational numbers, all possible physical lengths, and
    Irrational                                                                      their negatives

    Numbers

    Real Numbers  

When we categorize numbers using these sets, we use the smallest set that they belong to. For instance, -7 is an integer,
and a rational number, and a real number. The smallest set to which -7 belongs is integer, so we'd say it belongs to the
integers.

We can also represent the relationships between the different sets of real numbers using set notation. All natural

numbers are integers, but there are integers that are not natural numbers, so   . Similarly, every integer is a
rational number, but there are rational numbers that are not integers, so   . The same is true of the rational
numbers and the real numbers, so   .

There is no agreed-upon symbol for the irrational numbers. If we represent the irrationals as the set , we should note

that the following are true:          and               . Recall that this means the irrationals are the complement of the

rational numbers in the universal set of real numbers.

EXAMPLE 3.97

Categorizing Numbers
Identify all subsets of the real numbers to which the following real numbers belong:

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. is a natural number, integer, and rational number.

2.            is a rational number.

3.  is an irrational number.

      YOUR TURN 3.97

Identify all subsets of the real numbers to which the following real numbers belong:
    1.
    2.
    3.
206 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

         EXAMPLE 3.98
       Categorizing Numbers within a Venn Diagram
       Place the following numbers correctly in the Venn diagram (Figure 3.33).

                                 Figure 3.33

Solution

Since     is irrational, it belongs in the real numbers, but outside the rational numbers (Figure 3.34).

                                                                             Figure 3.34
Since -10 is an integer, it belongs in the integers but outside the natural numbers (Figure 3.35).

Since                                                               Figure 3.35
       is a rational number, it belongs in the rational numbers but not in the integers (Figure 3.36).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        3.6 · Real Numbers 207

                                                                             Figure 3.36
Since 41 is a natural number, it belongs in the natural numbers circle (Figure 3.37).

Since                                                                  Figure 3.37
       is a rational number, it belongs in the rational numbers but not in the integers (Figure 3.38).

Since                                                                  Figure 3.38
       is irrational, it belongs in the real numbers, but outside the rational numbers (Figure 3.39).

                                                                           Figure 3.39

      YOUR TURN 3.98
1. Place the following numbers correctly into the Venn diagram.
208 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

VIDEO
Identifying Sets of Real Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Sets_of_Real_Numbers)

Recognizing Properties of Real Numbers

The real numbers behave in very regular ways. These behaviors are called the properties of the real numbers. Knowing
these properties helps when evaluating formulas, working with equations, or performing algebra. Being familiar with
these properties is helpful in all settings where numbers are used and manipulated. For example, when multiplying

                , you could multiply the 4 and 25 first. If you know that product is 100, it makes the multiplication easier.

The table below is a partial list of properties of real numbers.

Property                                       Example                          In Words

Distributive property                                   Multiplication distributes across addition

Commutative property of addition                        Numbers can be added in any order

Commutative property of                                 Numbers can be multiplied in any order
        multiplication

Associative property of addition                        Doesn't matter which pair of numbers is added
                                                                                      first
      Associative property of
            multiplication                                  Doesn't matter which pair of numbers is
                                                                               multiplied first

Additive identity property                              Any number plus 0 is the number

Multiplicative identity property                        Any number times one is the number

Additive inverse property                               Every number plus its negative is 0

Multiplicative inverse property                         Every non-zero number times its reciprocal is 1
                   , provided

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   3.6 · Real Numbers 209

The names of the properties are suggestive. The commutative properties, for example, suggest commuting, or
moving. Associative properties suggest which items are associated with others, or if order matters in the computation.
The distributive property addresses how a number is distributed across parentheses.

  EXAMPLE 3.99

Identifying Properties of Real Numbers
In each of the following, identify which property of the real numbers is being applied.
 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. Here, the pair of numbers that is added first is switched. This is the associative property of addition.
 2. Here, a number is multiplied by its reciprocal, resulting in 1. This is the multiplicative inverse property.
 3. Here, the order in which numbers are added is switched. This is the commutative property of addition.

      YOUR TURN 3.99

In each of the following, identify which property of the real numbers is being applied.
    1.
    2.

Using these properties to perform arithmetic quickly relies on spotting easy numbers to work with. Look for numbers
that add to a multiple of 10, or multiply to a multiple of 10 or 100.

EXAMPLE 3.100

Using Properties of Real Numbers in Calculations
Use properties of the real numbers and mental math to calculate the following:

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. Notice that  , so that becomes the multiplication to do first. Use the commutative property of

    multiplication to change the order of the numbers being multiplied.

2. Notice that  , so that becomes the addition to do first. Use the commutative property of addition to

    change the order in which the numbers are added.

3. Notice that  . Using that, the problem can be changed to                     . That, however, doesn't look easy at all.

    But         . Using the distributive property, we rewrite and expand this as

                                                      . The last step is subtraction, so the final answer is

    1,584. So, multiplying by 99 is the same as multiplying by 100, and then subtracting the other number once.

      YOUR TURN 3.100
1. Use properties of real numbers and mental math to calculate the following:
210 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Check Your Understanding

33. Which of the following are real numbers:                       ?

34. Indicate which of the sets are subsets of the others: , , , .

35. Which property is demonstrated here:                              ?

        SECTION 3.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, identify each number as a natural number, an integer, a rational number, or a real number.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.

For the following exercises, correctly place the numbers in the Venn diagram.

     9.
    10.

For the following exercises, identify the property of real numbers that is being illustrated.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.
    25.
    26.

    27.
    28.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               3.7 · Clock Arithmetic 211

For the following exercises, use properties of real numbers and mental math to calculate the expression.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.
    34.
    35.
    36.
    37.
    38.
    39.
    40.

3.7 Clock Arithmetic

Figure 3.40 If a credit card number is entered incorrectly, error checking algorithms will often catch the mistake. (credit:
modification of work "Senior couple at home checking finance on credit card from above" by Nenad Stojkovic/Flickr, CC
BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Add, subtract, and multiply using clock arithmetic.
 2. Apply clock arithmetic to calculate real-world applications.
Online shopping requires you to enter your credit card number, which is then sent electronically to the vendor. Using an
ATM involves sliding your bank card into a reader, which then reads, sends, and verifies your card. Swiping or tapping for
a purchase in a brick-and-mortar store is how your card sends its information to the machine, which is then
communicated to the store's computer and your credit card company. This information is read, recorded, and
transferred many times. Each instance provides one more opportunity for error to creep into the process, a misrecorded
digit, transposed digits, or missing digits. Fortunately, these card numbers have a built-in error checking system that
relies on modular arithmetic, which is often referred to as clock arithmetic. In this section, we explore clock, or modular,
arithmetic.

       VIDEO
      Determining the Day of the Week for Any Date in History (https://openstax.org/r/
      Determining_the_Day_of_the_Week_for_Any_Date_in_History)

Adding, Subtracting, and Multiplying Using Clock Arithmetic

When we do arithmetic, numbers can become larger and larger. But when we work with time, specifically with clocks, the
numbers cycle back on themselves. It will never be 49 o'clock. Once 12 o'clock is reached, we go back to 1 and repeat the
numbers. If it's 11 AM and someone says, "See you in four hours," you know that 11 AM plus 4 hours is 3 PM, not 15 AM
(ignoring military time for now). Math worked on the clock, where numbers restart after passing 12, is called clock
arithmetic.
212 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

       Clock arithmetic hinges on the number 12. Each cycle of 12 hours returns to the original time (Figure 3.41). Imagine
       going around the clock one full time. Twelve hours pass, but the time is the same. So, if it is 3:00, 14 hours later and two
       hours later both read the same on the clock, 5:00. Adding 14 hours and adding 2 hours are identical. As is adding 26
       hours. And adding 38 hours.

Figure 3.41 Clock showing 3:00 with arrow going around the clock one full time, or 12 hours

What do 2, 14, 26, and 38 have in common in relation to 12? When they are divided by 12, they each have a remainder of
2. That's the key. When you add a number of hours to a specific time on the clock, first divide the number of hours being
added by 12 and determine the remainder. Add that remainder to the time on the clock to know what time it will be.

A good visualization is to wrap a number line around the clock, with the 0 at the starting time. Then each time 12 on the
number line passes, the number line passes the starting spot on the clock. This is referred to as modulo 12 arithmetic.
Even though the process says to divide the number being added by 12, first perform the addition; the result will be the
same if you add the numbers first, and then divide by 12 and determine the remainder.

In general terms, let be a positive integer. Then modulo 12, written ( mod 12), is the remainder when is divided by

12. If that remainder is , we would write  (mod 12).

Caution: 12 mod 12 is 0. So, if a mod 12 problem ends at 0, that would be 12 on the clock.

  EXAMPLE 3.101

Determining the Value of a Number modulo 12
Find the value of the following numbers modulo 12:

 1. 34
 2. 539
 3. 156

     Solution
To determine the value of a number modulo 12, divide the number by 12 and record the remainder.

 1. To find the value 34 modulo 12:
      Step 1: Determine the remainder when 34 is divided by 12 using long division. The largest multiple of 12 that is less
      than or equal to 34 is 24, which is the product of 12 and 2.

Step 2: Performing the subtraction yields 10.

     Since that subtraction resulted in a number less than 12, that is the remainder, 10. The value of 34 modulo 12 is 10,
     or 34 = 10 (mod 12).

2. To find the value 539 modulo 12:
     Step 1: Determine the remainder when 539 is divided by 12 using long division. We first look to the first two digits of
     539, 53. The largest multiple of 12 that is less than or equal to 53 is 48, which is the product of 12 and 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.7 · Clock Arithmetic 213

Step 2: Performing the subtraction results in 5.

Step 3: Now, the 9 is brought down.

Step 4: The largest multiple of 12 that is less than or equal to 59 is once more 48 itself, which is  .

Step 5: Finishing the process, the 48 is subtracted from the 59, yielding 11.

     We've used all the digits of 539, and the last subtraction resulted in a number less than 12, so that number, 11, is the
     remainder. The value of 539 modulo 12 is 11, or, 539 = 11 (mod 12).
3. To find the value 156 modulo 12:
     Step 1: Determine the remainder when 156 is divided by 12 using long division. We first look to the first two digits of
     156, 15. The largest multiple of 12 that is less than or equal to 15 is 12 itself, which is the product of 12 and 1.

     Step 2: Performing the subtraction results in 3.

Step 3: Now, the 6 is brought down.

Step 4: The largest multiple of 12 that is less than or equal to 36 is 36 itself, which is  .
214 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

             Step 5: Finishing the process, the 36 is subtracted from the 36, yielding 0.

       We've used all the digits of 156, and the last subtraction resulted in a number less than 12, so that number, 0, is the
       remainder. The value of 156 modulo 12 is 0, or, 156 = 0 (mod 12).
       We should note here that, had we been speaking of time, the 0 would be interpreted as 12:00.

               YOUR TURN 3.101
         Find the value of the following numbers modulo 12.

             1. 93
             2. 387

                 TECH CHECK
         Using Desmos to Determine the Value of a Number module 12
         Desmos may be used to determine the value of a number modulo 12. It is flexible enough to find the value of a
         number modulo of any other integer you want. To determine the value of modulo 12, type mod( ,12) into Desmos.
         The result will be displayed immediately. This can be used to find 539 modulo 12, as shown in the Figure 3.42.

                                                                  Figure 3.42 Display of 539 modulo 12
         Clock arithmetic is modulo 12 arithmetic but applied to time. As time is divided into 12 hours that repeat a cycle, we
         use modulo 12 for clock arithmetic.

              VIDEO
             Clock Arithmetic (https://openstax.org/r/Clock_Arithmetic)
         EXAMPLE 3.102
       Adding with Clock Arithmetic
       If it's 3:00, what time will it be in 89 hours?
            Solution
       To find that future time, we may determine the value of 89 (mod 12), either by long division or by using a calculator, such
       as Desmos. Then add the result to 3:00. Entering mod(89,12) in Desmos results in 5. Adding 5 hours, which was 89

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               3.7 · Clock Arithmetic 215

(mod12), to 3:00 results in 8:00.

        YOUR TURN 3.102

  1. If it is 9:00 now, what time will it be in 43 hours?

Subtracting time on the clock works in much the same way as addition. Find the value of the number of hours being
subtracted modulo 12, then subtract that from the original time.

  EXAMPLE 3.103
Subtracting with Clock Arithmetic
If it is 4:00 now, what time was it 67 hours ago?

     Solution
To find that past time, we may determine the value of 67 (mod 12), either by long division or by using a calculator, such
as Desmos. Then subtract the result to 4:00. Entering mod(67,12) in Desmos results in 7. Subtracting 7 hours from 4:00
results in 3:00. We know, though, that time is not represented with negative times. This value, 3:00, indicates three
hours before 12:00, which is 9:00. So, 67 hours before 4:00 was 9:00. We see this in the Figure 3.43.

               Figure 3.43 Clock showing 7 hours subtracted from 4:00

      YOUR TURN 3.103
1. If it is 7:00 now, what time was it 34 hours ago?

Recall that clock arithmetic was referred to as modulo 12 arithmetic. Multiplying in modulo 12 also relies on the
remainder when dividing by 12. To multiply modulo 12 is just to multiply the two numbers, and then determine the
remainder when divided by 12.

EXAMPLE 3.104

Multiplying modulo 12
What is the product of 11 and 45 modulo 12?

Solution

We begin by multiplying 11 and 45, which is 495. Next, we find 495 modulo 12, either by dividing the result by 12 to

determine the remainder, or by using a calculator. Entering mod(495,12) in Desmos yields 3. Had long division been

used, the remainder would be 3. So             modulo 12.

      YOUR TURN 3.104
1. What is the product of 4 and 19 modulo 12?
216 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    Calculating Real-World Applications with Clock Arithmetic

         EXAMPLE 3.105

       Applying Clock Arithmetic
       Suppose it is 3:00, and you decide to check your email every 5 hours. What time will it be when you check your email the
       ninth time?

            Solution
       If you check your email every 5 hours nine times, that ninth check will occur 45 hours after 3:00, which is an addition of
       45 hours to 3:00. So, we find 45 modulo 12, which is 9. Nine hours after 3:00 is 12:00. It will be 12:00 when you check
       your email the ninth time.

      YOUR TURN 3.105

1. You have agreed to text your friend every 3 hours while driving across the country. You began your trip at 8 AM.
    What time will it be when you text your friend the 15th time?

Clock arithmetic processes can be applied to days of the week. Every 7 days the day of the week repeats, much like every

12 hours the time on the clock repeats. The only difference will be that we work with remainders after dividing by 7. In

technical terms, this is referred to as modulo 7. More generally, let be a positive integer. Then modulo 7, written

mod 7, is the remainder when is divided by 7. If that value is , we may write  (mod 7).

EXAMPLE 3.106

Applying Clock Arithmetic to Days of the Week
Your family has a cat, and no one wants to empty the litter box. However, it has to be done daily. The six of you agree to
take turns, so everyone has to empty the litter box every 6 days. You empty the box on a Thursday. What day will you
empty the box for the 10th time?

     Solution
The first time you emptied the litter box was on a Thursday. So,the 10th time you empty the litter box will be 9 times
later (you've already had your first turn, so 9 turns left!). This will happen 54 (9 times 6) days later. Finding the value of 54
modulo 7, using division to determine the remainder or using a calculator to find the value of 54 modulo 7 gives the
answer 5. Five days after a Thursday is Tuesday.

        YOUR TURN 3.106

  1. Your family shares the cooking duties in the home. You've agreed to prepare the meal every 5 days. The last time
      you prepared dinner was a Tuesday. What day of the week will it be after you've prepared the meals 20 more
      times?

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, use clock arithmetic to perform the following:
    36.
    37.
    38.

39. Calene calls her mother every fourth day. She calls on a Monday. What day of the week will it be on Calene's eighth
      time calling after that?

        SECTION 3.7 EXERCISES

 1. Explain what modulo 12 means.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               3.7 · Clock Arithmetic 217

 2. Explain what modulo 7 means.

 3. What is 75 modulo 12?

 4. What is 139 modulo 12?

 5. What is 38 modulo 7?

 6. What is 83 modulo 7?

For the following exercises, use clock arithmetic (mod 12), to perform the indicated calculation.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17. It is 8:00. What time will it be in 70 hours?
    18. It is a Thursday. What day of the week will it be in 100 days?
    19. It is Monday. What day of the week will it be in 58 days?
    20. It is 3:00. What time of the day will it be in 150 hours?
    21. It is 6:00. What time was it 34 hours ago?
    22. It is 2:00. What time was it 100 hours ago?
    23. A trucker passes through Kokomo, Indiana, once every 9 days. They come through Kokomo on a Wednesday.
          What day of the week will the driver pass through Kokomo after 8 more visits?
    24. Jason checks his email every 5 hours. He checks it at 6 PM one day. What time of the day will it be when he
          checks his mail the 50th time after that 6 PM check?
    25. Mickey gets a new prescription of a drug that she needs to take every day. The prescription is for 250 days. She
          takes the first pill of the new bottle on a Friday. What day of the week will her prescription run out?
    26. Zainab visits the nursing home every 5 days. She visits on a Sunday. What day of the week will it be when she
          visits it for the 7th time after that?
    27. Micaela has to check in with her boss every 14 hours. If she checks in at 3:00, what time will it be when she
          checks in the 10th time after that?
    28. Tracy has an alarm set for every 4 hours. It goes off at 3:00. What time will it be when the alarm goes off the
          20th time after that?
    29. Dejan must check his blood sugar every 5 hours. He checks his blood sugar at 4:00. What time will it be when
          Dejan checks their his sugar the 40th time after that?
    30. Latanjana is in the hospital, where her blood pressure is checked every 3 hours. If her blood pressure is
          checked at 5:00, what time will it be when her blood pressure is checked the 13th time after that?

Months come in twelves, just as hours do. This means that months can be calculated using modulo 12, just like hours.
For the following exercises, calculate what month it will be for each exercise.

    31. Micaela works for a sprinkler maintenance company and runs a routine check on the Harris's sprinkler system
          every third month. If Micaela checks the system in an April, what month will it be when Micaela returns to the
          Harris's for the 11th time after that?

    32. Dana runs a half marathon every 5 months. She runs one in a May. What month will it be when she runs her 8th
          marathon after that?
218 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    3.8 Exponents

Figure 3.44 Astronomical distances are written using exponents. (credit: "Our Solar System (Artist's Concept)" by NASA/
Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Caltech/Public Domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Apply the rules of exponents to simplifying expressions.

Sometimes, we look for shorthand when writing or expressing something that simply takes too long. The use of LOL and
tl;dr. This shorthand only works if everyone reading the shorthand knows what it stands for. Using exponents is a similar
instance. Writing out a long string of a number times itself over and over takes too much time, and eventually one would
forget how many of the value has been written or read. For example,

                                                                                                      . There has to be a shorter and more efficient
way to write 8 times itself 1, 2, 3....hmmmm, 19 times.

And that's the role that exponents play in mathematics. They are shorthand for multiplying a number by itself a number
of times. Without it, calculations would become a mess and we'd have to write a lot more.

Applying the Rules of Exponents to Simplify Expressions

Squaring a number is multiplying it by itself, and has that name because it is the area of a square with that side length.
Cubing a number is finding the volume of a cube with that length of sides. That's why we refer to as five squared, or

      as ten cubed. Exponents represent that multiplication.

Let's remind ourselves of the terminology associated with exponents and what exponents represent. Suppose you want

to multiply a number, let's label that number , by itself some number of times. Let's label the number of times . We

denote that as . We say raised to the th power. When we write or see , we call the 7 the base and we call 5 the

exponent. What it represents is 7 multiplied by itself 5 times. This means exponents are used as a shorthand for

repeated multiplications, where we write                    . We would write and say seven to the fifth power.

      VIDEO

      Exponential Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Exponential_Notation)

The definitions of base and exponent make it possible to understand the exponent rules.

Product Rule for Exponents

The first rule we examine is the product rule,  . This rule means that when we multiply a base raised to a

power times the same base to another power, the result is the base raised to the sum of the powers. To demonstrate,

consider     . If we apply the product rule to that we get                . This can be tested by looking at the

multiplications that are represented. The is 9 times itself 3 times, while is 9 times itself 5 times. Substituting those

into         we see                                         , which is what the formula told us would happen.

      Caution: The product rule only applies when the bases are the same. If the bases are different, we do not apply this
      rule.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3.8 · Exponents 219

FORMULA

If a number, , raised to a power, , is then multiplied by raised to another power, , the result is               .

  EXAMPLE 3.107

Using the Product Rule for Exponents
If possible, use the product rule to simplify the following:
 1.
 2.

     Solution
 1. We can apply the product rule to simplify the expression because the bases are the same and we are multiplying.

 2. Since the bases are not the same (one is 5, the other 8), this cannot be simplified using the product rule for
      exponents.

      YOUR TURN 3.107

If possible, use the product rule to simplify the following:
    1.
    2.

These rules can be applied to unknowns too.

EXAMPLE 3.108

Using the Product Rule for Exponents of Unknowns

Use the product rule to simplify     .

     Solution
The bases are the same, and we are multiplying, so we apply the multiplication rule to simplify the expression.

YOUR TURN 3.108

1. Use the product rule to simplify     .

Quotient Rule for Exponents

The next rule we examine is the quotient, or division, rule.

  FORMULA

When a number, , raised to a power, , is divided by raised to another power, , then the result is                   .

This rule means that when we divide a base raised to a power by the same base to another power, the result is the base

raised to the difference of the powers. To demonstrate, consider  . If we apply the quotient rule to that, we get

               . This can be tested by looking at the division that is represented. Remember,       is 14 multiplied
220 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

to itself 13 times, while is 14 multiplied to itself 6 times. Substituting those into  gives the following:

We see here that there are a LOT of fours to be divided out.

What remains is 4 to the 7th power,                             .

All of the work above confirmed what the formula told us would be the result.

Caution: The quotient rule only applies when the bases are the same. If the bases are different, we do not apply this
rule.

  EXAMPLE 3.109

Using the Quotient Rule for Exponents
Use the quotient rule to simplify .

     Solution
We can apply the quotient rule to simplify the expression since the bases are the same and we are dividing.

        YOUR TURN 3.109

  1. Use the quotient rule to simplify .

       VIDEO
      Product and Quotient Rule for Exponents (https://openstax.org/r/Product_and_Quotient_Rule_for_Exponents)
A natural consequence of the quotient rule is what it means to raise a non-zero number to the zeroth power. Let's look at
the simplification when the exponents are equal.

We know that a number divided by itself is 1, so     . From that is must be that       . This provides the rule

for a number raised to the power 0:            .

FORMULA

If you have a non-zero number , then              .

Distributive Rule for Exponents

The next rule we look to is a distributive rule for exponents.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             3.8 · Exponents 221

FORMULA

If you have a product,  , and raise it to an exponent, , then                      .

This means that when we have two numbers multiplied together, and that is raised to a power, it is the same as raising

each of the numbers to the same power first, then multiplying. For example,              . This can be explained

using the definition of exponents and multiplying all the factors.

We may change the order in which numbers are multiplied. This is the commutative property of the real numbers. This

can be written as                             . Using exponents, that shortens to     .

This also works in the other direction,                   . Read this way, if we have one base raised to an exponent, and

another base raised to the same exponent, we can multiply the bases and raise that product to the shared exponent. For

instance,                                .

Caution: The exponent distributive rule,                        , only works if the exponents are the same.

EXAMPLE 3.110

Using the Distributive Rule for Exponents

Use the exponent distributive rule to expand           .

Solution

Applying the distributive rule to the product, we get               .

YOUR TURN 3.110

1. Use the exponent distributive rule to expand              .

EXAMPLE 3.111

Using the Distributive Rule for Exponents

Use the exponent distributive rule to expand           .

Solution

Applying the distributive rule to the product, we get                  .

YOUR TURN 3.111

1. Use the exponent distributive rule to expand           .

This distribution also works for quotients. A fraction raised to an exponent equals the numerator raised to the exponent

divided by the denominator raised to the exponent. For example,              . Demonstrating this is similar to the

previous rule.

FORMULA

When you have a fraction, , raised to an exponent, , then           .
222 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.112

Using the Distributive Rule for Exponents with Fractions
Use the exponent distributive rule to expand the following:

1.
2.

    Solution

1. Applying the distributive rule to the quotient, we get           .

2. Applying the distributive rule to the quotient, we get              .

      YOUR TURN 3.112

Use the exponent distributive rule to expand the following:
    1.
    2.

    VIDEO
    Fraction Raised to a Power (https://openstax.org/r/Fraction_Raised_to_a_Power)

Power Rule

In the previous two sets of rules, we've seen exponents applied to products and quotients. Now we look to exponents

applied to other exponents. For example,                         . This can be explained by examining what the outer

exponent does. We raise to the fourth power, so we multiply         by itself 4 times,  . Now if
we apply the product rule for exponents, this becomes                       .

FORMULA

If you raise a non-zero base, say , to an exponent , and raise that to another exponent, , you get the base raised

to the product of the exponents, which is                  .

EXAMPLE 3.113

Raising an Exponent to an Exponent
Expand the following:

1.
2.

    Solution

1. Using the power rule of exponents,                         .

2. Using the power rule of exponents,                            .

      YOUR TURN 3.113
Expand the following:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  3.8 · Exponents 223

1.
2.

Negative Exponent Rule

Up until now, we've only looked at positive exponents. The last exponent rule we look at is what negative exponents

represent. Recall the quotient rule:     . What would happen if the exponent in the denominator was larger

than that in the numerator? For example, . If we apply the quotient rule, we obtain               . We need to

make sense of that negative exponent. To do so, we can expand the quotient and see what happens:

               . When we divide out common factors, only two factors of 4 are left in the denominator, as we see

here: . Using exponent notation, this is . Since  and represent the same number, , they are equal. This
demonstrates how negative exponents are defined.

FORMULA

            provided that  .

Similarly,     .

EXAMPLE 3.114

Eliminating Negative Exponents
Convert the following to expressions with no negative exponent:

 1.
 2.
 3.

Solution

1. Using the negative exponent rule on the and multiplying,                          .

2. Using the negative exponent rule on the and multiplying,                          .

3. Begin by rewriting the expression as           . Apply the negative exponent rule to  in the expression,

which becomes                         , which has no negative exponents.

        YOUR TURN 3.114

  Convert the following to expressions with no negative exponent:
      1.
      2.

  EXAMPLE 3.115
Eliminating Denominators by Using Negative Exponents
Use negative exponents to rewrite the following expressions with no denominator:
 1.
 2.
224 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    Solution                                   . Then use the definition of negative exponents to rewrite the as     .
1. Rewrite the expression as
                                                  .
     Last, multiply, yielding
2. Rewrite the expression as                   . Then use the definition of negative exponents to rewrite the as .

     Last, multiply, yielding                  .

      YOUR TURN 3.115

Use negative exponents to rewrite the following expressions with no denominator:
    1.
    2.

The table below shows a summary of the exponent rules from this section.

Rule                             Example                                  In Words

Product Rule                                          A base raised to a power, times the same based raised to
                                                     another power, is the base raised to the sum of the powers.

Quotient Rule                                        A base raised to a power, divided by the same based raised to
                                                        another power, is the base raised to the difference of the
                                                                                          powers.

Zero Power Rule                                      Any non-zero number raised to the zeroth power equals 1.
       provided that

Distributive Rule,                                   Exponents distribute across multiplication.
  Multiplication

    Distributive Rule,                                                Exponents distribute across division.
  Division
                                                     A base raised to a power, raised to another power, is the base
         Power Rule                                          raised to the first power times the second power.

Negative Exponent Rule                               A base raised to a negative exponent is 1 divided by the base
   provided that                                                 raised to the positive power, and vice versa.

These rules often occur in tandem with each other, but it requires that you carefully apply the rules.

  EXAMPLE 3.116

Simplifying Expressions Using Exponent Rules
Simplify the following:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.8 · Exponents 225

1.
2.

    Solution
1. Step 1: To simplify this, we start by distributing the power 5 across the quotient:

     Step 2: We distribute the power 5 in the numerator across that multiplication:

     Step 3: We apply the power rule where indicated:

2. Step 1: To simplify this, we start by distributing the power 6 across the quotient:

     Step 2: We distribute the power 5 in the numerator across that multiplication:

     Step 3: We apply the power rule where indicated:

      YOUR TURN 3.116

Simplify the following:
    1.
    2.

VIDEO
Simplifying Expressions with Exponents (https://openstax.org/r/Simplifying_Expressions_with_Exponents)

Check Your Understanding

40. Simplify       .

41. Simplify .

42. Simplify    .

43. Simplify    .
226 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

44. Simplify  .

        SECTION 3.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, simplify the expression.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.

     6.

     7.

     8.

     9.

    10.

    11.

    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.
    25.

    26.

    27.

    28.

    29.

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression without a denominator.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression without negative exponents.
    34.
    35.

Access for free at openstax.org
                         3.9 · Scientific Notation 227

    36.
    37.

3.9 Scientific Notation

                      Figure 3.45 Calculations in the sciences often involve numbers in scientific notation form.

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Write numbers in standard or scientific notation.
 2. Convert numbers between standard and scientific notation.
 3. Add and subtract numbers in scientific notation.
 4. Multiply and divide numbers in scientific notation.
 5. Use scientific notation in computing real-world applications.

The amount of information available on the Internet is simply incomprehensible. One estimate for the amount of data
that will be on the Internet by 2025 is 175 Zettabytes. A single zettabyte is one billion trillion. Written out, it is
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000. One estimate is that we're producing 2.5 quintillion bytes of data per day. A quintillion is
a trillion trillion, or, written out, 1,000,000,000,000,000,000. To determine how many days it takes to increase the amount
of information that is on the Internet by 1 zettabyte, divide these two numbers, a zettabyte being
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000, and 2.5 quintillion, being 2,500,000,000,000,000,000, shows it takes 400 days to generate
1 zettabyte of information. But doing that calculation is awkward with a calculator. Keeping track of the zeros can be
tedious, and a mistake can easily be made.

On the other end of the scale, a human red blood cell has a diameter of 7.8 micrometers. One micrometer is one
millionth of a meter. Written out, 7.8 micrometers is 0.0000078 meters. Smaller still is the diameter of a virus, which is
about 100 nanometers in diameter, where a nanometer is a billionth of a meter. Written out, 100 nanometers is
0.0000001 meters. To compare that to engineered items, a single transistor in a computer chip can be 14 nanometers in
size (0.000000014 meters). Smaller yet is the diameter of an atom, at between 0.1 and 0.5 nanometers.

Sometimes we have numbers that are incredibly big, and so have an incredibly large number of digits, or sometimes
numbers are incredibly small, where they have a large number of digits after the decimal. But using those
representations of the names of the sizes makes comparing and computing with these numbers problematic. That's
where scientific notation comes in.

Writing Numbers in Standard or Scientific Notation Form

When we say that a number is in scientific notation, we are specifying the form in which that number is written. That
form begins with an integer with an absolute value between 1 and 9, then perhaps followed the decimal point and then
some more digits. This is then multiplied by 10 raised to some power. When the number only has one non-zero digit, the
scientific notation form is the digit multiplied by 10 raised to an exponent. When the number has more than one non-
zero digit, the scientific notation form is a single digit, followed by a decimal, which is then followed by the remaining
digits, which is then multiplied by 10 to a power.

The following numbers are written in scientific notation:

The following numbers are not written in scientific notation:
228 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

    because it isn't multiplied by 10 raised to a power
                   because the absolute value of -50.053 is not at least 1 and less than 10

             because 41.7 is not at least 1 and less than 10
                because 0.036 is not at least one and less than 10

EXAMPLE 3.117

Identifying Numbers in Scientific Notation
Which of the following numbers are in scientific notation? If the number is not in scientific notation, explain why it is not.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. The number                       is in scientific notation because the absolute value of -9.67 is at least 1 and less than 10.

2. The number                    is not in scientific notation because 145 is not at least 1 and less than 10.

3. The number          is not in scientific notation form. Even though it is at least 1 but less than 10, it is not multiplied by

    10 raised to a power.

      YOUR TURN 3.117

Which of the following numbers are in scientific notation? If the number is not in scientific notation, explain why it is
not.

    1.
    2.
    3.

Some numbers are so large or so small that it is impractical to write them out fully. Avogadro's number is important in
chemistry. It represents the number of units in 1 mole of any substance. The substance many be electrons, atoms,
molecules, or something else. Written out, the number is: 602,214,076,000,000,000,000,000. Another example of a
number that is impractical to write out fully is the length of a light wave. The wavelength of the color blue is about
0.000000450 to 0.000000495 meters. Such numbers are awkward to work with, and so scientific notation is often used.
We need to discuss how to convert numbers into scientific notation, and also out of scientific notation.

Recall that multiplying a number by 10 adds a 0 to the end of the number or moves the decimal one place to the right, as

in                 or               . And if you multiply by 100, it adds two zeros to the end of the number or moves

the decimal two places to the right, and so on. For example,                                 and                             .

Multiplying a number by 1 followed by some number of zeros just adds that many zeros to the end of the number or

moves the decimal place that many places to the right. Numbers written as 1 followed by some zeros are just powers of

10, as in          ,             ,             , etc. Generally,  .

We can use this to write very large numbers. For instance, Avogadro's number is 602,214,076,000,000,000,000,000, which

can be written as                   . The multiplication moves the decimal 23 places to the right.

Similarly, when we divide by 10, we move the decimal one place to the left, as in                 . If we divide by 100, we

move the decimal two places to the left, as in                    . In general, when you divide a number by a 1 followed by

zeros, you move the decimal places to the left, as in                              . This denominator could be written as

    . If we use that in the expression and allow for negative exponents, rewrite the number as
                                                         . With this, we can write division by a 1 followed by zeros as multiplication by

10 raised to .

Using that information, we can demonstrate how to convert from a number in standard form into scientific notation
form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       3.9 · Scientific Notation 229

Case 1: The number is a single-digit integer.

In this case, the scientific notation form of the number is          .

Case 2: The absolute value of the number is less than 1.

Follow the process below.

· Step 1: Count the number of zeros between the decimal and the first non-zero digit. Label this .

· Step 2: Starting with the first non-zero digit of the number, write the digits. If the number was negative, include the

negative sign.

· Step 3: If there is more than one digit, place the decimal after the first digit from Step 2.

· Step 4: Multiply the number from Step 3 by    .

Case 3: The absolute value of the number is 10 or larger.

Follow the process below.

· Step 1: Count the number of digits that are to the left of the decimal point. Label this .

· Step 2: Write the digits of the number without the decimal place, if one was present. If the number was negative,

include the negative sign.

· Step 3: If there is more than one digit, place the decimal point after the first digit.

· Step 4: Multiply the number from Step 3 by    .

EXAMPLE 3.118

Writing a Number in Scientific Notation
Write the following numbers in scientific notation form:

1. 428.9
2. -0.00000981
3. 8

Solution

1. Since the absolute value of 428.9 is 10 or larger, so we use the process from Case 3, above.

Step 1: There are three digits to the left of the decimal point, so     .

Step 2: Write the digits of the number without the decimal place, which is 4289.

Step 3: Since there is more than one digit, place the decimal point after the first digit. We now have 4.289.

Step 4: Since   , we multiply 4.289 by 10 raised to the second power,                      .

The scientific notation form of 428.9 is                  .

2. Since the absolute value of -0.00000981 is less than 1, we use the process from Case 2.

Step 1: The number of zeros between the decimal and the first non-zero digit is 5, so               .

Step 2: We write the non-zero digits, including the negative sign, yielding -981.

Step 3: The decimal gets placed to the right of the first digit, resulting in -9.81.

Step 4: Since   , we multiply -9.81 by 10 raised to the fourth power,                         .

The scientific notation form of -0.00000981 is               .

3. Since 8 is a single-digit integer, apply Case 1. The scientific notation form of 8 is         .

      YOUR TURN 3.118

Write the following numbers in scientific notation form:
    1. -38300
    2. 0.0045
    3. 1
230 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

When we write numbers in scientific notation form, we can manipulate the representation of the number by moving the

decimal around, and making an appropriate change to the exponent of the 10. For instance, let's look at                  .

If we wanted to move the decimal one place to the left, we'd have to increase the power of 10, as shown here:

                                 . Since we moved the decimal one to the left, we balance that with moving the

exponent up by one. Similarly, if we move the decimal one place to the right, we have to balance that by moving the

exponent one to the left, or subtracting one from the exponent, as shown here:                                    .

Generally, for a number in the form            :

· If you move the decimal to the left by digits, you increase the exponent by .
· If you move the decimal to the right by digits, you decrease the exponent by digits.

EXAMPLE 3.119

Increasing the Exponent

Change                by moving the decimal two places to the left.

    Solution

Since we are moving the decimal to the left by two places, we increase the exponent of 10 by 2, so that the exponent is

now 7. This gives us                              .

    YOUR TURN 3.119

1. Change                        by moving the decimal four places to the left.

EXAMPLE 3.120

Decreasing the Exponent

Change         by moving the decimal five places to the right.

    Solution

Since we are moving the decimal to the right by five places, we decrease the exponent of 10 by 5, so that exponent is

now -3. This give us                              .

    YOUR TURN 3.120

1. Change                        by moving the decimal two places to the right.

Converting Numbers from Scientific Notation to Standard Form

In the previous section, converting a number from standard form to scientific notation was explored. Now, we explore
converting from scientific notation back into standard form. Doing so involves moving the decimal according to the
power of the 10. The decimal is moved a number of steps equal to the exponent of the 10. As demonstrated previously,
when the exponent of the 10 is negative, the decimal is moved to the left and when the exponent of the 10 is positive,
the decimal is moved to the right.

EXAMPLE 3.121

Converting from Scientific Notation to Standard Form
Convert the following into standard form:

1.
2.

    Solution

1. Since the exponent is positive, the decimal moves nine places to the right, so       is                     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.9 · Scientific Notation 231

2. Since the exponent is negative, the decimal moves eight places to the left, so          is         .

      YOUR TURN 3.121

Convert the following into standard form:
    1.
    2.

VIDEO

Converting from Standard Form to Scientific Notation Form (https://openstax.org/r/
Converting_from_Standard_Form_to_Scientific_Notation_Form)

Converting from Scientific Notation Form to Standard Form (https://openstax.org/r/
Converting_from_Scientific_Notation_Form_to_Standard_Form)

TECH CHECK

Scientific Notation on a Calculator

Most scientific and graphing calculators come with the ability to directly convert from standard form to scientific
notation. On the TI-83, it is accessed through the MODE menus. For a commonly used, free phone scientific calculator,
the calculator can be forced to work in scientific notation mode through its settings.

Some calculators, such as the Desmos online calculator, display scientific notation as a number times 10 to a power as

you've seen in this section. However, some calculators indicate scientific notation by replacing the  with an E (or

EE) followed by the exponent. For example, Figure 3.46 shows what you may see on a TI-84.

                                                                Figure 3.46 Calculator screens

Adding and Subtracting Numbers in Scientific Notation

To add or subtract numbers in scientific notation, the numbers first need to have the same exponent for the 10s. It is
possible to add the following since the powers of 10 match:
Notice that the number parts were added, but the exponent part remained the same. This is due to the distributive
property of the real numbers. The is factored from the two terms, as shown:

Numbers in scientific notation can be added or subtracted directly using a calculator. Simply enter the values in scientific
form and set your calculator to display scientific notation.
232 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

         EXAMPLE 3.122

       Adding and Subtracting Numbers in Scientific Notation with the Same Powers of 10
       Calculate the following:
        1.
        2.

            Solution
        1. Since the powers of 10 match, we use the distributive property of real numbers to factor 10-3 from the numbers. We

             then add the number parts separately to get 4.806.

        2. Since the powers of 10 match, we use the distributive property of real numbers to factor 108 from the numbers. We
             then subtract the number parts separately to get 5.76.

      YOUR TURN 3.122

Calculate the following:
    1.
    2.

Adding and subtracting in scientific notation is straightforward when the exponents are the same. There are two issues
that can arise. The first issue is what to do if after adding or subtracting the result is not in scientific notation.

EXAMPLE 3.123

Correcting an Answer to Scientific Notation After Adding or Subtracting
Calculate the following:

1.
2.

    Solution
1. Since the powers of 10 match, we add the number parts and multiply that by :

                                                                                               .

    However,              is not in scientific notation because the absolute value of 15.53 is more than 10. To put this

    number in scientific notation, the decimal needs to move one to the left. To balance that move, the power of 10

    must be increased by 1. So, the answer in scientific notation is     .

2. Since the powers of 10 match, we add the number parts:

    However,              is not in scientific notation because it is less than 1. To put it in scientific notation, the

    decimal needs to move one to the right. To balance that move, the power of 10 must be decreased by 1. So, the

    answer in scientific notation is  .

        YOUR TURN 3.123
  Calculate the following:

      1.
      2.

The second issue that might be encountered when adding or subtracting is that the powers of 10 do not match. In that
case, one of the numbers must be changed so that the powers of 10 match. It is easiest to make the smaller power of 10

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.9 · Scientific Notation 233

larger to match the other power of 10.

For example, to perform the following,           , we'd change the                       so that the power of 10 is 5. To

do so, we need to increase the power of 10 and move the decimal in the number part two places to the left. That would

alter  into                      . We would use  in the addition problem, so that the exponents match,

allowing the addition to occur.

The steps to take when the exponents of the 10s are not equal are:

Step 1: Increase the smaller exponent to equal the larger exponent. Label the amount increased as .

Step 2: For the number with the smaller power of 10, move the decimal point of the number part to the left places.

Step 3: Perform the addition or subtraction.

Step 4: If the result is not in scientific notation, adjust the number to be in scientific notation.

EXAMPLE 3.124

Adding Numbers in Scientific Notation with Different Powers of 10
Calculate the following:

     Solution
Step 1: The lower exponent is 4. To make this equal to the larger exponent, we increased it by 1.

Step 2: Since the smaller exponent was increased by 1, move the decimal one to the left, so the addition become
                                                                    .

Step 3: Now add the numbers,

Step 4: The result is in scientific notation, so no additional adjustment is necessary.

      YOUR TURN 3.124
1. Calculate the following:

  EXAMPLE 3.125

Subtracting Numbers in Scientific Notation with Different Powers of 10
Calculate the following:

     Solution
Step 1: The lower exponent is -15 and the larger is -13. To make -15 equal to the larger exponent, we increased it by 2.

Step 2: Since the smaller exponent increased by 2, move the decimal two to the left. The subtraction changes to
                                                                                   .

Step 3: Subtract the numbers,                                           .

Step 4: The result is in scientific notation, so no additional adjustment is necessary.

      YOUR TURN 3.125
1. Calculate the following:
234 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Multiplying and Dividing Numbers in Scientific Notation

Multiplying and dividing numbers in scientific notation is somewhat easier than adding or subtracting, because the
exponents of the 10s do not have to match. However, it is much more likely that the result will not be in scientific
notation, and so that will have to be adjusted at the end. Generally, we multiply or divide the number parts of the two
values, and then apply exponent rules to the 10 raised to the powers.

To multiply two numbers in scientific notation:

Step 1: Multiply the number parts.

Step 2: Add the exponents of the 10s.

Step 3: The result is the answer from Step 1 times 10 raised to the answer from Step 2.

Step 4: If the number is not in scientific notation, adjust it appropriately.

EXAMPLE 3.126

Multiplying Numbers in Scientific Notation
Calculate the following:

1.

2.

    Solution

1. Step 1: Multiply the number parts to get          .

    Step 2: Add the exponents of the 10s to get   .

    Step 3: The result is then                 .

    Step 4: This number is already in scientific notation, so no additional adjustment is necessary,
                                                            .

2. Step 1: Multiply the number parts to get       .

    Step 2: Add the exponents of the 10s to get         .

    Step 3: The result then is                 .

    Step 4:Since the number is not in scientific notation, it must be adjusted. To put  into scientific notation,
    the decimal moves one to the left, so the exponent would be increased by 1, giving     .

        YOUR TURN 3.126
  Calculate the following:

      1.
      2.

       VIDEO
      Multiplying Numbers in Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Multiplying_Numbers_in_Scientific_Notation)

Dividing Numbers in Scientific Notation

To divide two numbers that are in scientific notation:
Step 1: Divide the number parts.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3.9 · Scientific Notation 235

Step 2: Subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator.
Step 3: The answer is the result from Step 1 times 10 raised to the result from Step 2.
Step 4: If the number is not in scientific notation, adjust it appropriately.

EXAMPLE 3.127

Dividing Numbers in Scientific Notation
Calculate the following:

1.
2.

    Solution
1.

    Step 1: Divide the number parts to get  .

    Step 2: Subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator to get                .

    Step 3: The result is then  .

    Step 4: This number is already in scientific notation, so no adjustment is necessary.

2.

    Step 1: Divide the number parts to get     .

    Step 2: Subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator to get                        .

    Step 3: The result then is     .

    Step 4: Since this number is not in scientific notation, it must be adjusted. To put   into scientific notation,
    the decimal needs to move one to the right, so the exponent is decreased by 1, giving     .

      YOUR TURN 3.127

Calculate the following:
    1.
    2.

    VIDEO
    Dividing Numbers in Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Dividing_Numbers_in_Scientific_Notation)

Using Scientific Notation in Computing Real-World Applications

As noted at the start of this section, scientific notation is useful when the standard representation of a number is

awkward or impractical, which occurs when the numbers being used are extremely large or extremely small. For

example, Venus is 67,667,000 miles from the sun. In scientific notation, this is           . Planetary and galaxy

distances is one set of numbers that is easier to express using scientific notation.

EXAMPLE 3.128

Calculating Distances                                                                 miles from the sun and Earth is
How much farther from the sun is Earth compared to Venus if Venus is

                   miles from the sun?
236 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

     Solution
To determine how much farther Earth is compared to Venus, we'd subtract the distances.

                                                                .

So, Earth is                miles farther from the sun than Venus.

YOUR TURN 3.128

1. Earlier we saw that a single transistor in a computer chip 0.000000014 meters, or         m, in size, and that

the diameter of an atom could be 0.2 nanometers, or                   m in size. How much larger is the transistor than

the atom?

EXAMPLE 3.129

Calculating Probability

The probability of winning the Mega Millions lottery is published as                 . The probability of being hit by

lightning is approximated to be                . How many times more likely are you to be hit by lightning than win the Mega

Millions?

     Solution
To find out how many times more likely you are to be hit by lightning, divide the probability of being hit by lightning by
the probability of winning the Mega Millions.

Step 1: Divide the number parts to get =       (rounded to the fourth digit).

Step 2: Subtract the exponent of the denominator from the exponent of the numerator to get                    .

Step 3: The result then is       .

Step 4: Since this number is not in scientific notation, it must be adjusted. To put         into scientific notation,
the decimal needs to move one place to the right, so the exponent is decreased by 1, giving              .

You are          , or 605.2, times more likely to be hit by lightning than you are to win the Mega Millions.

YOUR TURN 3.129

1. Mercury is about              miles from the sun. Neptune is about                miles from the sun. How many

times further is Neptune from the sun than Mercury?

EXAMPLE 3.130

Calculating Time and Length

Sometimes it is entertaining to determine the time it takes for something to happen. Fingernails grow about

                 km per minute. How many kilometers long would fingernails be after          minutes?

     Solution
To find the length of the fingernails after the specified time, we multiply their rate of growth and the time they've grown.

So, after        minutes, the fingernails would be                  km long. To put this in perspective,         km is a
millimeter, and
millimeters.         minutes is about 4.16 days. So, after about 4.16 days, fingernails have grown about 4.8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3.9 · Scientific Notation 237

YOUR TURN 3.130

1. There are approximately              grains of sand in a cubic meter. If the number of grains of sand on the
    Australian coastline is roughly               grains, roughly how many cubic meters of sand is there on the
    Australian coastline?

EXAMPLE 3.131

Calculating Data Generated
As mentioned in the opening to this section, it is estimated that we're producing 2.5 quintillion bytes of data per day. A
good estimate is that there are 7.674 billion people on the planet. Convert both of those numbers to scientific notation,
and then determine how much data is being generated per person each day.

Solution

Written in standard form, 2.5 quintillion is 2,500,000,000,000,000,000. Changing that to scientific notation, move the

decimal 18 places, so 2.5 quintillion bytes =  bytes. Writing 7.647 billion in scientific notation would be

           because a billion is 1,000,000,000 = . So, to find out how much data is being produced daily per person,

we would divide these two numbers.

In standard form, that's 327,000,000 bytes per person, so 327 million bytes of data daily are being produced per person.

YOUR TURN 3.131

1. Humans collectively exhale approximately    pounds of carbon dioxide per year. There are

approximately              humans currently living on Earth. How many pounds of carbon dioxide does a single

human, on average, exhale per year?

VIDEO
Application of Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Application_of_Scientific_Notation)

What Numbers Could Be Considered "Too Big" or "Too Small"?

One wonders when the numbers we represent become too large or small for consideration. Perhaps the following

examples put limits on what is meaningful. The number of particles in the known universe has been estimated at

particles. The smallest distance that has been measured is        , though the theoretical smallest

measurable value is        . The distance across the universe is  . Considering what those numbers

represent, the extreme largest and extreme smallest, they might be numbers that constrain what we should reasonably

be expected to deal with.

Check Your Understanding

45. Write 0.00456 in scientific notation.

46. Write            in standard form.

47. Calculate                        .

48. Calculate                        .

49. Calculate                           .

50. Calculate        .

51. The distance from Earth to the moon is     inches. The thickness of a dollar bill is        inches. How

many dollar bills must be stacked so the pile reaches the moon?
238 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

        SECTION 3.9 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, convert numbers to scientific notation.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.

For the following exercises, convert numbers to standard form.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.

For the following exercises, the numbers are not in scientific notation. Convert them to scientific notation.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.

For the following exercises, make the conversions required.

13. The distance from the sun to the star Polaris is about 3,056,000,000,000,000 km. Express that distance in

scientific notation.

14. The distance from us to the next-closest galaxy is about 662,000,000,000,000,000 km. Express that distance in

scientific notation.

15. The mass of a grain of sand is about             g. Convert that mass to standard form.

16. The diameter of a cell is about            m. Convert that diameter to standard form.

17. The equatorial circumference of Earth is approximately            km. Convert that circumference to standard

form.

18. The straight-line distance from Buffalo, NY, to Buenos Aires, Argentina, is approximately                  m. Convert

that distance to standard form.

19. The mass of a proton is approximately                    kg. Convert that mass to standard form.

20. The diameter of a housefly egg is approximately                   m. Convert that diameter to standard form.

21. The tallest building in the world, the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, stands at 829.8 m tall. Convert that height to

scientific notation.

22. Using the rings of the shell, the age of an Icelandic clam is 507 years. Express that age in scientific notation.

Calculate the following:
    23.
    24.
    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.
    34.
    35.
    36.
    37.
    38.
    39.
    40.
    41.
    42.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.10 · Arithmetic Sequences 239

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

For the following exercises, apply your understanding of scientific notation to real-world applications.

51. When stretched out, a strand of human DNA is, on average,              cm. One centimeter, or 1 cm, is

     km. Determine the average length of a strand of human DNA in kilometers.

52. One approximation of the average number of cells in the human body is        cells (30 trillion!!!). If the DNA

     of each cell were stretched out and laid end to end, what would be the total length of the DNA in km? Use your

     answer from Exercise 51 for the length, in kilometers, of DNA.

53. The equatorial circumference of Earth is approximately           km. Use the answer from Exercise 52 to

     determine the number of times that the stretched out human DNA would encircle Earth.

54. The average stride length of a 1.651 m tall woman is             meters. If such a person could walk from

     Buffalo, NY, to Buenos Aires, Argentina, in a straight line, how many steps would that person need to take? See

     Exercise 18 for the distance from Buffalo, NY, to Buenos Aires, Argentina.

3.10 Arithmetic Sequences

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify arithmetic sequences.
 2. Find a given term in an arithmetic sequence.
 3. Find the th term of an arithmetic sequence.
 4. Find the sum of a finite arithmetic sequence.
 5. Use arithmetic sequences to solve real- world applications

As we saw in the previous section, we are adding about 2.5 quintillion bytes of data per day to the Internet. If there are
550 quintillion bytes of data today, then there will be 552.5 quintillion bytes tomorrow, and 555 quintillion bytes in 2
days. This is an example of an arithmetic sequence. There are many situations where this concept of fixed increases
comes into play, such as raises or table arrangements.

Identifying Arithmetic Sequences

A sequence of numbers is just that, a list of numbers in order. It can be a short list, such as the number of points earned
on each assignment in a class, such as {10, 10, 8, 9, 10, 6, 10}. Or it can be a longer list, even infinitely long, such as the
list of prime numbers. For example, here's a sequence of numbers, specifically, the squares of the first 12 natural
numbers.

{1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144}

Each value in the sequence is called a term. Terms in the list are often referred to by their location in the sequence, as in
the th term. For the sequence {1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144}, the first term of the sequence is 1, the fourth
term is 16, and so on. In the sequence of assignment scores {10, 10, 8, 9, 10, 6, 10}, the first term is 10 and the third term
is 8 (Figure 3.47).

                                           Figure 3.47 Sequence showing first, second, and fifth terms
The notation we use with sequences is a letter, which represents a term in the sequence, and a subscript, which indicates
240 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

what place the term is in the sequence. For the sequence {1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100, 121, 144}, we will use the

letter as a value in the sequence, and so would be the term in the sequence at the fifth position. That number is 25,

so we can write     .

In this section, we focus on a special kind of sequence, one referred to as an arithmetic sequence. Arithmetic
sequences have terms that increase by a fixed number or decrease by a fixed number, called the constant difference
(denoted by ), provided that value is not 0. This means the next term is always the previous term plus or minus a
specified, constant value. Another way to say this is that the difference between any consecutive terms of the sequence
is always the same value.

To see a constant difference, look at the following sequence: {7, 15, 23, 31, 39, 47, 55, 63, 71, 79, 87}. Figure 3.48
illustrates that each term of the sequence is the previous term plus 8. Eight is the constant difference here.

                                 Figure 3.48 Sequence of numbers with 8 added to each term

EXAMPLE 3.132

Identifying Arithmetic Sequences
Determine if the following sequences are arithmetic sequences. Explain your reasoning.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution

1. In the sequence                                 , every term is the previous term plus 3. The ellipsis indicates that the

    pattern continues, which means keep adding 3 to the previous term to get the new term. Therefore, this is an

    infinite arithmetic sequence.

2. In the sequence                             , terms increase by various amounts, for instance from term 1 to term 2,

    the sequence increases by 20, but from term 2 to term 3 the sequence increases by 40. So, this is not an arithmetic

    sequence.

3. In the sequence                                        , every term is the previous term minus 6, so this is an

    arithmetic sequence.

      YOUR TURN 3.132

Determine if the following sequences are arithmetic sequences. Explain your reasoning.
    1.
    2.
    3.

Arithmetic sequences can be expressed with a formula. When we know the first term of an arithmetic sequence, which

we label , and we know the constant difference, which is denoted , we can find any other term of the arithmetic

sequence. The formula for the term of an arithmetic sequence is                         .

FORMULA

If we have an arithmetic sequence with first term  and constant difference , then the       term of the arithmetic

sequence is                        .

Let's examine the formula with this arithmetic sequence:         . In this sequence                                     and
       . The table below shows the values calculated.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           3.10 · Arithmetic Sequences 241

               , Place in Sequence  , Term Value of Term Term Written as
                           1                                   4
                           2                                   7
                           3                                  10
                           4                                  13
                           5                                  16

We can see how the term can be directly calculated. In this sequence, the formula is              where the first

term, , is 4 and the constant difference is 3. We can then determine the  term of this sequence:

                                         .

EXAMPLE 3.133

Calculating a Term in an Arithmetic Sequence                                                  term.
Identify and for the following arithmetic sequence. Use this information to determine the

     Solution                       and     . We use those values in the formula, with            .
Inspecting the sequence shows that

      YOUR TURN 3.133                                                                             term.
1. Identify and for the following arithmetic sequence. Use this information to determine the

VIDEO
Arithmetic Sequences (https://openstax.org/r/Arithmetic_Sequences)

If we know two terms of the sequence, it is possible to determine the general form of an arithmetic sequence,
                             .

FORMULA

If we have the th term of an arithmetic sequence, , and the th term of the sequence,  , then the constant

difference is  and the first term of the sequence is                      .
242 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

EXAMPLE 3.134

Determining First Term and Constant Difference Using Two Terms

A sequence is known to be arithmetic. Two of its terms are        and                        . Use that information to find the

constant difference, the first term, and then the       term of the sequence.

    Solution

To find the constant difference, use           . The location of the terms is given by the subscript of the two  terms,

     and      . So, the constant difference can be calculated as such:

                                                                         .

The constant difference of 4 is then used to find .

So   and              .                                                                      .
                                                                                                            .
With this information, the          term can be found.

The  term is                     .

     YOUR TURN 3.134

1. A sequence is known to be arithmetic. Two of the terms are                   and          . Use that information to
    find the constant difference and the first term. Then determine the
                                                                                        term of the sequence.

       VIDEO

      Finding the First Term and Constant Difference for an Arithmetic Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/
      Finding_the_First_Term_and_Constant_Difference_for_an_Arithmetic_Sequence)

Finding the Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence

Sometimes we want to determine the sum of the numbers of a finite arithmetic sequence. The formula for this is fairly
straightforward.

FORMULA

The sum of the first     terms of a finite arithmetic sequence, written  , with first and last term      and , respectively,

is                 .

EXAMPLE 3.135

Finding the Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence

What is the sum of the first 60 terms of an arithmetic sequence with                    and  ?
                                                                                                  . The
    Solution
                                                                                               .
The formula requires the first and last terms of the sequence. The first term is given,                        term is needed.

Using the formula                     provides the value for the         term.

Applying the formula                           provides the sum of the first 60 terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            3.10 · Arithmetic Sequences 243

                                                                                                                      .
The sum of the first 60 terms is 4,695.

YOUR TURN 3.135

1. What is the sum of the first 101 terms of an arithmetic sequence with     and                                         ?

VIDEO

Finding the Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/
Finding_the_Sum_of_a_Finite_Arithmetic_Sequence)

Using Arithmetic Sequences to Solve Real-World Applications

Applications of arithmetic sequences occur any time some quantity increases by a fixed amount at each step. For
instance, suppose someone practices chess each week and increases the amount of time they study each week. The first
week the person practices for 3 hours, and vows to practice 30 more minutes each week. Since the amount of time
practicing increases by a fixed number each week, this would qualify as an arithmetic sequence.

EXAMPLE 3.136

Applying an Arithmetic Sequence
Jordan has just watched The Queen's Gambit and decided to hone their skills in chess. To really improve at the game,
Jordan decides to practice for 3 hours the first week, and increase their time spent practicing by 30 minutes each week.
How many hours will Jordan practice chess in week 20?

Solution

Jordan's practice scheme is an arithmetic sequence, as it increases by a fixed amount each week. The first week there are

3 hours of practice. This means  . Jordan increases the time spent practicing by 30 minutes, or half an hour, each

week. This means  . Using those values, and that we want to know the amount of time Jordan will study in week

20, we determine the time in week 20 using                .

So, Jordan will practice 12.5 hours in week 20.

      YOUR TURN 3.136

1. Christina decides to save money for after graduation. Christina starts by setting aside $10. Each week, Christina
    increases the amount she saves by $5. How much money will Christina save in week 52?

EXAMPLE 3.137

Finding the Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence
Let's check back in on Jordan. Recall, Jordan had just watched The Queen's Gambit and decided to hone their skills,
practicing for 3 hours the first week, and increasing the time spent practicing by 30 minutes each week. How many hours
total will Jordan have practiced chess after 30 weeks of practice?

     Solution                                                                                                            . The formula requires the
To calculate the total amount of time that Jordan practiced, we need to use

first and last terms of the sequence. Since Jordan practiced 3 hours in the first week, the first term is                   . Because we
                                                                                                                               , the
want the total practice time after 30 weeks, we need the  term. Because the constant difference is
244 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

term is                                                                           .
Applying the formula                           provides the sum of the first 30 terms.

                                                                                                                   .
This means that Jordan practiced a total of 615 hours after 30 weeks.

        YOUR TURN 3.137

  1. In a theater, the first row has 24 seats. Each row after that has 2 more seats. How many total seats are there if
      there are 40 rows of seat in the theater?

        WHO KNEW?

  The Fibonacci Sequence
  Not all sequences are arithmetic. One special sequence is the Fibonacci sequence, which is the sequence that has as
  its first two terms 1 and 1. Every term thereafter is the sum of the previous two terms. The first nine terms of the
  Fibonacci sequence are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, and 34.
  This sequence is found in nature, architecture, and even music! In nature, the Fibonacci sequence describes the
  spirals of sunflower seeds, certain galaxy spirals, and flower petals. In music, the band Tool used the Fibonacci
  sequence in the song "Lateralus." The Fibonacci sequence even relates to architecture, as it is closely related to the
  golden ratio.

       VIDEO
      Fibonacci Sequence and "Lateralus" (https://openstax.org/r/Fibonacci_Sequence_and_Lateralus)

Check Your Understanding

52. Is the following an arithmetic sequence? Explain.
      {3, 6, 9, 15, 25, 39, 90}

53. What is the 7th term of the following sequence?
      {1, 5, 7, 100, 4, -17, 8, 100, 19, 7.6, 345}

54. In an arithmetic sequence, the first term is 10 and the constant difference is 4.5. What is the 135th term?
55. If the eighth term of an arithmetic sequence is 35 and the 40th term is 131, what is the constant difference and the

      first term of the sequence?
56. What is the sum of the first 100 terms of the arithmetic sequence with first term 4 and constant difference 7?
57. A new marketing firm began with 30 people in its survey group. The firm adds 4 people per day. How many people

      will be in their survey group after 100 days?

        SECTION 3.10 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine if the sequence is an arithmetic sequence.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   3.10 · Arithmetic Sequences 245

7.
8.

For the following exercises, the sequences given are arithmetic sequences. Determine the constant difference for each
sequence. Verify that each term is the previous term plus the constant difference.

     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.

For the following exercises, the first term and the constant difference of an arithmetic sequence is given. Using that

information, determine the indicated term of the sequence.

15.     ,              , find .

16.  ,                 , find .

17.     ,              , find .

18.        ,           , find .

19.        ,           , find .

20.           ,        , find         .

21.              ,     , find .

22.           ,        , find            .

For the following exercises, two terms of an arithmetic sequence are given. Using that information, identify the first

term and the constant difference.

23.     ,

24.        ,

25.     ,

26.     ,

27.                 ,

28.              ,

For the following exercises, the first term and the constant difference is given for an arithmetic sequence. Use that

information to find the sum of the first terms of the sequence, .

29.     ,              , calculate

30.  ,                 , calculate .

31.        ,           , calculate .

32.           ,        , calculate .

33.        ,           , calculate .

34.              ,     , calculate .

For the following exercises, apply your knowledge of arithmetic sequences to these real-world scenarios.
    35. A collection is taken up to support a family in need. The initial amount in the collection is $135. Everyone places
          $20 in the collection. When the 35th person puts their $20 in the collection, how much is present in the
          collection?
    36. There are 50 songs on a playlist. Every minute, 3 more songs are added to the playlist. How many songs are on
          the playlist after 40 minutes have passed?
    37. One genre on Netflix has 1,000 shows. Every week, 20 shows are added to that genre. After 15 weeks, how
          many shows are in that genre?
    38. A new local band has 10 people come to their first show. News of the band spreads afterwards. Each week, 4
          more people attend their show than the previous week. After 50 weeks, how many people are at their show?
    39. The Jester Comic book store is going out of business and is taking in no new inventory. Its inventory is currently
          13,563 titles. Each day after, they sell or give away 250 titles. After 15 days, how many titles are left?
    40. Jasmyn has decided to train for a marathon. In week one, Jasmyn runs 5 miles. Each week, Jasmyn increased the
          running distance by 2 miles. How many miles will Jasmyn run in week 13 of the training schedule?
    41. A 42-gallon bathtub sits with 14 gallons in it. The faucet is turned on and is now being filled at the rate of 2.2
          gallons per minute, but is draining slowly, at 1.8 gallons per minute. After 20 minutes, how many gallons are in
          the tub?
    42. A trained diver is 250 feet deep. The diver is nearly out of air and needs to surface. However, the diver can only
          comfortably ascend 30 feet per minute. How deep is the diver after ascending for 5 minutes?
246 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

           43. Jaclyn, an investor, begins a start-up to revitalize homes in South Bend, Indiana. She begins with $10,000,
                  making her investor 1. Each investor that joins will invest $500 more than the previous investor. How much does
                  the 50th investor invest in the project? With that 50th investor, what is the total amount invested in the project?

           44. Jasmyn has decided to train for a marathon. In week one, Jasmyn runs 5 miles. Each week, Jasmyn increased the
                  running distance by 2 miles. After training for 14 weeks, how many total miles will Jasmyn have run?

           45. The base of a pyramidal structure has 144 blocks. Each level above has 5 fewer blocks than the previous level.
                  How many total blocks are there if the pyramidal structure has 25 levels?

           46. As part of a deal, a friend tells you they will give you $10 on day 1, $20 on day 2, $30 on day 3, for all 30 days of
                  a month. At the end of that month, what is the total amount your friend has given you?

    3.11 Geometric Sequences

Figure 3.49 Savings grows in a geometric sequence. (credit: modification of "A big part of financial freedom is having
your heart and mind free from worry about the what-ifs of life. - Suze Orman" by Morgan/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify geometric sequences.
 2. Find a given term in a geometric sequence.
 3. Find the th term of a geometric sequence.
 4. Find the sum of a finite geometric sequence.
 5. Use geometric sequences to solve real-world applications.

One of the concerns when investing is the doubling time, which is length of time it takes for the value of the investment

to be twice, or double, that of its starting value. A shorter doubling times means the investment gets bigger, sooner. For

example, if you invest $200 in an account with an 8-year doubling time, then in 8 years the value of the account will be

double the starting amount, or               . After another 8 years (for a total of 16 years) the investment would be

twice its value after the first 8 years, or                             . Every 8 years, the investment would double

again, so after the third 8-year period, the investment would be worth                         . This process exhibits

exponential growth, an application of geometric sequences, which is explored in this section.

Identifying Geometric Sequences

We know what a sequence is, but what makes a sequence a geometric sequence? In an arithmetic sequence, each term

is the previous term plus the constant difference. So, you add a (possibly negative) number at each step. In a geometric

sequence, though, each term is the previous term multiplied by the same specified value, called the common ratio. In

the sequence                                 the common ratio is 2. To see the difference between an

arithmetic sequence and geometric sequence, examine these two sequences (Figures 3.52 and 3.53).

                                                              Figure 3.50 Arithmetic sequence
Each term in this arithmetic sequence is the previous term plus 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    3.11 · Geometric Sequences 247

                                   Figure 3.51 Geometric sequence

Each term in this geometric sequence is the previous term times 2.

In the sequence                                  , the numbers get big fairly quickly, and stay positive. However,

that's not always the case with geometric sequences. Depending on the value of the common ratio, the terms could

increase each time (like in the one shown in Figure 3.51), or the terms can get smaller each time, or the terms can

alternate between positive and negative values. It all depends on the value of the common ratio, .

Consider this geometric sequence:

Each term is the previous term times 5, which means the common ratio is 5. This common ratio is larger than 1, and so
the terms increase each time. Now, look at this geometric sequence:

Each term is the previous term times -3, and the sign of the terms alternate from positive to negative. Then, there's this
geometric sequence:

Each term is the previous term times , and the terms decrease each time. What we should take away from these three

examples is if the common ratio is a positive number larger than 1, then the sequence increases. If the common ratio is a
negative number, then the sign of the terms alternates between positive and negative. If the common ratio is between 0
and 1, then the terms decrease.

Two special cases of geometric sequences are when the constant ratio is 1 and when the common ratio is 0. When the

constant ratio is 1, every term of the sequence is the same, as in  . This is referred to as a constant

sequence. When the constant ratio is 0, the first term can be any number, but every term after the first term is 0, as in

                    .

EXAMPLE 3.138

Identifying Geometric Sequences
For each sequence, determine if the sequence is a geometric sequence. If so, identify the common ratio.

 1.
 2.
 3.

Solution

1. In the sequence                               , the jump from 5 to 20 is a multiplication by 4, as is the next

jump to 80, and the next to 320. Each term is 4 times the previous term. Since each term is 4 times the previous, this

is a geometric sequence. The common ratio is 4.

2. In the sequence                 , notice that 6 is -3 times -2. The jump from 6 to -12 is another

multiplication by negative. So, if this is a geometric sequence, each term should be the previous term times -2. But

the change from 24 to 11 is not a multiplication by -2, This means the sequence is not a geometric sequence.

3. In the sequence                 , the change from 4 to 2 is a multiplication by , as is the next jump, from 2 to

1, as is the next from 1 to . Each term is times the previous term. Since each term is times the previous, this is

a geometric sequence. The common ratio is .
248 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

      YOUR TURN 3.138

For each sequence, determine if the sequence is a geometric sequence. If so, identify the common ratio.
    1.
    2.
    3.

As with arithmetic sequences, the first term of a geometric sequence is labeled      . The number that is multiplied by each
                                                                                     , and the common ratio is known, ,
term is called the common ratio and is denoted . So, if the first term is known,

then the term, , can be calculated with the formula                       .

FORMULA

The th term of the geometric sequence, , with first term and common ratio , is                   .

Return to the sequence                                . We observe that the first term is 3, so          . We also
found that the common ratio is 2, so
                                               . The table below shows how any term can be calculated using just and .

                  , Place in Sequence                 ,Term Value of Term Term Written as

                                 1                         3

                                 2                         6

                                 3                         12

                                 4                         24

                                 5                         48

EXAMPLE 3.139

Determining the Value of a Specific Term in a Geometric Sequence
In the following geometric sequences, determine the indicated term of the geometric sequence with a given first term
and common ratio.

1. Determine the  term of the geometric sequence with                 and      .
2. Determine the   term of the geometric sequence with
                                                                          and     .

    Solution      with              ,          , and  , we calculate
1. Using

.

The term of the geometric sequence with               and             is             .

2. Using          with              ,          , and  , we calculate

.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          3.11 · Geometric Sequences 249

YOUR TURN 3.139

In the following geometric sequences, determine the indicated term of the geometric sequence with a given first

term and common ratio.

1. Determine the        term of the geometric sequence with             and            .

2. Determine the term of the geometric sequence with                   and   .

       VIDEO
      Geometric Sequences (https://openstax.org/r/Geometric_Sequences)

Finding the Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence

As with arithmetic sequences, it is possible to add the terms of the geometric sequence. Like arithmetic sequences, the
formula for the finite sum of the terms of a geometric sequence has a straightforward formula.

FORMULA

The sum of the first terms of a finite geometric sequence, written  , with first term     and common ratio , is

                     provided that  .

EXAMPLE 3.140

Calculating the Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence                                        and common ratio       ?
 1. What is the sum of the first 13 terms of the geometric sequence with first term
 2. What is the sum of the first 7 terms of the geometric sequence with first term        and common ratio       ?

Solution

1. Using       ,     , and          , we find that the sum is:

The sum of the first 13 terms of this geometric sequence is 1,328,600.

2. Using          ,     , and       , we find that the sum is:

The sum of the first 7 terms of this geometric sequence is          .

  YOUR TURN 3.140                                                                         and common ratio
                                                                                          and common ratio
1. What is the sum of the first 10 terms of the geometric sequence with first term
            ?

2. What is the sum of the first 6 terms of the geometric sequence with first term
             ?

Using Geometric Sequences to Solve Real-World Applications

Geometric sequences have a multitude of applications, one of which is compound interest. Compound interest is
250 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

something that happens to money deposited into an account, be it savings or an individual retirement account, or IRA.
The interest on the account is calculated and added to the account at regular intervals. This means the interest that was
earned later gains its own interest. This allows the money to grow faster. If that interest is added every month, we say it
is compounded monthly. If the interest is added daily, then we say it is compounded daily. The amount of money that is
deposited into the account is called the principal and is denoted . The account earns money on that principal. The
amount it earns is a percentage of the money in the account. The interest rate, expressed as a decimal, is denoted .

FORMULA

If you deposit dollars in an account that earns interest compounded yearly, then the amount in the account, ,

after years is calculated with the formula:           . This is a geometric sequence, with constant ratio

and first term  .

EXAMPLE 3.141

Calculating Interest Compounded Yearly         interest compounded yearly. How much money is in the account after 25
Daryl deposits $1,000 in an account earning
years?

     Solution   with             ,             , and  , we find that
Using

                                                                                       . After 25 years, there is

in the account.

      YOUR TURN 3.141

1. Sophia deposited $4,000 in an account that earns 5.5% interest compounded yearly. After 20 years, Sophia
    withdrew all the money in the account to pay for her child's college. How much money was in the account when
    Sophia withdrew the money?

Another application of geometric sequences is exponential growth. This arises in biology quite frequently, especially in
relation to bacterial cultures, but also with other organism population models. In bacterial cultures, the time it takes the
population to double is often recorded. This time to double is the same, regardless of how big the population gets. So, if
the population doubles after 3 hours, it doubles again after another 3 hours, and again after another 3 hours, and so on.
Put into geometric sequence language, it has a common ratio of 2.

EXAMPLE 3.142

Doubling a Bacterial Culture
When Escherichia coli (E. coli) is in a broth culture at 37°C, the population of E. coli doubles in number with 30 organisms,
how many E. coli bacteria are present in the culture after 16 hours?

Solution

Since the population is doubling every 20 minutes, this is a geometric sequence situation with common ratio           . The

culture begins with 30 organisms, so           . The time,16 hours, is 48 twenty-minute periods, so we're looking for the

48th term in the sequence. Using these values in the geometric sequence formula gives

                                                                      .

So, after 16 hours, the culture contains              E. coli organisms. That's more than 4,000 trillion bacteria.

      YOUR TURN 3.142
1. When Streptococcus lactis (S. lactis) is in a milk culture at 37°C, the population of S. lactis doubles in number

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           3.11 · Geometric Sequences 251

every 30 minutes. If the culture began with 15 organisms, how many S. lactis bacteria are present in the culture
after 20 hours?

EXAMPLE 3.143

Applying the Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence
A player places one grain of rice on the first square of a chess board. On the second square, the player places 2 grains of
rice. On the third square, the player places 4 grains of rice. On each successive square of the board, the player doubles
the number of grains of rice placed on the chess board. When the player places the last rice on the 64th square, how
many total grains of rice have been placed on the board?

Solution

Since the number of grains of rice is doubled at each step, this is a geometric sequence with first term  and

common ratio   . Rice is placed on 64 total squares, so we want the sum of the first 64 terms. Using this information

and the formula, the total number of grains of rice on the board will be:

That's a 20-digit number!

        YOUR TURN 3.143

  1. You have a square 1 meter on each side. You begin by coloring one half of the square blue. Then you color half
      the remaining area blue. Then you color half the remaining area blue once more. At each step, you color half the
      remaining area. What is the total area you have colored blue after performing this process 15 times?

       VIDEO
      Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/Sum_of_a_Finite_Geometric_Sequence)

Check Your Understanding

58. Is the following a geometric sequence? Explain.
      {3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96, 192}

59. Find the common ratio of the geometric sequence {3, -30, 300, -3,000, ...}.
60. In a geometric sequence, the first term is 10 and the common ratio is 1.5. What is the 15th term?
61. What is the sum of the first 100 terms of the geometric sequence with first term 4 and common ratio 0.3?
62. $15,000 is deposited in an account the yields 4.2% interest compounded annually. How much is in the account

      after 17 years?

        SECTION 3.11 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine if the sequence is a geometric sequence.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.

For the following exercises, the sequences given are geometric sequences. Determine the common ratio for each.
252 3 · Real Number Systems and Number Theory

Verify that each term is the previous term times the common ratio.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.

For the following exercises, the first term and the common ratio of a geometric sequence is given. Using that

information, determine the indicated term of the sequence.

15.  ,        , find .

16.  ,        , find .

17.     ,     , find .

18.  ,        , find .

19.        ,  , find .

20.     ,     , find .

21.     ,     , find .

22.     ,     , find .

23.     ,     , find .

24.        ,                     , find .

For the following exercises, the first term and the common ratio is given for a geometric sequence. Use that

information to find the sum of the first terms of the sequence, .

25.  ,        , calculate .

26.  ,        , calculate .

27.  ,        , calculate .

28.     ,     , calculate .

29.        ,  , calculate .

30.        ,                     , calculate .

31.  ,        , calculate .

32.  ,        , calculate .

For the following exercises, apply your understanding of geometric sequences to real-world applications.
    33. Lactobacilius acidophilus (L. acidophilus) is a bacterium that grows in milk. In optimal conditions, its population
          doubles every 26 minutes. If a culture starts with 20 L. acidophilus bacteria, how many bacteria will there be
          after 390 minutes? Hint: This means the 26-minute time period has occurred 15 times.
    34. Bacillus megaterium (B. megaterium) is a bacterium that grows in sucrose salts. In optimal conditions, its
          population doubles every 25 minutes. If a culture starts with 30 B. megaterium bacteria, how many bacteria will
          there be after 1,000 minutes? Hint: This means the 25-minute time period has occurred 40 times.
    35. Alex and Jill deposit $4,000 in an account bearing 5% interest compounded yearly. If they do not deposit any
          more money in that account, how much will it be worth in 30 years?
    36. Kerry and Megan deposit $6,000 dollars in and account bearing 4% compounded yearly. If they do not deposit
          any more money in that account, how much will be in the account after 40 years?
    37. You decide to color a square that measures 1 m on each side in a very particular manner. You first cut the
          square in half vertically. You color one side of the square with purple. On the side of the square that was not
          colored, you draw a line dividing that region horizontally exactly in half. You color the lower half blue. Now, you
          cut the remaining quarter of the square precisely in half with a vertical line. You color the left side red. You
          repeat this process 12 times. After you color that 12th piece, what is the total area you have colored?
    38. Consider the geometric sequence with first term 0.9 and common ratio of 0.1. What is the sum of the first 5
          terms?
    39. Repeat Exercise 38, for the sum of the first 10 terms.

For the following questions, recall that the formula for interest compounded yearly is  , where is the

amount in the account after years, is the initial amount deposited, and is the interest rate per year. However, if the

account is compounded monthly, the formula changes to               .

40. Returning to Kerry and Megan (Exercise 36), what would their account be worth if their account was
      compounded monthly?

41. Returning to Alex and Jill (Exercise 35), what would their account be worth if their account was compounded
      monthly?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  3.11 · Geometric Sequences 253

42. Imagine your family tree. You have two parents. Your parents have two parents: your grandparents. And so on.
      How many great-great-great-great-grandparents do you have? Hint: This would be six generations back.

43. Imagine your family tree. You have two parents. Your parents have two parents: your grandparents. And so on.
      How many great (20 times) grandparents do you have? Hint: This would be 22 generations back.
254 3 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers

  · natural numbers
  · factor of a number
  · multiple of a number
  · prime number
  · composite number
  · prime factorization
  · greatest common divisor (GCD)
  · least common multiple (LCM)

3.2 The Integers

  · integer
  · absolute value
  · average of a set of numbers

3.3 Order of Operations

  · order of operations
  · PEMDAS

3.4 Rational Numbers

  · density property of rational numbers
  · improper fraction
  · lowest terms
  · mixed number
  · rational number
  · repeating decimal
  · terminating decimal

3.5 Irrational Numbers

  · conjugate numbers
  · difference of squares
  · irrational numbers
  · lowest terms
  · rationalize the denominator

3.6 Real Numbers

  · complex number
  · imaginary number
  · real number

3.7 Clock Arithmetic

  · clock arithmetic
  · modulo 7
  · modulo 12

3.8 Exponents

  · base
  · exponent

3.9 Scientific Notation

  · scientific notation
  · standard notation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       3 · Chapter Summary 255

3.10 Arithmetic Sequences

  · sequence
  · term of a sequence
  · arithmetic sequence
  · first term
  · constant difference

3.11 Geometric Sequences

  · geometric sequence
  · common ratio

3.11 Geometric Sequences

  · common ratio
  · geometric sequence

Key Concepts

3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers

  · The natural numbers can be categorized as 1, prime numbers, and composite numbers.
  · Prime numbers have as their only factors 1 and themselves.
  · Composite numbers have at least three distinct factors.
  · Composite numbers can be written in their prime factorization form, which is found by repeatedly factoring prime

      factors from the number.
  · The greatest common divisor (GCD) of a set of numbers is the largest integer that divides all of the numbers in the

      set. The prime factorizations of the numbers can be used to identify the greatest common divisor.
  · The least common multiple (LCM) of a set of numbers is the smallest integer that is divisible by all of the numbers in

      the set. The prime factorizations of the numbers can be used to identify the least common multiple.
  · There are various ways that the GCD and LCM are applied.

3.2 The Integers

  · A set of numbers that can be built from the natural numbers are the integers, which consist of the natural numbers,
      zero (0), and the negatives of the natural numbers.

  · Integers are often graphed on a number line, which helps display the relative positions and values of those
      numbers.

  · The number line can be used to visualize when one integer is larger than or smaller than another integer.
  · Arithmetic operations with integers are similar to the operations with natural numbers, except that the sign

      (positive or negative) of the numbers will determine the sign (positive or negative) of the result.

3.3 Order of Operations

  · Establishing shared rules on which arithmetic operations are calculated first is necessary. Without them, different
      people may find different values for the same expression.

  · The highest precedence is with expressions in parentheses. This allows parts of an expression to be calculated in an
      order different than the basic order of operations.

  · The lowest precedence is addition and subtraction, as they are the basis for all other calculations.
  · Multiplication and division have precedence over addition and subtraction, as they are representations of repeated

      addition or subtraction.
  · Exponents have precedence over multiplication and division, as they represent repeated multiplication and division.

3.4 Rational Numbers

  · Rational numbers are fractions of integers, and can always be written as an integer divided by an integer.
  · The numerator and denominator of a fraction may have common factors. In such cases, the fraction can be reduced

      by canceling common factors. When the numerator and denominator of a fraction have no common factors, the
      fraction is said to be reduced.
  · An improper fraction is one with a numerator larger than the denominator. Such a fraction can be rewritten as an
      integer plus a proper fraction. This is called a mixed number.
  · Using division and remainder, an improper fraction may be written as a mixed number.
  · A mixed number can be converted to an improper fraction by reversing the process for changing an improper
      fraction to a mixed number.
256 3 · Chapter Summary

· The arithmetic operations or addition, subtraction, multiplication and division can all be performed on rational
    numbers.

· Addition and subtraction of rational numbers can be performed after a common denominator has been identified,
    and the fractions have been converted to forms having the common denominator.

· Multiplication and division of rational numbers can be performed without regard to common denominators.
· Between any two rational numbers, there is always another rational number. This is the density property of the

    rational numbers.

3.5 Irrational Numbers

· Irrational numbers are numbers that cannot be written as an integer divided by another integer. One example is pi,
    denoted . Another collection of irrational numbers are natural numbers that are not perfect squares.

· Some irrational numbers can be written as a rational part multiplied by an irrational part. If two irrational numbers
    have the same irrational parts, they can be added or subtracted.

· When irrational numbers are similar, on can multiply and divide the numbers without a calculator.

· Since                          , and                    , products and quotients of square roots can be determined.

· Because                and            , it is possible to simplify square root expressions so the radicand

contains no perfect square factors.

· When a fraction has an irrational number as its denominator, it is possible to convert the denominator into a

rational number using its conjugate. Doing so involves multiplying the numerator and denominator by the

conjugate of the denominator, and then applying the difference of squares formula.

· With a single square root term

· Using conjugate numbers for two term denominators

3.6 Real Numbers

· Real numbers is the collection of all rational and irrational numbers. Conceptually, it is the collection of all values
    that can be represented on a number line, or, as a length along with sign.

· The subsets of the real numbers include the natural numbers, integers, rational numbers and irrational numbers.
    The natural numbers are a subset of the integers, which is a subset of the rational numbers. The rational and
    irrational numbers are disjoint sets.

· The real numbers, due to order of operation rules and that performing arithmetic operations on real number always
    results in a real number, have arithmetic properties that apply in all cases. There include the distributive property,
    the commutative property, and the associative property. Also, every real number has an additive inverse and, except
    for zero (0), have a multiplicative inverse.

3.7 Clock Arithmetic

· Clock arithmetic uses the idea that after 12 o'clock comes 1 o'clock. For clock arithmetic, this means that every time
    12 is passed in an arithmetic process, the next number is 1, not 13.

· To determine the clock result of an arithmetic operation, divide the final result by 12 and keep the remainder. If the
    remainder is 0, then the time is 12 o'clock.

· Clock arithmetic is technically called modulo 12 arithmetic. To perform modulo 12 arithmetic, calculate the
    expression, then divide the result by 12. The modulo 12 result is the remainder.

· Days, in our system, pass in groups of seven. To calculate in day arithmetic, modulo 7 is used. To perform modulo 7
    arithmetic, calculate the expression, then divide the result by 7. The modulo 7 result is the remainder.

3.8 Exponents

· Exponents are used to express multiplying a number by itself a number of times. The number being multiplied by

itself is the base. The number of times it is multiplied by itself is the exponent, which is often referred to as the

power.

· Understanding that exponents represent repeated multiplication of a base makes it possible to establish some rules

for combining exponential expressions, using the product rule, the quotient rule, and the power rule. Additionally, it

allows us to formulate distributive rules for exponents.

· Any non-zero number raised to the 0th power is 1. This makes the definition of the 0th power consistent with the

division rule for exponents.

· For consistency, negative exponents represent the reciprocal of the base raised to the power, so that                ,

provided that            .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            3 · Chapter Summary 257

3.9 Scientific Notation

· Some numbers are so large or so small that writing the number out is clumsy and make it difficult to determine the
    true size of the number. Scientific notation makes the number more readable and make the relative size of the
    number immediately apparent.

· A number written in scientific notation is a number at least 1 and smaller than 10 multiplied by 10 raised to an
    exponent. Converting between scientific notation and standard notation involves correctly applying multiplication
    and division by powers of 10, which in practice equates to understanding how moving the decimal point of a
    number impacts the exponent of 10.

· Adding and subtracting numbers in base 10 requires the exponent of 10 in each number be the same. Once the
    numbers are converted to have the same exponent with the ten, then the numbers are added or subtracted as
    indicated, with the power of 10 remaining the same. If the result is not in scientific notation (for instance, the
    number has exceeded 10), then then number must be converted into scientific notation.

· Multiplying and dividing numbers in scientific notation is done by multiplying or dividing the number parts, then
    multiplying or dividing the 10 raised to the power parts, then multiplying those two results. If the new number is not
    in scientific notation, then the result must be converted into scientific notation.

3.10 Arithmetic Sequences

· A sequence is a list of numbers. Any individual number in that list, or sequence, is a term of the sequence. A specific
    term of a sequence is denoted by the sequence symbol with a subscript indicating where the term in the sequence
    is.

· A special form of a sequence is an arithmetic sequence. Each arithmetic sequence is determined by its first term and
    its constant difference. Any term in an arithmetic sequence is determined by adding the constant difference to the
    preceding term.

· If the first term and the constant difference of an arithmetic sequence are known, then any term of the sequence
    can be found directly.

· Because arithmetic sequences follow such a strict pattern, the sum of the first terms of an arithmetic sequence

can be determined with the formula                       .

3.11 Geometric Sequences

· A special form of a sequence is a geometric sequence. Each geometric sequence is determined by its first term and
    its constant ratio. Any term in a geometric sequence is determined by multiplying the constant ratio to the
    preceding term.

· If the first term and the constant ratio of a geometric sequence are known, then any term of the sequence can be
    found directly.

· Because geometric sequences follow such a strict pattern, the sum of the first terms of a geometric sequence can

be determined with the formula                        .

· Finding the sum of a finite geometric sequence
· Applying arithmetic sequences

3.11 Geometric Sequences

· Geometric sequence.
· Finding an arbitrary term in a geometric sequence.
· Constant ratio.
· Finding the sum of a finite geometric sequence.
· Applying arithmetic sequences.

Videos

3.1 Prime and Composite Numbers

· Divisibility Rules (https://openstax.org/r/Divisibility_Rules)
· Illegal Prime Number (https://openstax.org/r/Illegal_Prime_Number)
· Using a Factor Tree to Find the Prime Factorization (https://openstax.org/r/

    Using_a_Factor_Tree_to_Find_the_Prime_Factorization)
· Finding the Prime Factorization of 168 (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_the_Prime_Factorization_of_168)
· Using Desmos to find the GCD (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_find_the_GCD)
· Applying the GCD (https://openstax.org/r/Applying_the_GCD)
258 3 · Chapter Summary

  · Finding the LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_the_LCM)
  · Using Desmos to find the LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_find_the_LCM)
  · Application of LCM (https://openstax.org/r/Application_of_LCM)

3.2 The Integers

  · Graphing Integers on the Number Line (https://openstax.org/r/Graphing_Integers_on_the_Number_Line)
  · Comparing Integers Using the Number Line (https://openstax.org/r/Comparing_Integers_Using_the_Number_Line)
  · Evaluating the Absolute Value of an Integer (https://openstax.org/r/Evaluating_the_Absolute_Value_of-an-Integer)

3.3 Order of Operations

  · Order of Operations 1 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_1)
  · Order of Operations 2 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_2)
  · Order of Operations 3 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_3)
  · Order of Operations 4 (https://openstax.org/r/Order_of_Operations_4)

3.4 Rational Numbers

  · Introduction to Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Introduction_to_Fractions)
  · Equivalent Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Equivalent_Fractions)
  · Reducing Fractions to Lowest Terms (https://openstax.org/r/Reducing_Fractions_to_Lowest_Terms)
  · Using Desmos to Reduce a Fraction (https://openstax.org/r/Using_Desmos_to_Reduce_a_Fraction)
  · Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Different Denominators (https://openstax.org/r/

      Adding_and_Subtracting_Fractions)
  · Converting an Improper Fraction to a Mixed Number Using Desmos (https://openstax.org/r/

      Improper_Fraction_to_Mixed_Number)
  · Multiplying Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Multiplying_Fractions)
  · Dividing Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Dividing_Fractions)
  · Order of Operations Using Fractions (https://openstax.org/r/Operations_Using_Fractions)
  · Finding a Fraction of a Total (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_Fraction_of_Total)
  · Converting Units (https://openstax.org/r/Converting_Units)

3.5 Irrational Numbers

  · The Philosophy of the Pythagoreans (https://openstax.org/r/Philosophy_of_Pythagoreans)
  · Using Desmos to Find the Square Root of a Number (https://openstax.org/r/square_root_of_a_number)
  · Simplifying Square Roots (https://openstax.org/r/Simplifying_Square_Roots)
  · Rationalizing the Denominator (https://openstax.org/r/Rationalizing_Denominator)

3.6 Real Numbers

  · Properties of the Real Numbers 1 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_1)
  · Properties of the Real Numbers 2 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_2)
  · Properties of the Real Numbers 3 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_3)

3.6 Real Numbers

  · Arthur Benjamin TED talk, Faster than a Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/
      Arthur_Benjamin_TED_talk,_Faster_than_a_Calculator)

  · Identifying Sets of Real Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Sets_of_Real_Numbers)
  · Properties of the Real Numbers #1 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_1)
  · Properties of the Real Numbers #2 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_2)
  · Properties of the Real Numbers #3 (https://openstax.org/r/Properties_of_the_Real_Numbers_3)

3.7 Clock Arithmetic

  · Determining the Day of the Week for Any Date in History (https://openstax.org/r/
      Determining_the_Day_of_the_Week_for_Any_Date_in_History)

  · Clock Arithmetic (https://openstax.org/r/Clock_Arithmetic)

3.8 Exponents

  · Exponential Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Exponential_Notation)
  · Product and Quotient Rule for Exponents (https://openstax.org/r/Product_and_Quotient_Rule_for_Exponents)
  · Fraction Raised to a Power (https://openstax.org/r/Fraction_Raised_to_a_Power)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      3 · Chapter Summary 259

  · Simplifying Expressions with Exponents (https://openstax.org/r/Simplifying_Expressions_with_Exponents)

3.9 Scientific Notation

  · Converting from Standard Form to Scientific Notation Form (https://openstax.org/r/
      Converting_from_Standard_Form_to_Scientific_Notation_Form)

  · Converting from Scientific Notation Form to Standard Form (https://openstax.org/r/
      Converting_from_Scientific_Notation_Form_to_Standard_Form)

  · Multiplying Numbers in Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Multiplying_Numbers_in_Scientific_Notation)
  · Dividing Numbers in Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Dividing_Numbers_in_Scientific_Notation)
  · Application of Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Application_of_Scientific_Notation)

3.10 Arithmetic Sequences

  · Arithmetic Sequences (https://openstax.org/r/Arithmetic_Sequences)
  · Finding the First Term and Constant Difference for an Arithmetic Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/

      Finding_the_First_Term_and_Constant_Difference_for_an_Arithmetic_Sequence)
  · Finding the Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/

      Finding_the_Sum_of_a_Finite_Arithmetic_Sequence)
  · Fibonacci Sequence and "Lateralus" (https://openstax.org/r/Fibonacci_Sequence_and_Lateralus)

3.11 Geometric Sequences

  · Geometric Sequences (https://openstax.org/r/Geometric_Sequences)
  · Sum of a Finite Geometric Sequence (https://openstax.org/r/Sum_of_a_Finite_Geometric_Sequence)

Formula Review

3.4 Rational Numbers

3.5 Irrational Numbers

3.6 Real Numbers

3.8 Exponents

                , provided that
260 3 · Chapter Summary

                    , provided that

3.10 Arithmetic Sequences

3.11 Geometric Sequences

3.11 Geometric Sequences

Projects

Encryption began at least as far back as the Roman Empire. During the reign of Caesar, a particular cypher was used,
fittingly named the Caesar Cypher. This encryption process granted the Romans a great tactical advantage. Even if a
message was intercepted, it would not make sense to the person intercepting the message.
Find four instances when encryption was used and cracked over the course of history.

The Golden Ratio in Art and Architecture

The golden ratio has been used in art and architecture as far back as ancient Greece (possibly further). It also appears in
South America (Incan architecture). Find five instances of the use of the golden ratio in art or architecture and describe
its use in each of those instances.

Your Budget

Budgeting either is, or will shortly be, an important aspect of your life. Managing money well reduces stress in your life,
and provides space for planning for future expenses, such as vacations or home improvements.
Imagine your life 10 years from now. Estimate your monthly income. Identify expenses you will encounter monthly
(mortgage or rent, car payment, insurance, entertainment, etc.). Decide on an amount you plan to save monthly (this is
treated as an expense). Create a spreadsheet with those values. Record your monthly net income (your income minus
your expenses). Determine how much money you will have saved over the course of 5 years (ignore interest). Write a
reflection on your anticipated financial health.

Estimating Pi

The value of pi is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter of the circle. It is also equal to the ratio of the
area of the circle to the square of the radius of the square.
Research three ways to physically estimate pi.
Estimate pi using all three processes you found.
Present your process and solutions in class.

Design Your Own Shift Cypher

A cypher is a message written in such a way as to mask its contents. Changing a message into its cypher form is called
encryption. Decryption or deciphering is the process of changing a cyphertext message back into the original (legible)
message. One process of encryption is to scramble the letters, symbols, and punctuation of a message according to a
mathematical rule. One rule that could be used for such a cypher is addition in a chosen modulus. In this project, you will
create such a cypher, encrypt a message, and then decrypt the message.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    3 · Chapter Summary 261

Step 1: Choose the letters, symbols, and punctuation marks you want to allow in your messages. This should include at
least the uppercase letters and a space character. This is your character set.

Step 2: Count the number of characters you will use. Label this number .

Step 3: Pair each character of your character set an integer from 0 to     . Do not assign more than one character to
an integer.

Step 4: Choose an integer between 1 and  . This will be the number used to create the cypher. Label this number .

Step 5: Write a message using your character set.

Step 6: Replace every character in your message by the integer with which it was paired in Step 3.

Step 7: For every number, , from Step 7, perform the addition           (mod ).

Step 8: Replace every number found in Step 7 with the character with which it was paired in Step 3. This is your
cyphertext.

To decrypt your cyphertext, reverse the steps above.

Step 1: Replace the cyphertext characters with the paired values.

Step 2: For each value , perform the subtraction (mod ).

Step 3: Replace the numbers from Step 2 with their paired characters from the character set.

The message is then deciphered.

Design Your Own Cypher Using Multiplication

A cypher is a message written in such a way as to mask its contents. Changing a message into its cypher form is called
encryption. Decryption or deciphering is the process of changing a cyphertext message back into the original (legible)
message. One process of encryption is to scramble the letters, symbols, and punctuation of a message according to a
mathematical rule. One rule that could be used for such a cypher is multiplication in a chosen modulus. In this project,
you will create such a cypher, encrypt a message, then decrypt the message.

Step 1: Choose the letters, symbols, and punctuation marks you want to allow in your messages. This should include at
least the uppercase letters and a space character. This is your character set.

Step 2: Count the number of characters you will use. Label this number .

Step 3: Pair each character of your character set an integer from 0 to     . Do not assign more than one character to
an integer.

Step 4: Choose an integer, labeled , between 1 and           so that             . This will be the number used to create
the cypher.

Step 5: Write a message using your character set.

Step 6: Replace every character in your message by the integer with which it was paired in Step 3.

Step 7: For every number, , from Step 6, perform the multiplication        (mod ).

Step 8: Replace every number found in Step 7 with the character with which it was paired in Step 3. This is your
cyphertext.

Before beginning to decrypt in this cypher, you need to know the multiplicative inverse of the value you chose as s.

Step 1: The multiplicative inverse of is the number that, when multiplied by in your modulus, equals 1. To find this,
you will have to multiply and every number between 2 and ( ) until the product is 1 (mod ). Once this number is
found, the message can be decrypted. Call this number .

Step 2: To decrypt your cyphertext, replace the cyphertext characters with the paired values.

Step 3: For each of the value, , perform the multiplication             .

Step 4: Replace the numbers from Step 3 with their paired characters from the character set.

The message is then deciphered.
262 3 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Prime and Composite Numbers
 1. Identify which of the following numbers are prime, composite, or neither:
      201, 34, 17, 1, 37.

2. Find the prime factorization of 500.

3. Find the greatest common divisor of 80 and 340.

4. Find the greatest common divisor of 30, 40, and 70.

5. Find the least common multiple of 45 and 60.

6. Bella and JJ volunteer at the zoo. Bella volunteers every 8 days, while JJ volunteers every 14 days. How many days
    pass between days they volunteer together?

The Integers

7. Identify all the integers in the following list:                .

8. Plot the following on the same number line:
                  .

9. What two numbers have absolute value of 18?

10. Calculate               .

11. Calculate            .

12. Calculate                        .

13. Six students rent a house together. The total monthly rent (including heat and electricity) is $3,120. If they all pay
      an equal amount, how much does each student pay?

Order of Operations

14. Calculate                     .

15. Calculate                  .

16.

17.

18.

Rational Numbers
19. Reduce to lowest terms.

20. Convert to a mixed number and reduce to lowest terms.

21. Convert to decimal form.

22. Convert to decimal form.

23. Calculate            and reduce to lowest terms.

24. Compute              and reduce to lowest terms.

25. Determine 30% of 400.

26. 18 is what percent of 40?

27. In Professor Finnegan's Science Fiction course, there are 60 students. Of those, 15% say they've read A Hitchhiker's
      Guide to the Galaxy. How many of the students have read that book?

Irrational Numbers

28. Simplify the square root by expressing it in lowest terms:  .

29. Calculate                           without a calculator. If not possible, explain why.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3 · Chapter Summary 263

30. Calculate                       without a calculator. If not possible, explain why.

31. Rationalize the denominator of , and simplify the fraction.

32. Find the conjugate of           and find the product of       and its conjugate.

33. Rationalize the denominator of                       and simplify the fraction.

Real Numbers
34. Identify the numbers of the following list as a natural number, an integer, a rational number, or a real number:

             , -0.43, 18, -43, .

35. Identify the property of real numbers illustrated here:                             .

36. Identify the property of real numbers illustrated here:                          .

37. Identify the property of real numbers illustrated here:                                .

38. Identify the property of real numbers illustrated here:                             .

39. Use mental math to calculate                .

Clock Arithmetic
40. Determine 74 modulo 9.

41. Use clock arithmetic to calculate                    .

42. Use clock arithmetic to calculate              .

43. It is Wednesday. What day of the week will it be in 44 days?

44. It is 4:00. What time will it be in 100 hours?

45. Security guards with Acuriguard submit a report on campus activity every 4 days. If they make a report on a
      Monday, what day of the week will it be after 10 more reports?

Exponents

46. Use exponent rules to simplify                       .

47. Use exponent rules to simplify           .

48. Use exponent rules to simplify           .

49. Use exponent rules to simplify              .

50. Use exponent rules to simplify                 .

51. Use exponent rules to simplify                    .

52. Rewrite without a denominator.

53. Rewrite          without negative exponents.

Scientific Notation  to scientific notation.
54. Convert

55. Convert          to standard notation.

56. Convert          to scientific notation.

57. Calculate                          .

58. Calculate                             .

59. The Sextans Dwarf Spheroidal Galaxy has diameter 8,400 light years (ly). Express this in Scientific notation.

60. The Reticulum II Galaxy has diameter                    light years (ly), while the Andromeda Galaxy has a diameter of
264 3 · Chapter Summary

. How many times bigger is the Andromeda Galaxy compared to the Reticulum II Galaxy?

Arithmetic Sequences
61. Determine the common difference of the following sequence: {19, 13, 7, 1, -5, ...}.

62. Find the 25th term, , of the arithmetic sequence with         and            .

63. Find the first term and the common difference of the arithmetic sequence with 8th term  and 15th term
                    .

64. Find the sum of the first 30 terms,   , for the arithmetic sequence with first term     and common

difference          .

65. Jem makes a stack of 5 pennies. Each day, Jem adds three pennies to the stack. How many pennies are in the stack
      after 10 days?

Geometric Sequences
66. Determine the common ratio of the following geometric sequence: {6, 18, 54, 162, ...}.

67. Find the 6th term, , of the geometric sequence with           and            .

68. Find the sum of the first 12 terms,   , for the geometric sequence with first term      and common ratio
                    .

69. Carolann and Tyler deposit $8,500 in an account bearing 5.5% interest compounded yearly. If they do not deposit
      any more money in that account, how much will be in the account after 15 years?

70. The total number of ebooks sold in 2013 was 242 million (     ). Each year, the number of ebooks sold has

declined by 3% (                 ). How many ebooks were sold between 2013 and 2022?

Chapter Test

 1. Find the prime factorization of 300.

2. Tiles will be used to cover an area that is 650 cm × 1,200 cm. What is the largest size square tile that can be used so
    that all the tiles used are full tiles?

3. Calculate the following:                                    .

4. What does PEMDAS stand for?
5. David's tax return is for $1,560. He decides to spend 20% of that return. How much does David spend?
6. Convert into a mixed number.

7. Convert       to a fraction of integers.

8. Simplify the following square root:          .

9. What is the conjugate of         ?

10. Rationalize the denominator of           .

11. What two sets of numbers comprise the real numbers?

12. Which property of the real numbers is shown:                       ?

13. Georita believes it will take 30 hours for her and her family to drive to their vacation. If they leave at 2:00, what
      time should they arrive (ignore AM/PM)?

14. Suppose a bacterium in the gut has a generation time (time to divide) of 16 hours. If it first divides at 4:00, what
      time will it be when they divide the 80th time afterward?

15. Simplify     .

16. The moon is                  m from Earth. A dollar bill has a thickness of          m. If dollar bills could be

stacked perfectly, how many would it take to reach the moon?

17. A single long table can seat 8 people, 3 on each side and 1 on each end. If a second table is added to the first, end

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      3 · Chapter Summary 265

      to end, then 14 people can sit at the table, 6 per side and 1 at each end. Adding another table adds another 6
      people. How many people can sit at a table made by placing 10 of these tables end to end?
18. The first row of a theater seats 25 people. Each following row seats 2 more people. If there are 80 rows in the
      theater, how many people, total, can sit in the theater?
19. Alice deposits $2,500 in a bond yielding 6% interest compounded annually. How much is the bond worth in 20
      years?
20. What is the 15th term of a geometric sequence with first term 5 and common ratio 3?
266 3 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                              4 · Introduction 267

4  NUMBER REPRESENTATION AND
   CALCULATION

Figure 4.1 Different cultures developed different ways to record quantity. (credit: modification of work "Tally sticks from
the Swiss Alps" by Sandstein, Swiss Alpine Museum permanent collection/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System
  4.2 Early Numeration Systems
  4.3 Converting with Base Systems
  4.4 Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems
  4.5 Multiplication and Division in Base Systems

      Introduction

Right now, almost all cultures use the familiar Hindu-Arabic numbering system, which uses the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, and 9 along with place values based on powers of ten. This is a relatively recent development. The system didn't
develop until the 6th or 7th century C.E. and took some time to spread across the world, which means other cultures at
other times had to develop their own methods of counting and recording quantity. Being different cultures and different
times means there were significant differences in counting systems. Cultures needed to count and measure time for
agriculture and for religious observations. It was needed for trade. Some languages had words only for one, two, and
many. Other cultures developed more complex ways to represent quantity, with the Oksapmin people of New Guinea
using an astonishing 27 words for their system.

Representing these quantities in a recorded form likely began with a simple marking system, where one scratch on a
stick or bone represented one of whatever was being counted. We still see this today with tally marks. These systems use
repeated symbols to represent more than one. We also have systems where different symbols represent different
quantities but still use some repetition, such as in Roman numerals.

Other systems were devised that rely on place values, like the Hindu-Arabic system in use today. Place value systems
needed a zero, though, and weren't immediately recognized and took time to develop. And within these positional
systems there is variation. Some systems counted in twenties, others in tens, and some in a mix (adding another reason
to visit Hawaii). Even now, though we all use and think using tens, computers are designed to work in groups of two,
which requires a different perspective on numbering.

In this chapter, we explore different numbering systems and grouping systems, eventually discussing base 2, the
language of computers.
268 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

    4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System

       Figure 4.2 This manuscript is an early example of Hindu numerals. (credit: modification of work "Bakshali manuscript",
       Bodleian Libraries/ University of Oxford, public domain)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Evaluate an exponential expression.
        2. Convert a Hindu-Arabic numeral to expanded form.
        3. Convert a number in expanded form to a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
       The modern system of counting and computing isn't necessarily natural. That different symbols are used to indicate
       different quantities or amounts is a relatively new invention. Simple marking by scratches or dots, one for each item
       being counted, was the norm long into human history. The modern system doesn't use repeated symbols to indicate
       more than one of a thing. It uses the place of a digit in a numeral to determine what that digit represents. A numeral is a
       symbol used to represent a number. A number is an abstract idea that represents quantity or amount.
       Being clear about the difference between numeral and number is important. Just like a person can be called by various
       names, such as brother, father, husband, uncle, they are all representing the same person, John Smith. The person John
       Smith is the number, and the names brother, father, husband, and uncle are the numerals.

                WHO KNEW?

         Hindu-Arabic Numerals
         The numerals we currently use are referred to as Hindu-Arabic numerals, although they have changed as time has
         passed. Early forms of the numerals for 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 began in India, and passed through Persia to the
         Middle East. Place value was also employed in the early systems of India. Once this system was in north Africa and the
         Middle East, it spread to Europe, eventually replacing Roman numerals. Over time, the original symbols transformed
         into our modern ones. Read this article for another perspective on how the symbols began (based on the moon!)
         (https://openstax.org/r/myindiamyglory.com/2018/09/05).

       The system we use for counting and computing uses place values based on powers of 10. In this section, we review
       exponents and our positional system.

     Evaluating Exponential Expressions

       Most modern numerical systems depend on place values, where the quantity represented depends not only on the digit,
       but also on where the digit is in the number. The place value is a power of some specific number, which means most
       numbering systems are actually exponential expressions. An exponential expression is any mathematical expression
       that includes exponents. So, evaluating such an expression means performing the calculation. In this chapter, we will be
       using exponents that are positive integer values. Before we do so, let's remind ourselves about exponents and what they
       represent. Suppose you want to multiply a number. Let's label that number , by itself some number of times. Let's label
       the number of times . We denote that as . We say , or the base, raised to the th power, or the exponent. For
       example, if we are multiplying 13 by itself eight times, we write and say 13 to the eighth power.
       When computing exponential expressions, we should be careful to remember the order of operations. Using the order of
       operation rules, calculations inside the parentheses are done first, then exponents are calculated, then multiplication

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         4.1 · Hindu-Arabic Positional System 269

and division calculations are performed, and then addition and subtraction.
       VIDEO
      Exponential Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Exponential_Notation)

  EXAMPLE 4.1

Evaluating an Exponential Expression
Evaluate the following exponential expressions.
 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. To evaluate, or calculate, this expression, we use order of operations, which means the exponents are done first,

      then multiplications, and then additions.

 2. To evaluate the expression, we use the order of operations, which means the exponents are done first, then the
      multiplications, then the additions. Remember that any base raised to the exponent 0 is 1.

 3. To evaluate the expression, we use the order of operations, which means the exponents are done first, then the
      multiplications, and then the additions. Remember that any base raised to the exponent 0 is 1.

      YOUR TURN 4.1

Evaluate the following exponential expressions.
    1.
    2.
    3.

Converting Hindu-Arabic Numerals to Expanded Form

When you see the number 738, and you speak the number out loud, what do you say? You probably said "seven hundred
thirty-eight" while wondering what point could possibly be made by asking this. What you didn't say was "seven, and
three, and eight." A pre-K student might say that. Which should make you wonder, why?

The reason is that you've been taught place values, or the positions of digits in a number that determine the values of
those digits. You know that in a three-digit number, the first digit is hundreds, the second digit is tens, and the last digit
is ones. These place values rely on powers of 10, which makes this system a base 10 system.

This sense of place value is what makes our system of numbers so useful. You've also been taught the Hindu-Arabic
numeration system. This system, which uses the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, and also employs place value based
on powers of 10, is in use today.

Writing a number using these place values is writing them in expanded form. For a number with digits, the expanded

form is the first digit times 10 raised to one less than , plus each following digit times 10 raised to one less than the

previous power of 10. For example, the number 738 would be written as            .

What about a four-digit number, like 5,825? Out loud, we'd say five thousand, seven hundred twenty-five. In expanded

form, it would be                                . Notice that the largest exponent is one less than the number

of digits, and that the exponents go down by one as we move through the number.
270 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Aryabhata of Kusumapura and Brahmagupta

The Hindu-Arabic numeral system developed in India, and Aryabhata of Kusumapura is credited with the place value
notation in the 5th century. However, the system wasn't as complete as it could be, until. roughly a century later, when
Brahmagupta introduced the symbol for 0. The 0 is necessary to indicate that a given place value has been skipped,
as in 4,098. In 4,098, the 102 power is skipped. Without such a symbol, 4,098 and 498 look similar. The value of both
the place value notation and the introduction of the symbol 0 cannot be overstated, for math and the sciences.

EXAMPLE 4.2

Writing a Number in Expanded Form
Write the following in expanded form.

1. 563
2. 4,821
3. 903,786

Solution

1. Step 1: Since there are three digits in 563,  is 3. So, this is the first digit times 10 raised to the power of 2, so we

start with     .

Step 2: Then we add the next digit, 6, multiplied by 10 to a power one less than the previous, at which point we have
                         .

Step 3: Finally, the last digit is multiplied by 10 to the zeroth power and added to the previous. This results in
                                        .

2. Step 1: Since there are four digits in 4,821, is 4. We multiply the first digit, 4, by 10 raised to the power of 3, which

is          .

Step 2: Then we add the next digit, 8, multiplied by 10 to a power one less than the previous, at which point we have
                         .

Step 3: We continue to the next digit, lowering the exponent of 10 by one. Now we have
                                        .

Step 4: Finally, the last digit is multiplied by 10 to the zeroth power and added to the previous. This results in
                                                       .

3. Since there are six digits in 903,786, is 6. So, we begin the process with 9 times 10 raised to the 5th power and
     continue through the numbers, reducing the exponent of 10 by one each time. This results in
                                                                                          .

        YOUR TURN 4.2

  Write the following in expanded form.
      1. 924
      2. 1,279
      3. 4,130,045

Converting Numbers in Expanded Form to Hindu-Arabic Numerals

Converting from expanded form back into a Hindu-Arabic numeral is the reverse process of expanding a number, and is
equivalent to evaluating the exponential expression.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.1 · Hindu-Arabic Positional System 271

  EXAMPLE 4.3

Converting a Number from Expanded Form to a Hindu-Arabic Numeral
Convert the following into Hindu-Arabic numerals.

 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. Evaluating the expression results in:
 2. Evaluating the expression results in:

 3. Evaluating the expression results in:

      YOUR TURN 4.3

Convert the following to Hindu-Arabic Numerals.
    1.
    2.
    3.

Check Your Understanding

 1. What is meant by a place value system?

2. Evaluate the following exponential expression:                 .

3. Express the following number in expanded form: 45,209.

4. What number provides the value of a digit in our system of numeration?

5. How are numerals and numbers different?

6. Express as a Hindu-Arabic number:                                        .

        SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES

 1. What does it mean for a system to be a place value system?

 2. In the system we use today, what number are the place values based on?

 3. How are numerals and numbers different?

 4. What relates numerals to numbers?

For the following exercises, evaluate the exponential expression.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
272 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

           14.
       For the following exercises, express the Hindu-Arabic number in expanded form.

           15. 13
           16. 25
           17. 82
           18. 99
           19. 131
           20. 408
           21. 651
           22. 3,901
           23. 5,098
           24. 12,430
       For the following exercises, express the expanded number as a Hindu-Arabic number.
           25.
           26.
           27.
           28.
           29.
           30.
           31.
           32.
           33.
           34.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                              4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 273

4.2 Early Numeration Systems

Figure 4.3 Babylonians used clay tablets for writing and record keeping. (credit: modification of work by Osama Shukir
Muhammed Amin FRCP(Glasg), CC BY 4.0 International)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Understand and convert Babylonian numerals to Hindu-Arabic numerals.
 2. Understand and convert Mayan numerals to Hindu-Arabic numerals.
 3. Understand and convert between Roman numerals and Hindu-Arabic numerals.

Each culture throughout history had to develop its own method of counting and recording quantity. The system used in
Australia would necessarily differ from the system developed in Babylon that would, in turn, differ from the system
developed in sub-Saharan Africa. These differences arose due to cultural differences. In nearly all societies, knowing the
difference between one and two would be useful. But it might not be useful to know the difference between 145 and
167, as those quantities never had a practical use. For example, a shepherd likely didn't manage more than 100 sheep,
so quantities larger than 100 might never have been encountered. This can even be seen in our use of the term few,
which is an inexact quantity that most would agree means more than two. However, as societies became more complex,
as commerce arose, as military bodies developed, so did the need for a system to handle large numbers. No matter the
system, the issues of representing multiple values and how many symbols to use had to be addressed. In this section, we
explore how the Babylonians, Mayans, and Romans addressed these issues.

Understand and Convert Babylonian Numerals to Hindu-Arabic Numerals

The Babylonians used a mix of an additive system of numbers and a positional system of numbers. An additive
system is a number system where the value of repeated instances of a symbol is added the number of times the symbol
appears. A positional system is a system of numbers that multiplies a "digit" by a number raised to a power, based on the
position of the "digit."

The Babylonian place values didn't use powers of 10, but instead powers of 60. They didn't use 60 different symbols
though. For the value 1, they used the following symbol:

For values up to 9, that symbol would be repeated, so three would be written as
274 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       To represent the quantity 10, they used
       For 20, 30, 40, and 50, they repeated the symbol for 10 however many times it was needed, so 40 would be written
       When they reached 60, they moved to the next place value. The complete list of the Babylonian numerals up to 59 is in
       Table 4.1.

       Table 4.1 Babylonian Numerals
       You can see how Babylonians repeated the symbols to indicate multiples of a value. The number 6 is 6 of the symbol for
       1 grouped together. The symbol for 30 is three of the symbols for 10 grouped together. However, their system doesn't go
       past 59. To go past 59, they used place values. As opposed to the Hindu-Arabic system, which was based on powers of
       10, the Babylonian positional system was based on powers of 60. You should also notice there is no symbol for 0, which
       has some impact on the number system. Since the Babylonian number system lacked a 0, they didn't have a placeholder
       when a power of 60 was absent. Without a 0, 101, 110, and 11 all look the same. However, there is some evidence that
       the Babylonians left a small space between "digits" where we would use a 0, allowing them to represent the absence of
       that place value. To summarize, the Babylonian system of numbers used repeating a symbol to indicate more than
       one, used place values, and lacked a 0.

                WHO KNEW?
         Invention of 0
         The idea of 0 is not a natural one. Most cultures failed to recognize the need for a 0. If someone asked a farmer in 300
         B.C.E. how many cows they had, but they had none, they would not answer "zero." They'd say "I don't have any" and
         be done with it. It wasn't until roughly 3 B.C.E. that 0 appeared in Mesopotamia. It was independently discovered (or
         invented!) in the Mayan culture around 4 C.E. it made its appearance in India in the 400s C.E., and began to spread at

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 275

  that point. It wasn't developed earlier mostly because positional systems were not yet fully developed. Once
  positional systems arose, the need to represent a missing power had to be addressed.

So how do we convert from Babylonian numbers to Hindu-Arabic numbers? To do so, we need to use the symbols from
Table 4.1, and then place values based on powers of 60. If you have digits in the Babylonian number, you multiply the
first "digit" by 60 raised to one less than the number of "digits." You then continue through the "digits," multiplying each
by 60 raised to a power that is one smaller. However, be careful of spaces, since they represent a zero in that place.

  EXAMPLE 4.4
Converting Two-Digit Babylonian Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the Babylonian number

into a Hindu-Arabic number.
     Solution

has two digits:

and
Step 1: So the first symbol,

represents 4 in the Babylonian system. This is multiplied by 60 to the first power (just as would happen in a two digit

number), which gives us          .

Step 2: The next symbol is

which represents 27 in the Babylonian system. This is multiplied by 60 raised to 0, which gives  .

Step 3: Calculating that yields                . So the Babylonian number

equals 267 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.

YOUR TURN 4.4

1. Convert the Babylonian number               into a Hindu-Arabic number.
276 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

         EXAMPLE 4.5
       Converting Three-Digit Babylonian Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
       Convert the Babylonian number

       into a Hindu-Arabic number.
            Solution

has three digits:

and

and
Step 1: So the first symbol,

represents 13 in the Babylonian system. This is multiplied by 60 to the second power (since there are 3 digits), which

gives us           .

Step 2: The next symbol is

which represents 8 in the Babylonian system, is multiplied by 60 raised to the first power, which gives us
                           .

Step 3: The last digit is

representing 54, which is multiplied by 60 raised to 0, which gives                                                                      .

Step 4: Calculating that yields
                                                                                                                                      .

So, the Babylonian number

equals 47,334 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 277

    YOUR TURN 4.5

1. Convert the Babylonian number                                       into a Hindu-Arabic number.

  EXAMPLE 4.6

Converting Four-Digit Babylonian Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the Babylonian number

into a Hindu-Arabic number.

     Solution
It appears that

has three digits, but there is a space in between
and

Remember, the Babylonian system has no 0, it instead employs a space where we expect a zero. This means this is a four
digit number.

Step 1: The first symbol,

represents 12 in the Babylonian system. This is multiplied by 60 to the third power since there are four digits, which gives

us  .

Step 2: The next symbol is a blank, which for us is a 0, representing  , giving us                           .

Step 3: The next symbol is

which represents 42 in the Babylonian system, is multiplied by 60 raised to the first power, which gives us
                                            .

Step 4: The last Babylonian digit,

represents 39 in the Babylonian system. This is multiplied by 60 raised to 0, which gives
                                                            .

Step 5: Calculating that yields
278 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

So the Babylonian number

equals 2,594,559 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.

YOUR TURN 4.6

1. Convert the Babylonian number                     into a Hindu-Arabic number.

      WHO KNEW?

The Legacy of Babylonian System
The Babylonian system can still be seen today. An hour is 60 minutes, and a minute is 60 seconds. Additionally, when
measuring angles in degrees, each degree can be split into 60 minutes (1/60th of a degree) and 60 seconds (1/60th of
a minute).

VIDEO

Converting Between Babylonian and Hindu-Arabic Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Babylonian_to_Hindu-
Arabic_Numbers)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 279

Understand and Convert Mayan Numerals to Hindu-Arabic Numerals

The Mayans employed a positional system just as we do and the Babylonians did, but they based their position values on
powers of 20 and they had a dedicated symbol for zero. Similar to the Babylonians, the Mayans would repeat symbols to
indicate certain values. A single dot was a 1, two dots were a 2, up to four dots. Then a five was a horizontal bar. The
horizontal bars could be used three times, since the fourth horizontal bar would make a 20, which was a new position in
the number. The 0 was a special picture, which appears like a turtle lying on its back. The shell would then be "empty," so
maybe that's why the symbol was 0. The complete list is provided in Table 4.2. Another feature of Mayan numbers was
that they were written vertically. The powers of 20 increased from bottom to top.

                                                  Table 4.2 Mayan Numerals
To summarize, the Mayan system of numbers used repeating symbol to indicate more than one, used place values, and
employed a 0. So how do we convert from Mayan numbers to Hindu-Arabic numbers? To do so, we need to use the
symbols from Table 4.2 and then place values based on powers of 20. If you have digits in the Mayan number, you
multiply the first "digit" by 20 raised to one less than the number of "digits." You then continue through the "digits,"
multiplying each by 20 raised to a power that is one smaller than the previous power. Fortunately, there is an explicit 0,
so there is no ambiguity about numbers like 110, 101, and 11.

  EXAMPLE 4.7
Converting Two-Digit Mayan Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the Mayan number

into a Hindu-Arabic number.
     Solution
280 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

has two digits:

and

Step 1: So, the first symbol,

represents 15 in the Mayan system. This is multiplied by 20 to the first power, which gives us  .
Step 2: The next symbol is                                                                              .

which represents 9 in the Mayan system. This is multiplied by 20 raised to 0, which gives

Step 3: Calculating that yields                            . So

equals 309 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.

        YOUR TURN 4.7
  1. Convert the Mayan number into a Hindu-Arabic number.

  EXAMPLE 4.8

Converting Three-Digit Mayan Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the Mayan number

into a Hindu-Arabic number.
     Solution

has three digits:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 281

and

and

Step 1: So the first symbol,

represents 6 in the Mayan system. This is multiplied by 20 to the second power (since there are 3 digits), which gives us
          .

Step 2: The next symbol is

which represents 8 in the Mayan system, is multiplied by 20 raised to the first power, which gives us  .

Step 3: The last digit is

representing 4, which is multiplied by 20 raised to 0, which gives  .
                                                                                                  . So
Step 4: Calculating that yields
the Mayan number

equals 2,564 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.
        YOUR TURN 4.8

  1. Convert the Mayan number into a Hindu-Arabic number.

  EXAMPLE 4.9
Converting Four-Digit Mayan Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the Mayan number
282 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       into a Hindu-Arabic number.
            Solution

has four digits, so the first power of 20 that is used is 3.
Step 1: The first symbol,

represents 8 in the Mayan system. This is multiplied by 20 to the third power (since there are four digits), which gives us
          .

Step 2: The next symbol is

which is a 0, representing       , giving us   .

Step 3: The next symbol is

which represents 16 in the Mayan system, is multiplied by 20 raised to the first power, which gives us
                                          .

Step 4: The last Mayan digit,

represents 5 in the Mayan system. This is multiplied by 20 raised to 0, which gives
                                                         .

Step 5: Calculating that yields

So the Mayan number

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 283

equals 64,325 in the Hindu-Arabic number system.

        YOUR TURN 4.9
  1. Convert the Mayan number into a Hindu-Arabic number.

      WHO KNEW?

The Mayan Calendar

The Mayans used this base 20 system for everyday situations. But their culturally important, and extremely accurate,
calendar system used a slightly different system. For their calendars, they used a system where the place values were
1, 20, then 20*18, then 20*18*18. The reason for this is 20*18 is 360, which is closer to the number of days in a year.
Had they used a purely base 20 system for their calendar, they'd be very far off with 400 days in a year.

Three hundred sixty days still left the Mayans a bit short, as there are 365 days in a year (ignoring leap years). The
Mayan calendar also included 5 days, called Wayeb days, which brings their calendar to 365 days. As it happens,
Wayeb is the Mayan god of misfortune, so these 5 days were considered the bad luck days.

       VIDEO

      Converting Mayan Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers (https://openstax.org /r/Mayan_to_Hindu-Arabic_Numbers)

Understand and Convert Between Roman Numerals and Hindu-Arabic Numerals

The Mayan and Babylonian systems shared two features, one of which we are familiar with (place value) and one that we
don't use (repeated symbols). The Roman system of numbers used repeated symbols, but does not employ a place
value. It also lacks a 0. The Roman system is built on the following symbols in Table 4.3.

Roman Numeral Hindu-Arabic Value

I                                                          1

V                                                          5

X                                                          10

L                                                          50

Table 4.3 Roman Numerals
284 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                               Roman Numeral Hindu-Arabic Value

                                               C                         100

                                               D                         500

                                               M                         1,000

                                               Table 4.3 Roman Numerals

As in the Mayan and Babylonian systems, a symbol may be repeated to indicate a larger value. However, at 4, they did
not use IIII. They instead used IV. Since the I came before the V, the number stands for "one before five." A similar
process was used for 9, which was written IX, or "one before ten." The value 40 was written XL, or "ten before fifty," while
49 was written XLIX, or "forty plus nine."

The following are the rules for writing and reading Roman numerals.

  · The representations for bigger values precede those for smaller values.
  · Up to three symbols may be grouped together; for example, III for 3, or XXX for 30, or CC for 200.
  · A larger value followed by a smaller value indicated addition; for example, VII for 7, XIII for 13, LV for 55, and MCC

      for 1200.
  · I can be placed before V to indicate 4, or before X, to indicate 9. These are the only ways I is used as a subtraction.
  · X can be placed before L to indicate 40, and before C to indicate 90. These are the only ways X is used as a

      subtraction.
  · C can be placed before D to indicate 400, and before M to indicate 900. These are the only ways C is used as a

      subtraction.
  · If multiple symbols are used, and a subtraction involving that symbol, the subtraction part comes after the multiple

      symbols. For example, XXIX for 29 and CCXC for 290.

WHO KNEW?

Legacy of Roman Numerals

The Roman numbering system is still used today in some situations. Many cornerstones of buildings have the year
written in Roman numerals. Movie titles often represent the year the movie was produced as Roman numerals. The
most recognizable might be that the Super Bowl is numbered using Roman numerals.

  EXAMPLE 4.10

Converting Roman Numerals to Hindu-Arabic Numbers
Convert the following Roman numerals into Hindu-Arabic numerals.

 1. XXVII
 2. XXXIV
 3. MMCMXLVIII

     Solution
 1. The numeral XXVII begins with two X's, which is then followed by a V. So, the two X's combine to be 20. The V is

      followed by two I's, so the V indicates the addition of 5. The two I's that follow indicate addition of two. That ends the
      symbols, so the value is 20 plus 5 plus 2, or 27 in Hindu-Arabic numerals.
 2. The numeral XXXIV begins with three X's, which is then followed by an I. So, the three X's combine to be 30. The I is
      followed by a V, which indicates 4. That ends the symbols, so the value is 30 plus 4, or 34 in Hindu-Arabic numerals.
 3. The numeral MMCMXLVIII begins with two M's, which is then followed by a C. So, the two M's combine to make
      2000. The C is followed by an M, which indicates 900. The CM is followed by XL, which indicates 40. The L is followed
      by V, which indicates 5. The V is followed by three I's, indicating 3. Adding those values yields 2,948.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  4.2 · Early Numeration Systems 285

        YOUR TURN 4.10

  Convert the following Roman numerals into Hindu-Arabic numerals.
      1. LXXVII
      2. CCXL
      3. MMMCDXLVII

       VIDEO

      Converting From Roman Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Roman_to_Hindu-
      Arabic_Numbers)

Of course, we can convert from Hindu-Arabic numerals, to Roman numerals, too.

  EXAMPLE 4.11

Converting Hindu-Arabic Numbers to Roman Numerals
Convert the following Hindu-Arabic numerals into Roman numerals.

 1. 38
 2. 94
 3. 846
 4. 2,987

     Solution
 1. Thirty is represented as three X's, and the 8 is represented with VIII, so 38 in Roman numerals is XXXVIII.
 2. Ninety is represented by XC, and four is represented by IV, so 94 in Roman numerals is XCIV.
 3. The number is less than 900 and more than 500, so the first symbol to be used is D, which is 500. To get to 800, we

      need 300 more, which is represented with three C's. Forty is represented with XL, and the six. The Roman numerals
      are DCCCXLVI.
 4. The two thousand is represented by two M's. The 900 is represented by CM. The 80 is represented by LXXX (50 plus
      30). Finally, the 7 is represented by VII. We have that 2,987 in Roman numerals is MMCMLXXXVII.

        YOUR TURN 4.11

  Convert the following Hindu-Arabic numerals into Roman numerals.
      1. 27
      2. 49
      3. 739
      4. 3,647

       VIDEO
      Converting From Hindu-Arabic Numbers to Roman Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Hindu-
      Arabic_to_Roman_Numbers)

Check Your Understanding

 7. What is the place value for Babylonian numerals?
 8. What place value is used in the Mayan numeration system?
 9. What place value is used for Roman numerals?

10. Convert the Babylonian numeral  into a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
286 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       11. Convert the Mayan numeral into a Hindu-Arabic numeral.

       12. Convert the Roman numeral CCXLVII into a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
       13. Convert 479 into a Roman numeral.

             SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES

       For the following exercises, convert the Babylonian numeral into a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
             1.
             2.
             3.
             4.

             5.
             6.
             7.
             8.
       For the following exercises, express the Mayan numeral as a Hindu-Arabic numeral. Use the common system, which is
       based on powers of 20 only.
             9.
           10.
           11.

           12.
           13.

           14.

           15.

           16.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 287

For the following exercises, express the Roman numeral as a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
    17. VII
    18. XI
    19. IX
    20. XXIV
    21. MCXLII
    22. CXXII
    23. DCCXLIV
    24. MCMLIX

For the following exercises, express the Hindu-Arabic numeral as a Roman numeral.
    25. 8
    26. 14
    27. 27
    28. 94
    29. 274
    30. 487
    31. 936
    32. 2,481

33. What uses a place value system for numbers: Roman, Babylonian, Egyptian, Greek?
34. What uses an additive system: Roman, Mayan, Egyptian, Greek?
35. What uses a 0: Roman, Mayan, Egyptian, Greek?

4.3 Converting with Base Systems

Figure 4.4 Computers use Base 2, which only uses 0's and 1's, to represent quantity. (credit: modification of work
"IMAG0933" by yvanhou/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Convert another base to base 10.
 2. Write numbers in different base systems.
 3. Convert base 10 to other bases.
 4. Determine errors in converting between bases.
In our system of numbers, we use base 10, but using base 10 was not a given within other systems. There were other
systems that used bases other than 10, as we saw with the Mayans and the Babylonians. The base 10 system comes
down to grouping objects in sets of 10, but grouping in sets of 10 only happens if the culture values grouping by that
288 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

many. We feel 10 is natural because we have 10 fingers. There are other systems using other grouping values, such as 4
or 20.

One good reason for examining other bases is to remind ourselves how we had to learn arithmetic when we were

young, memorizing rules for our base 10 system. We had to learn why those arithmetic rules made sense, such as why

and                   . Another good reason for learning other base systems is due to computers; their circuitry

instead uses base 2.

In this section, we explore other base systems and how to convert between them.

Conversion of Another Base into Base 10 and Other Bases

We saw in Hindu-Arabic Positional System that our Hindu-Arabic system uses base 10, which is a system using place
values of digits that depend on powers of 10 (or, are based on powers of 10). We've already worked with bases other than
base 10: The Babylonian system was base 60, while the Mayan system was base 20.

To explore how our base 10 system is used, answer the following question: What's the following quantity: 4,572? You
probably said four thousand five hundred seventy-two (no, there is no "and" between hundred and seventy). But why do
you think that 4 means four thousand? A very young person when learning their numbers might say that's a four five
seven and two. But you added the context of thousands to the four. Why?

Place value, that's why. You learned early on that where the numeral was gave it different meanings. Ten thousands,
thousands, hundreds, tens, and ones. So, you translate that symbol string (4,572) into "four thousand five hundred
seventy-two." As we saw in Hindu-Arabic Positional System, expanding a Hindu-Arabic number involved writing the
number using each digit times its appropriate power of 10. So, we could write 4,572 as

                                                                                                               .

One possible reason we use base 10 is that we have 10 fingers, and in the cultures where the Hindu-Arabic system
developed, that became the standard. Other cultures may have used other ways of organizing numbers, perhaps using
20 by including toes, or using 60 because 60 has many divisors. Mathematically though, base 10 is an awkward base to
work in since 10 has limited divisors. But we think it is easy and simple because that's what we've been taught to use.

Using a base 10 system means we need 10 symbols to make our numbering system work: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now imagine that we all only had 6 fingers instead of 10 and our counting system was based on those 6 fingers. We
would be counting in groups of 6, not groups of 10. How would this change how we work with quantity?

First, we'd need only six symbols. Let's use 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Second, our place values would be based on powers of 6, not

powers of 10. For instance, the number 3,024 in base 6 would be                               . That is how you can

translate a base 6 number into a base 10 number. When we calculate that expression we get

                                                                                           .

This means the base 6 number 3,024 is equal to the base 10 number 664.

From now on, if we are using a base 6 number, we will follow it with the subscript 6, like the following: 3,0246 means the
number is in base 6.

A base 10 number gets no subscript (it's the standard). So, 3,024 is a base 10 number. A base 13 number would be
4,67213.

So, a base 6 system uses only the symbols 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Also, the place values use powers of 6. However, we still
don't know how to count in base 6. In order to do so, we'd have to know how to represent the quantities larger than five
in base 6. Let's review how our base 10 system works by counting from 0 to 100, which shows how larger values are
represented.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 289

In writing the base 10 numbers, you start with these first 10 values:
                                                       0123456789

But you've run out of symbols. So, we use two digits:
                                               10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

The 1 out front means you've run out of digits one time.
But now you've run out twice. Continuing with those numbers gives:

                                               20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29

And so on,

                              30 31 32 33 34 etc....

Eventually, you hit the 90s,

                              90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99

And you've run out of the digits again! So, we say we've run out of digits in the tens place one time, hence:
                                      100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109

That's the pattern we use in base 10. We write out the symbols until we've used all the symbols, then add a digit in front
that counts how many times we've used the digits. Knowing the numbers, or being able to count higher and higher, is
necessary to understand how all the arithmetic works, as it all goes back to counting.
The counting pattern is the same for any other base, including base 6. So, let's start:

                                                                    012345

But we've run out of symbols! Just like in base 10, we use a second digit, where the first digit will tell us we've run out of
symbols one time.

                                                               10 11 12 13 14 15

And we use the same pattern:

                              20 21 22 23 24 25
                              30 31 32 33 34 35
                              40 41 42 43 44 45
                              50 51 52 53 54 55
290 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       But we've run out of symbols for that front digit. So, we indicate it the same way as in base 10...by adding a third digit in
       front, indicating we've run out of symbols once in the second place:

                                                                 100 101 102 103 104 105
                                                                 110 111 etc.

       The symbol pattern is the same, but truncated. We only use the six symbols. So that is how we represent base 6. Being
       able to write out these numbers is important when working with addition in the base.
       When using a base larger than 10, though, we need more symbols. Instead of creating new symbols, we use capital
       letters, with A representing the digit for "10," B representing the digit for "11," and so on.

         EXAMPLE 4.12
       Determining Digits of a Base with Less Than 10 Digits
       What are the digits used for base 7?

            Solution
       Since this is base 7, we need only 7 symbols: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

               YOUR TURN 4.12
         1. What are the digits for base 4?

         EXAMPLE 4.13
       Determining Digits of a Base with More Than 10 Digits
       What are the digits used for base 14?

            Solution
       Since this is base 14, we need 14 symbols. We don't have single character numbers for 10, 11, 12, and 13, so, in a fit of
       inspired creativity, we use capital letters A, B, C, D to represent those quantities. So, the digits in base 14 are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
       5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D.

               YOUR TURN 4.13
         1. What are the digits used for base 12?

                WHO KNEW?
         Using Base 12
         As mentioned in the text, working in base 10 is mathematically awkward. Ten has only two natural number divisors: 2
         and 5. This means dividing into groups is not easy. However, 12, or a dozen, has more divisors: 2, 3, 4, and 6. The
         Dozenal Society recognizes this more mathematically pleasant detail. It advocates for a switch to using base 12 for
         numbers. Their argument is based on the divisibility of the number 12. But has there ever been a society that used
         such a system? The answer is yes. A dialect of the Gwandara language in Nigeria uses the base 12 system. It is
         unlikely, though, that the Dozenal Society will achieve their goal, as the base 10 system is so entrenched in our
         society.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 291

  EXAMPLE 4.14
Converting from One Base into Another
Convert 3,6017 into base 10.

     Solution
In base 7, the place values are powers of 7. Since there are four digits, the highest power of 7 that is used is 3. This yields

                                                                                                                                                        .

       VIDEO
      Convert Base 7 to Base 10 (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_Base_7_to_Base_10)

        YOUR TURN 4.14

  1. Convert 4216 into base 10.

  EXAMPLE 4.15
Converting from Base 14 to Base 10
Convert 4B714 into base 10.

     Solution
In base 14, the place values are powers of 14. Since there are three digits, the highest power of 14 is 2. Also recall that in
base 14, 10 is represented by A, 11 is represented by B, 12 is represented by C, and 13 is represented by D. Using that, we
convert to base 10:

                                                                                                                                                      .

        YOUR TURN 4.15

  1. Convert A3C14 into base 10.

  EXAMPLE 4.16
Converting from Base 12 to Base 10
Convert A1612 into base 10.

     Solution
In base 12, the place values are powers of 12. Since there are three digits, the highest power of 12 is 2. Also recall that in
base 12, 10 is represented by A and 11 is represented by B. Using that, we convert to base 10:

                                                                                                                                                         .

        YOUR TURN 4.16

  1. Convert 5AB12 into base 10.
292 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

         EXAMPLE 4.17
       Converting from Base 2 to Base 10
       Convert 10112 into base 10.

            Solution
       In base 2, the place values are powers of 2. Since there are four digits, the highest power of 2 is 3. Using that, we convert
       to base 10:

                                                                                                                                                                  .

               YOUR TURN 4.17

         1. Convert 110112 into base 10.

                WHO KNEW?

         Before Napoleon
         Before Napoleon's France, which adopted the base 10 system, a modified base 12 system was often used in Europe.
         Twelve is easily divisible into groups of 2, 3, 4, and 6, which makes it easier to work with. Even our numbering system
         retains a bit of this. You have likely noticed that we use the words thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and so on to indicate 10
         and 3, 10 and 4, 10 and 5, and so one. Even the 20s reinforce this idea, as in twenty-one, and twenty-two. However,
         two numbers don't follow this pattern, namely 11 and 12. If they followed the same rules, they'd be one teen and two
         teen. We even have a special word for 12; that is, a dozen. However, etymologically speaking, the words eleven and
         twelve are likely derived by referencing the number 10. These two numbers may date back to the Old English words
         endleofan and twelf, which can be traced back further to ain lif and twa lif. The word lif here may be the base word for
         "to leave." This would suggest ain lif is one left after 10, and twa lif is two left after 10, or, 11 and 12.

         EXAMPLE 4.18
       Writing Numbers in Base Systems Other Than Base 10
       Write the numbers in base 7 up to 1007.

            Solution
       Step 1: Using the patterns we indicated earlier, we begin with the first seven digits.
       0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
       Step 2: Since we've run out of digits, we start with 10, indicating we've run out of symbols once.
       10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
       Step 3: Continuing in the same way, we get:
       20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26
       30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36
       40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46
       50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56
       60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66
       Now, all the digits have been used in the leading digits. Since the digits have all been used in that leading digit, we use
       100, as in base 10.
       100

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 293

        YOUR TURN 4.18

  1. Write the numbers of base 4 up to 1004.

  EXAMPLE 4.19

Writing Numbers in Bases with More Than 10 Symbols
Write the numbers in base 14 up to 10014.

     Solution
Step 1: Using the patterns we indicated earlier, we begin with the first 14 digits.
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D
Step 2: Since we've run out of digits, we start with 10, indicating we've run out of symbols once.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D
Step 3: Continuing in the same way, we get:
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 3A, 3B, 3C, 3D
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 4A, 4B, 4C, 4D
50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 6A, 6B, 6C, 6D
70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 7A, 7B, 7C, 7D
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 8A, 8B, 8C, 8D
90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 9A, 9B, 9C, 9D
A0, A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, A8, A9, AA, AB, AC, AD
B0, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, B7, B8, B9, BA, BB, BC, BD
C0, C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, C6, C7, C8, C9, CA, CB, CC, CD
D0, D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D9, DA, DB, DC, DD
100

        YOUR TURN 4.19

  1. Write the numbers of base 12 up to 1004.

Base 2 is important in the digital age, as it is the system used by computers. It is the simplest base to work with, but has
the drawback that the numbers in base 2 may use many, many digits. In Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems and
Multiplication and Division in Base Systems, we will look at base 2 in each situation.

  EXAMPLE 4.20

Writing Numbers in Base 2
Write the numbers in base 2 up to 1002.

     Solution
Base 2 uses only two symbols: 0 and 1. Following the pattern established previously, the numbers in base 2 up to 1002
are 0, 1, 10, 11, and 100.
294 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

      YOUR TURN 4.20
1. Write the numbers in base 3 up to 1003.

      WHO KNEW?

Early Hawaiian Numeration System

Before the British arrived in Hawaii, people there used a system that combined two different bases. Objects were
initially grouped into collections of four, and a collection of four was referred to as kauna. A person could have two
kauna and three "ones" (in Hindu-Arabic, 11). Or they could have eight kauna and one "ones" (In Hindu-Arabic, 33).
However, sets of four were grouped in collections of 10. A set of 10 kauna was ka'au. The collections of ka'au were
grouped by 10 also. Which meant that 10 ka'au (this is 40 in Hindu-Arabic) would be lau (or 400 in Hindu-Arabic). What
this shows is that the Hawaiian culture developed a system that used base 4 combined with base 10.

Conversion of Base 10 into Another Base

Converting from base 10 into another base uses repeated division, recording the remainder at each step. Then, the
number in the new base is the remainder starting from the last remainder found. To be accurate in what we're saying,
we need to remind ourselves of some terminology associated with division. When integers are divided, the one being
divided is the dividend, and the one that is dividing the dividend is the divisor. The quotient is the largest natural
number that can be multiplied by the divisor where the product is less than the dividend.

When the integer is divided by the integer , is called the dividend and is the divisor.

To convert a base 10 number into base , we divide by , recording the remainder. Then we divide the quotient from
that step by the base , and record the remainder again. We continue this process until the quotient is 0. Then, the base

  number has digits that start with the last remainder and use each remainder in reverse order.

EXAMPLE 4.21

Converting from Base 10 into a Lower Base
Convert 298 to base 6.

     Solution
We divide 298 by 6, and record the remainder. Then we divide the quotient from that step by 6, and record the remainder
again. We continue this process until the quotient is 0. Then, the base 6 number has digits that start with the last
remainder and use each remainder in reverse order.

Step 1: When we divide 298 by 6, we get        . The quotient is 49 and the remainder is 4.

Step 2: Now we divide the quotient, 49, by 6. This gives      . The quotient is 8 and the remainder is 1.

Step 3: Repeating, we get        . The quotient is 1 and the remainder is 2.

Step 4: Finally, we perform the operation on the quotient 1,  giving us a quotient of 0 and a remainder of 1.

Step 5: The base 6 number has digits equal to the remainders in reverse order, 12146. So, 298 in base 10 when converted
to base 6 is 12146.

      YOUR TURN 4.21
1. Convert 693 to base 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 295

VIDEO
Converting from Base 10 to Another Base (https://openstax.org/r/Base_10_to_Another_Base)

  EXAMPLE 4.22

Converting from Base 10 into a Higher Base
Convert 45,134 to base 13.

     Solution
We divide 45,134 by 13, and record the remainder. Then we divide the quotient from that step by 13, and record the
remainder again. We continue this process until the quotient is 0. Then, the base 13 number has digits that start with the
last remainder and use each remainder in reverse order. It is at this step that we'll convert to the base 13 digits, which
are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C.

Step 1: When we divide 45,134 by 13, we get                   . The quotient is 3,471 and the remainder is 11.

Step 2: Now we divide the quotient, 3,471, by 13. This gives     . The quotient is 267 and the remainder is 0.

Step 3: Repeating, we get  . The quotient is 20 and the remainder is 7.

Step 4: Again, and we get  . The quotient is 1 and the remainder is 7.

Step 5: Finally, we get    , with quotient 0 and a remainder 1.

Step 6: The base 13 number has digits equal to the remainders in reverse order, which were 1, 7, 7, 0, and 11. The 11 is
written as B in base 13. So, 45,134 in base 10 when converted to base 13 is 1770B13.

        YOUR TURN 4.22

  1. Convert 9,275 to base 12.

  EXAMPLE 4.23

Converting from Base 10 into Base 2
Convert 100 to base 2.

     Solution
Following the pattern above:
Step 1: We divide 100 by 2, and record the remainder.
Step 2: Then we divide the quotient from that step by 2, and record the remainder again.
Step 3: We continue this process until the quotient is 0.
Step 4: Following this process, the remainders are, in order, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1. Writing those in reverse order gives the
number in base 2, 11001002.
Notice that 100 in base 2 took seven digits.
296 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

               YOUR TURN 4.23
         1. Convert 137 to base 2.

     Converting from Hindu-Arabic Numbers to Mayan Numbers

       To convert from a Hindu-Arabic number to a Mayan number involves two distinct processes. First, the number must be
       converted to base 20, using the process described and demonstrated previously. Next, that base 20 number has to be
       written using Mayan numerals. For reference, the Mayan numerals and their values are below.

  EXAMPLE 4.24

Converting from Base 10 into the Mayan System
Convert the following into Mayan numbers.

 1. 51
 2. 653

     Solution
 1. The Mayan system is base 20, so we must use 20 in the process from above. The first division has a quotient of 2

      and remainder of 11. The 11 serves as the "ones" digit. Dividing that quotient, 2, by 20 has a quotient of 0 with a
      remainder of 2. The 2 becomes the "twenties" digit of the number. So, in base 20, the number would be 2 followed

by 11. The Mayan symbols for 2 and 11 are and  . Writing these vertically, with the "ones" digit on top, as
appropriate for Mayan numbers, results in:

2. The Mayan system is base 20, so we must use 20 in the process from above. The first division, 673 divided by 20, has
     a quotient of 32 and remainder of 13. Dividing that quotient, 32, by 20 has a quotient of 1 with a remainder of 12.
     Dividing that quotient, 1, by 20 has a quotient of 0 and a remainder of 1. Since there are three remainders here, this
     is a three-digit number. The 1 is the "20-squared" digit, the 12 is the "twenties" digit, and the 13 is the "ones" digit.
     So, in base 20, the number would be 1 followed by 12 followed by 13.. The Mayan symbols for 1, 12 and 13 are ,

, and  . Writing these vertically, as appropriate for Mayan numbers, would result in:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 297

        YOUR TURN 4.24
  Convert the following into Mayan numbers.

      1. 137
      2. 2,171

        WHO KNEW?
  Other Languages, Other Bases
  There have been base systems that use bases other than 10. Some bases used were 20, 12, and 27! Visit this site to
  see more on the languages that used other bases (https://openstax.org/r/number-systems_other_languages).

Errors in Converting Between Bases

There are some common errors that are made when converting between bases. Often, it comes down to using an
"illegal" symbol in the new base.

  EXAMPLE 4.25
Detecting an Illegal Symbol When Converting Between Bases
A base 10 number is converted to base 7 and the result was 20817. Was an error committed? How do you know?

     Solution
The result has the digit 8 in it. In base 7, 8 is an illegal symbol. Based on that, an error was committed.

        YOUR TURN 4.25
  1. A base 10 number is converted to base 4 and the result was 37024. Was an error committed? How do you know?

When converting from base 10 to another base, an illegal symbol will be used if a mistake was made in the division
process used to find the number in the new base. Since the digits are based on the remainders, any remainder that is an
illegal symbol would indicate an error.

  EXAMPLE 4.26
Detecting an Error in Division When Converting Between Bases
When changing from base 10 to base 8, the division process resulted in the following remainders: 1, 0, 9, 2, 4. Was an
error committed? How do you know?

     Solution
The remainders include 9, which in base 8 is an illegal symbol.

        YOUR TURN 4.26
  1. When changing from base 10 to base 6, the division process resulted in the following remainders: 5, 0, 0, 10. Was

      an error committed? How do you know?
298 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       Another possible way to detect an error in converting between bases is to count the number of digits. When converting
       from a higher base to a lower base, the number of digits cannot get smaller. Similarly, when converting from a lower
       base to a higher base, the number of digits cannot get bigger. So, if a base 10 number is converted to a base 3 number,
       the number of digits in the new base 3 numbers cannot be less than the number of digits in the base 10 number.
       Similarly, if a base 7 number is converted to base 10, the number of digits in the base 10 number cannot be more than
       the number of digits in the original base 7 number.

         EXAMPLE 4.27

       Detecting an Error in Number of Digits When Converting Between Bases
       A five-digit base 10 number is converted to a base 5 number. The base 5 number has four digits. Was an error
       committed? How do you know?

            Solution
       Since 10 is larger than 5, the base 5 number cannot have less digits than the base 10 number. Since it did, we know an
       error has been made.

               YOUR TURN 4.27

         1. A six-digit base 12 number is converted into a base 10 number. The base 10 number has five digits. Was an error
              committed? How do you know?

     Check Your Understanding

       14. In base 25, how many symbols would be necessary?
       15. In base 18, what would the place value of the 4 be in the number 34818 be?
       16. Convert 23045 into base 10.
       17. When counting in base 9, what number would follow 389?
       18. Convert 329 into base 8.
       19. Convert ABC14 into base 10.
       20. How do you know a mistake was made when converting from base 10 to base 4 and the result is 1524?

             SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES

        1. What does it mean when we say a number is written in base 7?
        2. What does it mean when we say a number is written in base 12?
        3. How many symbols are there in a base 3 system? What are they?
        4. How many symbols are there in a base 15 system? What are they?
        5. List the numbers, up to 100, in the base 5 system.
        6. List the numbers, up to 100, in the base 2 system.
       For the following exercises, convert the number into a base 10 number.

             7. 145
             8. 216
             9. 123
           10. 345
           11. 148
           12. 789
           13. 3B12
           14. 2416
           15. 1012
           16. 4A714

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           4.3 · Converting with Base Systems 299

    17. 8049
    18. 1010012
    19. 32236
    20. 14367
    21. 8A0BD15
    22. 1102023
    23. 100A412
    24. 10100001012

For the following exercises, convert the base 10 number into the given base.
    25. 12 into base 4
    26. 25 into base 2
    27. 43 into base 12
    28. 153 into base 5
    29. 203 into base 2
    30. 431 into base 4
    31. 543 into base 12
    32. 1,023 into base 2
    33. 2,876 into base 4
    34. 1,765 into base 5
    35. 1,993 into base 7
    36. 2,000 into base 2
    37. 4,368 into base 12
    38. 12,562 into base 16 (Hint: Base 16 uses the symbols 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F.)

39. When converting from base 10 to base 6, a student finds the following remainders: 3, 1, 3, 6. How do you know
      that a mistake was made?

40. When converting from base 10 to base 4, a student finds the following remainders: 0, 0, 3, 7, 2. How do you know a
      mistake was made?

41. Suppose a base 12 number is converted into a base 10 number, and one of the digits is A. Was an error
      committed? How do you know?

42. Suppose a base 10 number is converted into a base 5 number and one of the digits is 6. Was an error committed?
      How do you know?

43. Suppose a base 2 number is converted into a base 10 number, and the base 10 number has more digits that the
      base 2 number. Was an error committed? How do you know?

44. Suppose a base 16 number is converted to base 2, and the base 2 number has fewer digits than the base 16
      number. Was an error committed? How do you know?

For the following exercises, convert the Hindu-Arabic number into a Mayan number.
    45. 25
    46. 71
    47. 400
    48. 723

The Babylonian system used base 60. To convert from Hindu Arabic numbers into Babylonian numbers, the process for
converting from base 10 to a different base would be done first. Then, the results found in the conversion process would
be changed to Babylonian numerals. This process is similar to the one for Mayan numbers.

The Babylonian system used base 60. To convert from Hindu-Arabic numbers into Babylonian numbers, the process for
converting from base 10 to a different base would be done first. Then, the results found in the conversion process
would be changed to Babylonian numerals. This process is similar to the one for Mayan numbers. For the following
exercises, convert the Hindu-Arabic number to a Babylonian number.

    49. 67
    50. 135
    51. 781
    52. 10,952
300 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

    4.4 Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems

Figure 4.5 All information in computers is represented by 0's and 1's, including quantity, which means computers use
Base 2 for arithmetic. (credit: modification of work "Magnifying glass and binary code" by Marco Verch Professional
Photographer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Add and subtract in bases 2-9 and 12.
 2. Identify errors in adding and subtracting in bases 2-9 and 12.

Once we decide on a system for counting, we need to establish rules for combining the numbers we're using. This begins

with the rules for addition and subtraction. We are familiar with base 10 arithmetic, such as  or                     . How

does that change if we instead use a different base? A larger base? A smaller one? In particular, computers use base 2 for

all number representation. When your calculator adds or subtracts, multiplies or divides, it uses base 2. This is because

the circuitry recognizes only two things, high current and low current, which means the system is uses only has two

symbols. Which is what base 2 is.

In this section, we use addition and subtraction in bases other than 10 by referencing the processes of base 10, but
applied to a new base system.

Addition in Bases Other Than Base 10

Now that we understand what it means for numbers to be expressed in a base other than 10, we can look at arithmetic
using other bases, starting with addition. When you think back to when you first learned addition, it is very likely you
learned the addition table. Once you knew the addition table, you moved on to addition of numbers with more than one
digit. The same process holds for addition in other bases. We begin with an addition table, and then move on to adding
numbers with two or more digits.

We worked with base 6 earlier, and have the numbers in base 6 up to 1006. Using that table of values, we can create the
base 6 addition table.

Here's the beginning of the base 6 addition table:

                                   +012345

                                   0012345

                                   112345?

                                   22345? ?

                                   3345? ? ?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 301

                                                                 445? ? ? ?
                                                                 55? ? ? ? ?
Many of the cells are not filled out. The ones filled in are values that never get past 5, which is the largest legal symbol in
base 6, so they are acceptable symbols. But what do we do with 5 + 3 in base 6? We can't represent the answer as "8"
since "8" is not a symbol available to us. Let's go back to the list of numbers we have for base 6.
                                                                012345
                                                               10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                               20 21 22 23 24 25
                                                               30 31 32 33 34 35
                                                               40 41 42 43 44 45
                                                               50 51 52 53 54 55
So, what is 5 + 1 equal to in base 6? Well, start at the 5, and jump ahead one step. You land on 10.

This means that, in base 6, 5 + 1 = 10.
So, what is 5 + 2 in base 6? Well, 5 + 2 = 5 + 1 + 1, so 10 + 1...jump one more space and you land on 11. So, 5 + 2 = 11 in
base 6.
302 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       And so it goes. Using that process, stepping one more along the list, we can fill in the remainder of the base 6 addition
       table (Table 4.4).

                                                                    +0 1 2 3 4 5
                                                                    00 1 2 3 4 5
                                                                    1 1 2 3 4 5 10
                                                                    2 2 3 4 5 10 11
                                                                    3 3 4 5 10 11 12
                                                                    4 4 5 10 11 12 13
                                                                    5 5 10 11 12 13 14
                                                                  Table 4.4 Base 6 Addition Table
       With this table, and with our understanding of "carrying the one," we can then use the addition table to do addition in
       base 6 for numbers with two or more digits, using the same processes you learned for addition when you did it by hand.
         EXAMPLE 4.28
       Adding in Base 6
       Calculate 2516 + 1336.
            Solution
       Step 1: Let's set up the addition using columns.

                                                                                         251
                                                                                  +133
       Step 2: Let's do the one's place first. According to the base 6 addition table (Table 4.4), 1 + 3 = 4.

                                                                                         251
                                                                                  +133

                                                                                                      4

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 303

Step 3: Now, we do the "tens" place (it's really the sixes place). According to the base 6 addition table (Table 4.4), we have
5 + 3 = 12. So, like in base 10, we use the 2 and carry the 1.

                                                                                 1
                                                                                 251
                                                                           +133

                                                                                        24

Step 4: Now the "hundreds" place (really, thirty-sixes place). There, we have 1 + 2 + 1 = 3 + 1 = 4.
                                                                                 1
                                                                                 251

                                                                           +133
                                                                                 424

So, 2516 + 1336 = 4246.
As you can see, the process is the same as when you learned base 10 addition, just a different symbol set.

        YOUR TURN 4.28
  1. Calculate 4536 + 3456.

  EXAMPLE 4.29
Creating an Addition Table for a Base Lower Than 10
 1. Create the addition table for base 7.
 2. Create the addition table for base 2.

     Solution
 1. We begin with the table below.

                                                                 +0123456
                                                                 00123456
                                                                 1123456
                                                                 223456
                                                                 33456
                                                                 4456
304 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                               556
                                               66

In base 7, the number that follows 6 is 10 (since we've run out of symbols!). So, 67 + 17 = 107. Once that is
established, 67 + 27 will be two numbers past 6, which is 11 in base 7.

                                                        +0 1 2 345 6

                                               00 1 2 345 6

                                               1 1 2 3 4 5 6 10

                                               22 3 4 56  11

                                               33 4 5 6

                                               44 5 6

                                               55 6

                                               6 6 10 11

     Continuing, we can fill in the rows as we would in base 10, but being aware that we are working in base 7 (Table 4.5).
                                                           +0 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                           00 1 2 3 4 5 6
                                                           1 1 2 3 4 5 6 10
                                                           2 2 3 4 5 6 10 11
                                                           3 3 4 5 6 10 11 12
                                                           4 4 5 6 10 11 12 13
                                                           5 5 6 10 11 12 13 14
                                                           6 6 10 11 12 13 14 15

                                                        Table 4.5 Base 7 Addition Table
2. We revisit base 2 here. Begin with the table:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 305

                                                                                 +01
                                                                                 001
                                                                                 11
                                                                               Table 4.6
                                                                               Base 2
                                                                               Addition
                                                                               Table
      In base 2, the number that follows 1 is 10 (since we've run out of symbols!). So, 12 + 12 = 102. The complete table for
      base two then is below.
                                                                                 +0 1
                                                                                 00 1
                                                                                 1 1 10

      This demonstrates that the rules necessary for base 2 addition are as small as possible: four rules.

        YOUR TURN 4.29
  1. Create the addition table for base 4.

To summarize the creation of the addition tables for a given base, do the following.
Step 1: Set up the table.
Step 2: Fill in all the additions that use the "legal" symbols for the base. The diagonal that goes from upper left to lower
right that is immediately next to the filled boxes all get the value 10, regardless of base.
Step 3: Enter the values that are in the "teens." This can all be done on one table without creating multiple copies of
previously done work.

  EXAMPLE 4.30
Adding in Base 7
Calculate 5367 + 4337.

     Solution
Step 1: Let's set up the addition using columns.

                                                                                 536
                                                                           +433

Step 2: Let's do the one's place first. According to the base 7 addition table in the solution for Example 4.29, 6 + 3 = 12.
We will carry the 1.
306 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                                                                               1
                                                                                         536
                                                                                  +433

                                                                                                      2

       Step 3: Now, we do the "tens" place (it's really the sevens place). According to the base 7 addition table in the solution for
       Example 4.29, we have 1 + 3 + 3 = 10. So, like in base 10, we use the 0 and carry the 1.

                                                                                         1
                                                                                         536
                                                                                  +433

                                                                                               02

       Step 4: Now the "hundreds" place (really, forty-ninths place). There, we have 1 + 5 + 4 = 6 + 4 = 13.
                                                                                         1
                                                                                         536

                                                                                  +433
                                                                                  1302

       So, 5367 + 3337 = 13027.

               YOUR TURN 4.30
         1. Calculate 4617 + 1427.
       As seen previously, when performing addition in another base, set up the problem exactly as you would for addition in
       base 10. At each step, check the addition table for the base. As in base 10 addition, move right to left, adding down the
       columns using the rules in the addition table. When necessary and just as in base 10, be sure to carry the 1.
         EXAMPLE 4.31
       Creating an Addition Table for a Base Higher Than 10
       Create the addition table for base 12.

            Solution
       Step 1: Recall, in base 12, the symbol set is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, and B. So, the addition table begins as shown
       below.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 307

                                            + 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            4 4 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            5 5 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            6 6 7 8 9 AB
                                            7 7 8 9 AB
                                            8 8 9 AB
                                            9 9 AB
                                            AAB
                                            BB

Step 2: The diagonal immediately to the right of the filled in boxes is where the 10 goes for this base.
                                    +0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                    00 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                    1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    4 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    5 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    6 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    7 7 8 9 A B 10
                                    8 8 9 A B 10
                                    9 9 A B 10
308 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                           A A B 10
                                           B B 10

       Step 3: Using the pattern we're familiar with, and counting in base 12, we can fill in the other cells.
                                           +0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                           00 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                           1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10
                                           2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10 11
                                           3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10 11 12
                                           4 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10 11 12 13
                                           5 5 6 7 8 9 A B 10 11 12 13 14
                                           6 6 7 8 9 A B 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                           7 7 8 9 A B 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                           8 8 9 A B 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                           9 9 A B 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
                                           A A B 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
                                           B B 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1A

                                        Table 4.7 Base 12 addition table
       Notice that the lower-right entry is 1A12, as this is the number one past 1912.

               YOUR TURN 4.31
         1. Create the addition table for base 14.

         EXAMPLE 4.32
       Adding in Base 12
       Calculate 3A712 + 9BA12.

            Solution
       Step 1: Using the process established in the earlier addition problem, set up the columns.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 309

                                                                                 3A7
                                                                           +9BA

Step 2: Using the rules from the base 12 addition table in the solution for Example 4.31, and being careful to carry the 1
when necessary, we get the following:

                                                                                 11
                                                                                 3A7
                                                                           +9BA
                                                                           11A5

The ones that were carried are located over the columns.
So, 3A712 + 9BA12= 11A512.

        YOUR TURN 4.32

  1. Calculate 4B312 + B0612.

  EXAMPLE 4.33
Adding in Base 2
We again return to base 2, the base used by computers. Calculate 10012 + 110112.

     Solution
Step 1: Using the process established in the earlier addition problem, set up the columns.

                                                                                 1001

                                                                    +11011

Step 2: Using the rules from the base 2 addition table in the solution for Example 4.29, and being careful to carry the 1
when necessary (and shown at the top of the grid), we get the following:

                                             1  11

                                                1001

                                             +11011

                                             100100

Step 3: Calculate 10012 + 110112 = 1001002.
So, 10012 + 110112 = 1001002.
310 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

        YOUR TURN 4.33

  1. Calculate 1011112 + 11000112.

Subtraction in Bases Other Than Base 10

Subtraction in bases other than base 10 follow the same processes as base 10 subtraction, but, as with addition, using
the addition table for the base.

  EXAMPLE 4.34
Subtracting in Base 6
Calculate 526 - 346.

     Solution
Step 1: Let's set up the subtraction using columns.

                                                                                     52

                                                                              -34

Step 2: Just as we might do in base 10, we borrow a 1 from the 5 for the ones digit.
                                                                                            12

                                                                           -3 4

Step 3: Referring to the base 6 addition table (Table 4.4), we see that 4 + 4 = 12, so 126 - 46 is 46.
                                                                                            12

                                                                           -3 4
                                                                                             4

Step 4: Now we deal with the "tens" (really, sixes) digit, 46 - 36, which equals 16 according to the base 6 addition table
(Table 4.4).

                                                   4 12

                                               -3  4

                                               1   4

So, 526 - 346 = 146.

      YOUR TURN 4.34
1. Calculate 1156 - 436.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 311

  EXAMPLE 4.35

Subtracting in Base 12
Calculate A1712 - 4B312.

     Solution
Step 1: Let's set up the subtraction using columns.

                                                                                 A17

                                                                           -4B3

Step 2: Even in base 12, 712 - 312 = 412.

                                                 A17
                                           -4B3

                                                              4

Step 3: Moving to the "tens" digit, we have 112 - B12. Since 1 is less than B in base 12, we need to borrow a 1 from the A,
just as we would for subtraction in base 10.

                                               9 11 7

                                           -4  B3

                                                                                      4

Step 4: According to the base 12 addition table in the solution for Example 4.31, B12 + 212 = 1112, so 1112 - B12 = 212.
                                                                                   9 11 7

                                           -4  B3

                                               24

Step 5: Finally, we deal with the "hundreds" digit. According to the base 12 addition table in the solution for Example
4.31, 412 + 512 = 912, so 912 - 412 = 512.

                                                                                   9 11 7

                                           -4  B3

                                           5   24

So, A1712 - 4B312 = 52412.
312 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

        YOUR TURN 4.35

  1. Calculate 71612 - 4AB12.

Errors When Adding and Subtracting in Bases Other Than Base 10

Errors when computing in bases other than 10 often involve applying base 10 rules or symbols to an arithmetic problem
in a base other than base 10. The first type of error is using a symbol that is not in the symbol set for the base. For
instance, if a 9 shows up when working in base 7, you know an error has happened because 9 is not a legal symbol in
base 7.

  EXAMPLE 4.36

Identifying an Illegal Symbol in Arithmetic in a Base Other Than Base 10
Explain the error in the following calculation:

    Solution

Since the problem is in base 6, the symbol set available is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The 9 in the answer is clearly not a legal

symbol for base 6. Looking back to the base 6 addition table (Table 4.4), we see that  . Correcting the error,

we see the sum is                .

      YOUR TURN 4.36
1. Explain the error in the following calculation and correct the problem:

The second type of error is using a base 10 rule when the numbers are not in base 10. For instance, if you are working in
base 13, then 913 + 913 is not 1813, even though 18 is the correct answer in base 10.

  EXAMPLE 4.37

Identifying an Arithmetic Error in a Base Other Than Base 10
Explain the error in the following calculation, and correct the error:

    Solution

If this problem was a base 10 problem, this would be the correct answer. However, in base 12, 9 + 6 is not 15, but is

instead 13. To correct this error, carefully use the addition table for base 12. If properly used, the correct answer would

be  , as seen below:

                                                  89

                                               +  76

                                                  143

      YOUR TURN 4.37
1. Explain the error in the following calculation, and correct the error:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          4.4 · Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems 313

Check Your Understanding

21. Determine the addition table for base 8.

22. Compute 246 + 536.

23. Compute 358 - 268.

24. Compute 3B14 + 4514.

25. Compute A412 - 9B12.

26. How do you know an error has occurred in a base 8 addition question if the answer obtained was 288?

27. What is one common error made in calculating in base 14?

        SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, create the addition table for the given base.
     1. base 5
     2. base 3
     3. base 16 (Hint: Use the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, and F.)
     4. base 2

For the following exercises, perform the indicated base 6 operation.
     5. 46 + 36
     6. 146 + 256
     7. 316 + 36
     8. 436 + 346
     9. 5326 + 236
    10. 2546 + 1436
    11. 206 - 36
    12. 236 - 56

For the following exercises, perform the indicated base 12 operation.
    13. 512 + 612
    14. 312 + A12
    15. 3412 + 712
    16. 7612 + B12
    17. 5912 + 1A12
    18. A112 + 3612
    19. 5312 - 912
    20. 2B12 - 712

21. Explain two ways to detect an error in arithmetic in bases other than base 10.

22. Explain the error in the following calculation: 2813 + 4713 = 7513.

23. Explain the error in the following calculation: 367 + 237 = 597.

24. In base 10 addition, there are 100 addition rules plus a rule for carrying a 1. How many addition rules are there for
      base 6?

25. In base 10 addition, there are 100 addition rules plus a rule for carrying a 1. How many addition rules are there for
      base 14?

26. In base 10 addition, there are 100 addition rules plus a rule for carrying a 1. How many addition rules are there for
      base 2?

For the following exercises, use the addition table that you created from Exercise 4 to perform the indicated base 2
operations.

    27. 1012 + 1112
    28. 10112 + 100112
    29. 111112 + 111112
    30. 10101012 + 10101012
314 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       For the following exercises, use the addition table that you created from Exercise 3 to perform the indicated base 16
       operations.

           31. 2916 + 3816
           32. 4D16 + 8916
           33. 92716 + 43816
           34. BFA16 - 78E16

       For the following exercises, tell how you know an error was committed without performing the operation in the given
       base.

           35.
           36.

    4.5 Multiplication and Division in Base Systems

Figure 4.6 The processes for multiplication and division are the same for arithmetic in any bases. (credit: modification of
work "NCTR Intern Claire Boyle" by Danny Tucker/U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Public Domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Multiply and divide in bases other than 10.
 2. Identify errors in multiplying and dividing in bases other than 10.

Just as in Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems, once we decide on a system for counting, we need to establish rules
for combining the numbers we're using. This includes the rules for multiplication and division. We are familiar with those
operations in base 10. How do they change if we instead use a different base? A larger base? A smaller one?

In this section, we use multiplication and division in bases other than 10 by referencing the processes of base 10, but
applied to a new base system.

Multiplication in Bases Other Than 10

Multiplication is a way of representing repeated additions, regardless of what base is being used. However, different
bases have different addition rules. In order to create the multiplication tables for a base other than 10, we need to rely
on addition and the addition table for the base. So let's look at multiplication in base 6.

Multiplication still has the same meaning as it does in base 10, in that  is 4 added to itself six times,
                                          .

So, let's apply that to base 6. It should be clear that 0 multiplied by anything, regardless of base, will give 0, and that 1
multiplied by anything, regardless of base, will be the value of "anything."

Step 1: So, we start with the table below:

                                            *012345

                                            0000000

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 315

                                                1012345
                                                2024
                                                303
                                                404
                                                505

Step 2: Notice      is there. But we didn't hit a problematic number there (4 works fine in both base 10 and base 6).

But what is         ? If we use the repeated addition concept,  . According to the base 6 addition

table (Table 4.4),  . So, we add that to our table:

                                                *01 2 3 45

                                                000 0 0 00

                                                101 2 3 45

                                                2 0 2 4 10

                                                3 0 3 10

                                                404

                                                505

Step 3: Next, we need to fill in  . Using repeated addition,                           (if we use our base 6

addition rules). So, we add that to our table:

                                                *01 2 3 4 5

                                                000 0 0 0 0

                                                101 2 3 4 5

                                                2 0 2 4 10 12

                                                3 0 3 10

                                                4 0 4 12

                                                505

Step 4: Finally,                                   . And so we add that to our table:
                                  *01 2 3 4 5
                                  000 0 0 0 0
316 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                               101 2 3 4 5
                                               2 0 2 4 10 12 14
                                               3 0 3 10
                                               4 0 4 12
                                               5 0 5 14

Step 5: A similar analysis will give us the remainder of the entries. Here is         demonstrated:
                                                                               .

This is done by using the addition rules from Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems, namely that              , and

then applying the addition processes we've always known, but with the base 6 table (Table 4.4). In the end, our

multiplication table is as follows:

                                               *01 2 3 4 5

                                               000 0 0 0 0

                                               101 2 3 4 5

                                               2 0 2 4 10 12 14

                                               3 0 3 10 13 20 23

                                               4 0 4 12 20 24 32

                                               5 0 5 14 23 32 41

                                               Table 4.8 Base 6 Multiplication Table

Notice anything about that bottom line? Is that similar to what happens in base 10?

To summarize the creation of a multiplication in a base other than base 10, you need the addition table of the base with
which you are working. Create the table, and calculate the entries of the multiplication table by performing repeated
addition in that base. The table needs to be drawn only the one time.

  EXAMPLE 4.38

Creating a Multiplication Table for a Base Lower Than 10
Create the multiplication table for base 7.

     Solution
Step 1: Let's apply the process demonstrated and outlined above to find the base 7 multiplication table. It should be
clear that 0 multiplied by anything, regardless of base, will give 0, and that 1 multiplied by anything, regardless of base,
will be the value of "anything." So, we start with the table below:

                                               *0123456

                                               00000000

                                               10123456

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 317

                                  20246
                                  3036
                                  404
                                  505
                                  606

Step 2: Notice          is there. But we didn't hit a problematic number there (4 works fine in both base 10 and base 6).
The same is true for
                        and       , which equal 6. But what is  ? If we use the repeated addition concept,
add that to our table:
                                  . According to the base 7 addition table in the solution for Example 4.29,  . So, we

                                  *01 2 3 4 56

                                  000 0 0 0 00

                                  101 2 3 4 56

                                  2 0 2 4 6 11

                                  303 6

                                  4 0 4 11

                                  505

                                  606

Step 3: Next, we need to fill in  . Using repeated addition,                                                  if we use our

base 7 addition rules. So, we add that to our table:

                                  *01 2 3 4 5 6

                                  000 0 0 0 0 0

                                  101 2 3 4 5 6

                                  2 0 2 4 6 11 13

                                  303 6

                                  4 0 4 11

                                  5 0 5 13

                                  606
318 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

Step 4: Finally,                                                              . And so we add that to our table:
                                               *01 2 3 4 5 6
                                               000 0 0 0 0 0
                                               101 2 3 4 5 6
                                               2 0 2 4 6 11 13 15
                                               303 6
                                               4 0 4 11
                                               5 0 5 13
                                               6 0 6 15

Step 5: A similar analysis will give us the remainder of the entries. Here is  demonstrated:

This is done by using the addition rules from Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems, namely that               and

then applying the addition processes we've always known, but with the base 7 table in the solution for Example 4.29.

Using those addition rules, the rest of the table is given below:

                                               *01 2 3 4 5 6

                                               000 0 0 0 0 0

                                               101 2 3 4 5 6

                                               2 0 2 4 6 11 13 15

                                               3 0 3 6 12 15 21 24

                                               4 0 4 11 15 22 26 33

                                               5 0 5 13 21 26 34 42

                                               6 0 6 15 24 33 42 51

        YOUR TURN 4.38
  1. Create the multiplication table for base 4.

  EXAMPLE 4.39
Creating a Multiplication Table for a Base Higher Than 10
Create the multiplication table for base 12.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 319

     Solution                                          demonstrated:
Let's apply the repeated addition to base 12. Here is

This is done by using the addition rules from Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems, namely that
and then applying the addition processes we've always known, but with the base 12 table in the solution for Example
4.31. Using those addition rules, the rest of the table is given below:

                                    *01 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                    000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
                                    101 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B
                                    2 0 2 4 6 8 A 10 12 14 16 18 1A
                                    3 0 3 6 9 10 13 16 19 20 23 26 29
                                    4 0 4 8 10 14 18 20 24 28 30 34 38
                                    5 0 5 A 13 18 21 26 2B 34 39 42 47
                                    6 0 6 10 16 20 26 30 36 40 46 50 56
                                    7 0 7 12 19 24 2B 36 41 48 53 5A 65
                                    8 0 8 14 20 28 34 40 48 54 60 68 74
                                    9 0 9 16 23 30 39 46 53 60 69 76 83
                                    A 0 A 18 26 34 42 50 5A 68 76 84 92
                                    B 0 B 1A 29 38 47 56 65 74 83 92 A1
                                  Table 4.9 Base 12 Multiplication Table

        YOUR TURN 4.39

  1. Create the multiplication table for base 14.

The multiplication table in base 2 below is as minimal as the addition table in the solution for Table 4.6. Since the product
of 1 with anything is itself, the following multiplication table is found.

                                                                              *01

                                                                              000

                                                                              101

                                                                            Table 4.10
                                                                            Base 2
                                                                            Multiplication
                                                                            Table
320 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

As with the addition table, we can use the multiplication tables and the addition tables to perform multiplication of two
numbers in bases other than base 10. The process is the same, with the same carry rules and placeholder rules.

EXAMPLE 4.40

Multiplying in a Base Lower Than 10

1. Calculate  .

2. Calculate                     .

    Solution
1. Step 1: Use the base 6 multiplication table (Table 4.8) and, when necessary, the base 6 addition table (Table 4.4).

Set up this calculation using columns:

                                               45

                                               x24

Step 2: Multiply the 1s digits, 5 and 4, using the base 6 multiplication table (Table 4.8). There we see the result is 326.
So, we enter the 2 and carry the 3.

                                                                                 3
                                                                                 45
                                                                           x24

                                                                                        2

Step 3: So, now we multiply the 4 and the 4, then add the 3 (just as you would do if multiplying two base 10

numbers!).                          (from the base 6 table [Table 4.8]), then  . So, we enter the 31.

                                               3

                                               45

                                               x24

                                               312

Step 4: Now we move on to the 2 in the "tens" place in the bottom value. We multiply the 26 and the 56, and we get
146. So, we enter the 4 and carry the 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 321

Step 5: Next up, we multiply the 2 and the 4, and then add 1. This gives us              . We enter those on that
second line.

                                                                                     1
                                                                                     45
                                                                              x24
                                                                              312
                                                                       1340

Step 6: Now we add down the columns.

                                                      1
                                                      45
                                               x24
                                         1312
                                         1340
                                         2052

     Step 7: The 3 and the 3 add to 10 in base 6, so we enter the 0 and carry the 1. We now have the result:
                                 .

2. Step 1: Use the base 2 multiplication table (Table 4.10) and, when necessary, the base 2 addition table in the
     solution for Example 4.29. Set up this calculation using columns:
                                                                                   101

                                                                             x110

Step 2: Using the pattern established above, and the processes from multiplication from base 10, we find the
following:

                                                           101

                                      x                    110

                                                           000

                                         101

                                         101

Step 3: Adding down the columns results in the following:
322 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

                                                  101

                                               x  110

                                                  000

                                                  101

                                                  101

                                                  11110

So,                              .

YOUR TURN 4.40

1. Calculate                     .
2. Calculate                          .

Summarizing the process of multiplying two numbers in different bases, the multiplication table is referenced. Using
that table, the multiplication is carried out in the same manner as it is in base 10. The addition rules for the base will also
be referenced when carrying a 1 or when adding the results for each digit's multiplication line.

EXAMPLE 4.41

Multiplying in a Base Higher Than 10

Calculate     .

     Solution
Step 1: Use the base 12 multiplication table in the solution for Example 4.39 and, when necessary, the base 12 addition
table in the solution for Table 4.7. Set up this calculation using columns:

                                                  3A

                                                  ×74

Step 2: First, the 4 is multiplied by 3A, resulting in the first line.
                                                                                    3A

                                                                              ×74
                                                                              134

Step 3: Now we move on to the 7 in the "tens" place in the bottom value.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 323

                                                         5
                                                         3A
                                                  x74
                                                  134
                                            22A0

Step 4: Now we add down the columns.

                                                         3A
                                                  x74
                                                  134
                                            22A0
                                            2414

Step 5: The 3 and the A add to 11 in base 12, so we enter the 1 and carry the 1.

We now have the result:               .

YOUR TURN 4.41

1. Calculate             .

Division in Bases Other Than 10

Just as with the other operations, division in a base other than 10, the process of division in a base other than 10 is the

same as the process when working in base 10. For instance,   because, we know that                . So, for many

division problems, we are simply looking to the multiplication table to identify the appropriate multiplication rule.

EXAMPLE 4.42

Dividing with a Base Other Than 10

1. Calculate     .

2. Calculate

Solution

1. Looking at the multiplication table for base 6 (Table 4.8), we see that        . Using that, we know that

              .

2. Looking at the multiplication table for base 12 in the solution for Example 4.39, we see that                       .

Using that, we know that                 .

  YOUR TURN 4.42
1. Calculate
324 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

2. Calculate                     .

Errors in Multiplying and Dividing in Bases Other Than Base 10

The types of errors encountered when multiplying and dividing in bases other than base 10 are the same as when
adding and subtracting. They often involve applying base 10 rules or symbols to an arithmetic problem in a base other
than base 10. The first type of error is using a symbol that is not in the symbol set for the base.

  EXAMPLE 4.43

Identifying an Illegal Symbol in a Base Other Than Base 10
Explain the error in the following calculation, and determine the correct answer:

Solution

Since the problem is in base 6, the symbol set available is 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. The 8 in the answer is clearly not a legal

symbol for base 6. Looking back to the base 6 multiplication table (Table 4.8), we see that       .

      YOUR TURN 4.43
1. Explain the error in the following calculation and determine the correct answer:

The second type of error is using a base 10 rule when the numbers are not in base 10. For instance, in base 17,

                 would be incorrect, even though in base 10,  . That rule doesn't apply in base 17.

EXAMPLE 4.44

Identifying an Error in Arithmetic in a Base Other Than Base 10
Explain the error in the following calculation. Determine the correct answer:

Solution

If this problem was a base 10 problem, this would be the correct answer. However, in base 12,     is not 56, but is

instead 48. To correct this error, carefully use the multiplication table for base 12 (Table 4.9). If properly used, the correct

answer would be                                .

      YOUR TURN 4.44
1. Explain the error in the following calculation. Determine the correct answer:

Check Your Understanding

28. To create the multiplication table for a given base, what should be used?

29. What are the differences between multiplying in base 10 and multiplying in a different base?

30. When dividing in a base other than base 10, what table is referenced?

31. Compute      .

32. Compute      .

33. How do you know an error has occurred in a base 5 multiplication question if the answer obtained was 285?

34. What are two common ways to determine an error is committed when computing in s base other than base 10?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.5 · Multiplication and Division in Base Systems 325

        SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, create the multiplication table for the given base.
     1. base 5
     2. base 3
     3. base 16 (Hint: Use the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F.)
     4. base 2

For the following exercises, perform the indicated base 6 operation.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.

For the following exercises, perform the indicated base 12 operation.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.

21. Explain two ways to detect an error in arithmetic in bases other than base 10.

22. Explain the error in the following calculation:

23. Explain the error in the following calculation:  .

24. In base 10 multiplication, there are 100 multiplication rules plus a rule for carrying a number. How many
      multiplication rules are there for base 6?

25. In base 10 multiplication, there are 100 multiplication rules plus a rule for carrying a number. How many
      multiplication rules are there for base 14?

26. In base 10 multiplication, there are 100 multiplication rules plus a rule for carrying a number. How many
      multiplication rules are there for base 2?

27. Consider the answers from Exercise 24 and Exercise 26. Which base do you think would be more efficient: base 10,
      base 6, or base 2?

For the following exercises, use the multiplication table that you created from Exercise 4 to perform the indicated base
2 operations.

    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.

32. Convert  and  to base 10. Then multiply those base 10 numbers. Next, convert the answer you got

for Exercise 31 to base 10. Do these numbers match?

For the following exercises, use the multiplication table that you created from Exercise 3 to perform the indicated base
16 operations.

    33.
    34.
    35.
    36.

For the following exercises, explain how you know an error was committed without performing the operation in the
326 4 · Number Representation and Calculation

       given base.
           37.
           38.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      4 · Chapter Summary 327

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System

  · numeral
  · number
  · exponential expression
  · base
  · exponent
  · place value
  · base 10 system
  · Hindu-Arabic numeration system
  · expanded form

4.2 Early Numeration Systems

  · additive system of numbers
  · positional system of numbers
  · Babylonian system of numbers
  · Mayan system of numbers
  · Roman system of numbers

4.3 Converting with Base Systems

  · base 10
  · remainder
  · dividend
  · divisor
  · quotient

Key Concepts

4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System

  · Exponents are used to represent repeated multiplication of a base.
  · In arithmetic, exponents are computed before multiplication, division, addition, and subtraction. Computing an

      exponent is done by multiplying the base by itself the number of times equal to the exponent.
  · The system of numbers currently used is the Hindu-Arabic system. Digits in this system take on values based on

      their place in the number. The place values are determined by multiplying the digit by 10 raised to the appropriate
      power.
  · The expanded form of a Hindu-Arabic number is the sum of each digit times 10 raised to the exponent for that place
      value.

4.2 Early Numeration Systems

  · Historically, there have been many systems for numbering. One system is an additive system, in which symbols are
      repeated to express larger numbers. Another system is a positional system, in which the digits and their positions
      determine the quantity being represented.

  · The Babylonian system was a combination of a positional and additive system. It used 60 as its base. Using that in
      the positional system makes it possible to convert between Babylonian and Hindu-Arabic numbers.

  · The Mayan system was a combination of a positional and additive system. It used 20 as its base. Using that in the
      positional system makes it possible to convert between Mayan and Hindu-Arabic numbers.

  · The Roman system was an additive system. Knowing what each symbol represents makes it possible to convert
      between Roman and Hindu-Arabic numbers.

4.3 Converting with Base Systems

  · The system we use is the base 10 system. Base 10 is not the only base that can be used. To use another base, one
      could start with a list of numbers in that base.

  · To indicate that a number is written in a base other than 10, a subscript is appended to the end of the number. That
      subscript indicates the base for the number.

  · Numbers written in a base smaller than 10 use the same symbols as base 10. However, when using bases larger
328 4 · Chapter Summary

      than 10, the symbols A, B, C, ... are used to represent digits larger than 9.
  · To convert from a number written in a base other than 10 into a base 10 number, the number is written in expanded

      form and then that expression is computed.
  · To convert a number from base 10 into another base, the base 10 number is repeatedly divided by the new base.

      The remainders when performing these divisions become the digits for the number in the new base.
  · Common errors can be detected when performing base conversions.

4.4 Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems

  · Addition tables for bases other than 10 can be built using the same processes that are used in base 10, including
      using a number line.

  · Addition in bases other than base 10 use the same processes as addition in base 10, but use the addition table for
      that base.

  · Subtraction in bases other than base 10 use the same processes as subtraction in base 10, but use the addition
      table for that base.

4.5 Multiplication and Division in Base Systems

  · Multiplication tables for bases other than 10 can be built using the same processes that are used in base 10,
      including using repeated addition and the addition table for the base.

  · Multiplication in bases other than base 10 use the same processes as multiplication in base 10, but use the
      multiplication table for that base.

  · Basic division in bases other than base 10 use the same processes as basic division in base 10, where the missing
      factor process is used.

Videos

4.1 Hindu-Arabic Positional System

  · Exponential Notation (https://openstax.org/r/Exponential_Notation)

4.2 Early Numeration Systems

  · Converting Between Babylonian and Hindu-Arabic numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Babylonian_to_Hindu-
      Arabic_Numbers)

  · Converting Mayan Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers (https://openstax.org /r/Mayan_to_Hindu-Arabic_Numbers)
  · Converting From Roman Numbers to Hindu-Arabic Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Roman_to_Hindu-

      Arabic_Numbers)
  · Converting From Hindu-Arabic Numbers to Roman Numbers (https://openstax.org/r/Hindu-

      Arabic_to_Roman_Numbers)

4.3 Converting with Base Systems

  · Convert Base 7 to Base 10 (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_Base_7_to_Base_10)
  · Converting from Base 10 to Another Base (https://openstax.org/r/Base_10_to_Another_Base)

Projects

Additive Systems

Go online. Google "additive number systems."What system comes up?

  · Describe the additive system you found.

Using Google, identify three more additive systems of numbers.

  · Compare and contrast the systems you found. For instance, how many times can a symbol be used before a new
      symbol is used.

  · Identify three situations where additive systems are still used.

Computers and Bases

Use Google to determine what base computers use.

Were other bases attempted for use in computers?

Determine why the base used in computers is appropriate.

Determine how the base used in computers is related to the circuitry in computers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      4 · Chapter Summary 329

Determine how Boolean logic and the base used in computers are related, and might be identical.

There is research into using quibits in computers. Find out what quibits are and how can they improve computing speed.

Cultures Using Base Systems Other Than 10

Using Google, find three cultures, other than Babylonian or Mayan, that use base systems other than 10.

  · Tell what base is used for each system.
  · If possible, determine why the culture used that base system.
  · Choose one of those systems. Explain that base system. Be sure to address whether the system is additive, place-

      value based, a blend of the two, and if it employs a zero.

History of Zero

Using any resources available to you, determine the history of 0 in at least three different numbering systems. Address
at least when and why such a development occurred and why a 0 is vital to the use of a positional system.

Numbering Systems from Other Global Regions

Using any resources available to you, find at least three numbering systems from sub-Saharan Africa, Australia, China, or
the Pacific Islands. Explore if they are positional or additive systems (or combinations!), the terminology of the system, if
they used a 0, and what base they employed (if positional).
330 4 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Hindu-Arabic Positional System
 1. What is the base of 57?

 2. What is the exponent of 57?

3. Compute  .

4. Convert the Hindu-Arabic number into expanded form: 4,201.

5. Convert the expression to a Hindu-Arabic numeral:                                  .

Early Numeration Systems
 6. Which systems--Hindu-Arabic, Roman, Mayan, or Babylonian--are additive systems?

7. Which systems--Hindu-Arabic, Roman, Mayan, or Babylonian--are positional systems?

8. Which systems--Hindu-Arabic, Roman, Mayan, or Babylonian--use a 0?

9. In the Babylonian system, what are the place values based on?

10. In the Mayan system, what are the place values based on?

11. Convert the Babylonian numeral to a Hindu-Arabic numeral.

12. Convert the Mayan numeral to a Hindu-Arabic numeral.

13. Convert the Roman numeral MMCDXLVII into a Hindu-Arabic numeral.
14. Convert the Hindu-Arabic numeral 394 to a Roman numeral.
Converting with Base Systems
15. List the numbers from 0 to 100 in base 5.
16. In base 8, what is the place value of the 3 in the number 6388?
17. How many symbols are needed for a base 17 system?
18. What does it mean for a number to be in base 6?
19. What symbols are used in a base 12 system?
20. When converting from a base 10 number to a base 2 number, would the number of digits decrease?
21. Convert 3115 to base 10.
22. Convert 4512 to base 10.
23. Convert 10012 to base 10.
24. Convert 459 to base 8.
25. Convert 1198 to base 12.
26. Convert 38 to base 2.
27. When converting from base 10 to base 4, the result obtained was 1424. How can you tell an error was made?
Addition and Subtraction in Base Systems
28. Create the addition table for base 5.
29. How many addition rules are there for a base 7 system?
30. Calculate 345 + 445.
31. Calculate A712 + 8812.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                4 · Chapter Summary 331

32. Calculate 5416 - 2336.
33. Calculate 5B12 - 1A12.
34. When adding in base 8, the result 9118 is found. How do we know a mistake was made?

Multiplication and Division in Base Systems
35. What is the process for creating the multiplication table for a base other than 10?

36. Create the multiplication table for base 7.

37. How many multiplication rules are there in a base 3 system?

38. Calculate            .

39. Calculate                  .

40. Calculate         .

41. Calculate               .

42. When multiplying              , the result 140 is found. How do we know a mistake was made?

Chapter Test

 1. Expand the Hindu-Arabic numeral 5,789.

2. Evaluate the expression                  .

3. Rewrite                                                       in Hindu-Arabic form.

4. Convert the Babylonian numeral to a Hindu-Arabic numeral.

5. Convert the Mayan number to a Hindu Arabic numeral.

6. What base system did the Babylonians use?

7. Which system--Roman, Babylonian, Mayan--used place values?

8. Convert the Roman numeral MDXLVII to a Hindu-Arabic numeral.

9. How many symbols are needed for a base 9 system?

10. For a system in a base larger than 10, what symbols are used as digits representing more than 10?

11. Convert 1328 to a base 10 number.

12. List the numbers in base 4 up to 1004.

13. Convert 74 to a base 12 number.

14. Create the addition table for base 4.

15. Calculate                  .

16. Calculate 4B112 - 2A612.

17. When calculating              , a student obtains 766 . How do you know an error was made?

18. Create the multiplication table for base 4.

19. Calculate                  .

20. Calculate         .
332 4 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5 · Introduction 333

5  ALGEBRA

Figure 5.1 In these algebraic equations, the represents different numbers. (credit: Larissa Chu, CC BY 4.0)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Algebraic Expressions
  5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications
  5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications
  5.4 Ratios and Proportions
  5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities
  5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications
  5.7 Functions
  5.8 Graphing Functions
  5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables
  5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables
  5.11 Linear Programming

      Introduction

The jump from arithmetic to algebra can be a difficult one for many students. Many students struggle with the idea that
mathematics can include situations that aren't static and do change. In elementary arithmetic, a situation such as:

is a static situation and will yield the answer of 8 every time. However, a situation such as:

can yield many different answers because the answer depends on what amount (number) that represents. Since the
value of can vary (represent different values), it is known as a variable.

Algebra is useful to better model real life situations. In the first equation shown,            can only model situations

where you add those two numbers together. For example, if your uncle gives you five dollars and your aunt gives you

three dollars, then you will always receive eight dollars. The second equation                  can model more complex

situations. For example, you wish to buy a game that costs $38 but you only have three dollars. Your uncle will pay you

five dollars an hour to work for him. If you've worked five hours, have you earned enough money? If not, how many

hours will you have to work?

Algebra and algebraic thinking open up a world of possibilities that arithmetic alone cannot do.
334 5 · Algebra

    5.1 Algebraic Expressions

Figure 5.2 Two college graduates! (credit: modification of work UC Davis College of Engineering/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Convert between written and symbolic algebraic expressions and equations.
 2. Simplify and evaluate algebraic expressions.
 3. Add and subtract algebraic expressions.
 4. Multiply and divide algebraic expressions.

Algebraic expressions are the building blocks of algebra. While a numerical expression (also known as an arithmetic

expression) like  can represent only a single number, an algebraic expression such as    can represent many

different numbers. This section will introduce you to algebraic expressions, how to create them, simplify them, and

perform arithmetic operations on them.

Algebraic Expressions and Equations

Xavier and Yasenia have the same birthday, but they were born in different years. This year Xavier is 20 years old and
Yasenia is 23, so Yasenia is three years older than Xavier. When Xavier was 15, Yasenia was 18. When Xavier will be 33,
Yasenia will be 36. No matter what Xavier's age is, Yasenia's age will always be 3 years more.

In the language of algebra, we say that Xavier's age and Yasenia's age are variable and the 3 is a constant. The ages

change, or vary, so age is a variable. The 3 years between them always stays the same or has the same value, so the age

difference is the constant. In algebra, letters of the alphabet are used to represent variables. The letters most often

used for variables are , , , , , and . Suppose we call Xavier's age . Then we could use  to represent Yasenia's

age, as shown in the table below.

                                        Xavier's Age Yasenia's Age

                                        15  18

                                        20  23

                                        33  36

To write algebraically, we need some symbols as well as numbers and variables. The symbols for the four basic
arithmetic operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are summarized in Table 5.1, along with words
we use for the operations and the result.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 335

             Operation    Notation                          Say:                The result is...

             Addition                                       plus                The sum of and

             Subtraction                -                   minus         The difference of and

             Multiplication · , ( )( ), ( ) , ( ), ,        times            The product of and

             Division     ÷,/                               divided by    The quotient of and

Table 5.1 Symbols for Operations

In algebra, the cross symbol is normally not used to show multiplication because that symbol could cause

confusion. For example, does mean          (three times ) or              (three times times )? To make it clear,

use or parentheses for multiplication.

We perform these operations on two numbers. When translating from symbolic form to words, or from words to
symbolic form, pay attention to the words of or and to help you find the numbers.

· The sum of 5 and 3 means add 5 plus 3, which we write as    .

· The difference of 9 and 2 means subtract 9 minus 2, which we write as   .

· The product of 4 and 8 means multiply 4 times 8, which we can write as     .

· The quotient of 20 and 5 means divide 20 by 5, which we can write as    .

EXAMPLE 5.1

Translating from Algebra to Words
Translate the following algebraic expressions from algebra into words.

 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

     Solution
 1. According to Table 5.1, this could be translated as 12 plus 14 OR the sum of 12 and 14.
 2. According to Table 5.1, this could be translated as 30 times 5 OR the product of 30 and 5.
 3. According to Table 5.1, this could be translated as 64 divided by 8 OR the quotient of 64 and 8.
 4. According to Table 5.1, this could be translated as minus OR the difference of and

        YOUR TURN 5.1

  Translate the following algebraic expressions from algebra into words.
      1.
      2.
      3.
      4.

  EXAMPLE 5.2

Translating from Words to Algebra
Translate the following phrases from words into algebraic expressions.
 1. The difference of 47 and 19
336 5 · Algebra

2. 72 divided by 9
3. The sum of and
4. 13 times 7

    Solution

1. According to Table 5.1, these words could be translated as           .

2. According to Table 5.1, these words could be translated as  .

3. According to Table 5.1, these words could be translated as  .

4. According to Table 5.1, these words could be translated as           .

      YOUR TURN 5.2

Translate the following phrases from words into algebraic expressions.
    1. 43 plus 67
    2. The product of 45 and 3
    3. The quotient of 45 and 3
    4. 89 minus 42

What is the difference in English between a phrase and a sentence? A phrase expresses a single thought that is
incomplete by itself, but a sentence makes a complete statement. "Running very fast" is a phrase, but "The football
player was running very fast" is a sentence. A sentence has a subject and a verb. In algebra, we have expressions and
equations. Example 5.1 and Example 5.2 used expressions. An expression is like an English phrase. Notice that the
English phrases do not form a complete sentence because the phrase does not have a verb. The following table has
examples of expressions, which are numbers, variables, or combinations of numbers and variables using operation
symbols.

                                 Expression  Words             English Phrase

                                             3 plus 5          The sum of three and five

                                             minus one The difference of and one

                                             6 times 7   The product of six and seven

                                             divided by        The quotient of and

EXAMPLE 5.3

Translating from an English Phrase to an Expression
Translate the following phrases from words into algebraic expressions.

1. Seven more than a number .
2. A number times itself.
3. Six times a number , plus two more.
4. The cost of postage is a flat rate of 10 cents for every parcel, plus 34 cents per ounce .

    Solution

1.

2.               or

3.

4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 337

      YOUR TURN 5.3

Translate the following phrases from words into algebraic expressions.
    1. Twenty less than a number . (Hint: you have a number and you want 20 less than it.)
    2. Add two to a number , then multiply it by six.
    3. A number to the third power minus five.
    4. A plumber charges $60 per hour , plus a $40 flat fee for every job.

An equation is two expressions linked with an equal sign (the symbol =). When two quantities have the same value, we

say they are equal and connect them with an equal sign. When you read the words the symbols represent in an

equation, you have a complete sentence in English. The equal sign gives the verb. So,  is read " is equal to ." The

following table has some examples of equations.

Equation                                         English Sentence

          The sum of three and five is equal to eight.

                                                 minus one equals fourteen.

          The product of six and seven is equal to forty-two.

                                                 is equal to fifty-three.

          plus nine is equal to two times minus three.

  EXAMPLE 5.4

Translating from an English Sentence to an Equation
Translate the following sentences from words into algebraic equations.

 1. Two times is 6.
 2. plus 2 is equal to times 3.
 3. The quotient of 35 and 7 is 5.
 4. Sixty-seven minus is 56.

     Solution
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

      YOUR TURN 5.4

Translate the following sentences from words into algebraic equations.
    1. Five times is 50.
    2. Half of a number is 30.
    3. The difference of three times a number and 7 is 2.
    4. Two times plus 7 is 21.
338 5 · Algebra

      WHO KNEW?

The Use of Variables

French philosopher and mathematician René Descartes (1596-1650) is usually given credit for the use of the letters ,
 , and to represent unknown quantities in algebra. He introduced these ideas in his publication of La Geometrie,

which was printed in 1637. In this publication, he also used the letters , , and to represent known quantities. There
is a (possibly fictitious) story that, when the book was being printed for the first time, the printer began to run short
of the last three letters of the alphabet. So the printer asked Descartes if it mattered which of , , or were used for
the mathematical equations in the book. Descartes decided it made no difference to him; so the printer decided to
use predominantly for the mathematics in the book, because the letters and would occur more often in the
body of the text (written in French) than the letter would! This might explain why the letter is still used today as
the most common variable to represent unknown quantities in algebra.

Simplifying and Evaluating Algebraic Expressions

To simplify an expression means to do all the math possible. For example, to simplify  we would first multiply

to get 8 and then add 1 to get 9. We have introduced most of the symbols and notation used in algebra, but now

we need to clarify the order of operations. Otherwise, expressions may have different meanings, and they may result in

different values. Consider          . Do you add first or multiply first? Do you get different answers?

                 Add first:         Multiply first:  Which one is correct?

Early on, mathematicians realized the need to establish some guidelines when performing arithmetic operations to
ensure that everyone would get the same answer. Those guidelines are called the order of operations and are listed in
the table below.

Step 1: Parentheses and Other       Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping symbols,
        Grouping Symbols                                 working on the innermost parentheses first.

                 Step 2: Exponents  Simplify all expressions with exponents.

Step 3: Multiplication and          Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right. These
            Division                                            operations have equal priority.

Step 4: Addition and Subtraction    Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These operations
                                                                               have equal priority.

      You may have heard about Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally or PEMDAS. Be careful to notice in Steps 3 and 4 in the
      table above that multiplication and division, as well as addition and subtraction, happen in order from LEFT to
      RIGHT. It is possible, for example, to have PEDMAS or PEMDSA. The PEMDAS trick can be misleading if not fully
      understood!

  EXAMPLE 5.5

Making a Numerical Equation True Using the Order of Operations
Use parentheses to make the following statements true.
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 339

    Solution                                       . Then you have         .
1. Add the parentheses around the                . Then you have         .
2. Add the parentheses around the               . Then you have
3. Add the parentheses around the                . Then you have                              .
4. Add the parentheses around the                                                            .

      YOUR TURN 5.5

Use parentheses and the order of operations to make each equation true.
    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.

In the last example, we simplified expressions using the order of operations. Now we'll evaluate some
expressions--again following the order of operations. To evaluate an expression means to find the value of the
expression when the variable is replaced by a given number.

EXAMPLE 5.6

Evaluating and Simplifying an Expression

1. Evaluate             when     .

2. Evaluate             when              .

    Solution                  in the expression, and then simplify:      .
1. To evaluate, let           in the expression, and then simplify:                   .
2. To evaluate, let

     YOUR TURN 5.6

     1. Evaluate        when        .
     2. Evaluate
                              when           .

Operations of Algebraic Expressions

Algebraic expressions are made up of terms. A term is a constant or the product of a constant and one or more

variables. Examples of terms are 7, , 5 , 9 , and . The constant that multiplies the variable is called the coefficient.

Think of the coefficient as the number in front of the variable. Consider the algebraic expressions 5 , which has a

coefficient of 5, and 9 , which has a coefficient of 9. If there is no number listed in front of the variable, then the

coefficient is 1 since        .

Some terms share common traits. When two terms are constants or have the same variable and exponent, we say they
are like terms. If there are like terms in an expression, you can simplify the expression by combining the like terms. We
add the coefficients and keep the same variable.

EXAMPLE 5.7

Adding Algebraic Expressions

Add                                    .

     Solution                                                            ) and drop the parentheses:
Step 1: Add the terms in any order and get the same result (think:
340 5 · Algebra

Step 2: Group like terms together:
Step 3: Combine the like terms:

YOUR TURN 5.7

1. Add                              .

EXAMPLE 5.8

Subtracting Algebraic Expressions

Subtract                            .

     Solution                                                                         , which is the correct
Step 1: Distribute the negative inside the parentheses (think:      , which is not correct as we have
answer). You cannot just drop the parentheses (for example,
already verified the answer is 3):

Step 2: Group like terms together:

Step 3: Combine the like terms:

YOUR TURN 5.8

1. Subtract                            .

Before looking at multiplying algebraic expressions we look at the Distributive Property, which says that to multiply a

sum, first you multiply each term in the sum and then you add the products. For example,

                                    can also be solved as           . If we use a variable, then

                   .

We can extended this example to                                                           , which can

also be solved as                      . If we use variables, then

                                                                    .

FORMULA

Distributive Property:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 341

  EXAMPLE 5.9

Simplifying an Expression Using the Order of Operations
Simplify each expression.

 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.

     Solution
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.

      YOUR TURN 5.9

Simplify each expression.
    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.
    5.

EXAMPLE 5.10

Multiplying Algebraic Expressions

Multiply             .

     Solution
Step 1: Use the Distributive Property:

Step 2: Multiply:

Step 3: Combine the like terms:

YOUR TURN 5.10

1. Multiply                .

You may have heard the term FOIL which stands for: First, Outer, Inner, Last. FOIL essentially describes a way to use

the Distributive Property if you multiply a two-term expression by another two-term expression, but FOIL only works

in that specific situation. For example, suppose you have a two-term expression multiplied by a three-term

expression, such as                     . What terms qualify as inner terms and what terms qualify as outer terms? In
342 5 · Algebra

this particular situation, FOIL cannot possibly work; the multiplication of       should yield six terms,

where FOIL is designed to only give you four! The Distributive Property works regardless of how many terms there

are. FOIL can be misleading and applied inappropriately if not fully understood!

EXAMPLE 5.11

Dividing Algebraic Expressions

Divide                           .

     Solution
Divide EACH term by 4 :

YOUR TURN 5.11

1. Divide                           .

Be careful how you divide! Sometimes students incorrectly divide only one term on top by the bottom term. For

example,                         might turn into  if done incorrectly. When we divide expressions, EACH

term is divided by the divisor. So,                                               If you forget, it is always a good

idea to check these rules by creating an example using numerical expressions. For example,                     .

Dividing each term on top by 3 would yield                                        , which is the correct answer.

However, if you just divided the 9 on top by the 3 on the bottom, getting                   , this does not

result in the correct answer.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 343

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Al-Khwarizmi

                                                                    Figure 5.3 Al-Khwarizmi
  Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Musa Al-Khwarizmi was born around 780 AD, probably in or around the region of
  Khwarizm, which is now part of modern-day Uzbekistan. For most of his adult life, he worked as a scholar at the
  House of Wisdom in Baghdad, Iraq. He wrote many mathematical works during his life, but is probably most famous
  for his book Al-kitab al-muhtasar fi hisab al-jabr w'al'muqabalah, which translates to The Condensed Book on the
  Calculation of al-Jabr (completion) and al'muqabalah (balancing). The word al-jabr would eventually become the word
  we use to describe the topic that he was writing about in this book: algebra. From another book of his, with the Latin
  title Algoritmi de numero Indorum (Al-Khwarizmi on the Hindu Art of Reckoning ), our word algorithm is derived. In
  addition to writing on mathematics, Al-Khwarizmi wrote works on astronomy, geography, the sundial, and the
  calendar.

In 2012, Andrew Hacker wrote an opinion piece in the New York Times Magazine suggesting that teaching algebra in
high school was a waste of time. Keith Devlin, a British mathematician, was asked to comment on Hacker's article by his
students in his Stanford University Continuing Studies course "Mathematics: Making the Invisible Visible"
(https://openstax.org/r/Making_the_Invisible_Visible) on iTunes University. Devlin concludes that Hacker was displaying
his ignorance of what algebra is.

       VIDEO
      Q&A: Why We Teach Algebra (https://openstax.org/r/Teach_Algebra)

Check Your Understanding

 1. Juliette is 2 inches taller than her friend Vivian. Which algebraic equations represent their height? Use for
      Juliette's height and for Vivian's height.

 2. Which options represent algebraic expressions?
344 5 · Algebra

3. Which expression equals 10 ?

4. Using the expression          , when a certain number is put in for , the result is 50. What is the value of ?

5. Which expression equals              ? Hint: Use the Distributive Property.

6. Given the expression                 , the Distributive Property allows it to be rewritten as:

7. Given the two algebraic expressions  and                , the solution is                       . What
                                                                                . What mathematical
mathematical operation was performed on the two algebraic expressions?

8. Given the two algebraic expressions       and , the solution is

operation was performed on the two algebraic expressions?

        SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, translate from algebra to words.
     1.
     2. (10)( )
     3.
     4.
     5.

For the following exercises, translate from words to algebra.
     6. 15 divided by 3.
     7. The sum of 13 and 13.
     8. 120 minus 12.
     9. The product of 5 and 4.
    10. The sum of double and 5.

For the following exercises, translate from an English phrase to an expression.
    11. Three times minus 7.
    12. divided by 2; then add 4.
    13. squared minus 3.
    14. A rental car company charges $0.15 per mile , plus a $40 flat fee for the rental.
    15. A parking garage in New York City charges $20 for the first hour, then $5 per hour .

For the following exercises, use parentheses to make the statements true.
    16.
    17.
    18.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           5.1 · Algebraic Expressions 345

19.
20.

For the following exercises, evaluate and simplify the expression.

21. when

22.      when

23.                 when

24.           when

25.                    when

26.                 when

27.                       when

28. Yasenia is 3 years older than Xavier. How old is Yasenia when Xavier is 18 years old?

29. A rental car company charges $0.15 per mile , plus a $40 flat fee for the rental. What is the cost of the car

     rental if one drives 100 miles?

30. A parking garage in New York City charges $20 for the first hour, then $5 per hour . What is the cost of parking

     for 10 hours?

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operation for the expressions.

31. Add                   .

32. Add                               .

33. Subtract                       .

34. Subtract                             .

35. Multiply        .

36. Multiply                    .

37. Multiply           .
38. Multiply                .

39.                          .

40.                          .
346 5 · Algebra

    5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications

Figure 5.4 Most gyms have a monthly membership fee. (credit: modification of work "Morning PT after the Holidays
2021" by Fort Drum & 10th Mountain Division (LI)/Flickr, Public Domain Mark 1.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Solve linear equations in one variable using properties of equations.
 2. Construct a linear equation to solve applications.
 3. Determine equations with no solution or infinitely many solutions.
 4. Solve a formula for a given variable.

In this section, we will study linear equations in one variable. There are several real-world scenarios that can be
represented by linear equations: taxi rentals with a flat fee and a rate per mile; cell phone bills that charge a monthly fee
plus a separate rate per text; gym memberships with a monthly fee plus a rate per class taken; etc. For example, if you
join your local gym at $10 per month and pay $5 per class, how many classes can you take if your gym budget is $75 per
month?

Linear Equations and Applications

Solving any equation is like discovering the answer to a puzzle. The purpose of solving an equation is to find the value or
values of the variable that makes the equation a true statement. Any value of the variable that makes the equation true
is called a solution to the equation. It is the answer to the puzzle! There are many types of equations that we will learn to
solve. In this section, we will focus on a linear equation, which is an equation in one variable that can be written as

where and are real numbers and   , such that is the coefficient of and is the constant.

To solve a linear equation, it is a good idea to have an overall strategy that can be used to solve any linear equation. In
the Example 5.12, we will give the steps of a general strategy for solving any linear equation. Simplifying each side of the
equation as much as possible first makes the rest of the steps easier.

EXAMPLE 5.12

Solving a Linear Equation Using a General Strategy
Solve

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 347

Solution                         Use the Distributive Property. Notice that each side
                                     of the equation is now simplified as much as
Step 1: Simplify each side of                                 possible.
  the equation as much as
             possible.

   Step 2: Collect all variable    Nothing to do; all -terms are on the left side.
   terms on one side of the
                                 To get constants only on the right, add 29 to each
              equation.                                         side.

Step 3: Collect constant terms                                Simplify.
    on the other side of the
              equation.

Step 4: Make the coefficient of          Divide each side by 7.
 the variable term equal to 1.                    Simplify.

Step 5: Check the solution.                         Let                                Check:
                                                    Subtract.

      YOUR TURN 5.12
1. Solve

In Example 5.12, we used both the addition and division property of equations. All the properties of equations are
summarized in table below. Basically, what you do to one side of the equation, you must do to the other side of the
equation to preserve equality.

                      Operation          Property                Example

                               Addition         If
                                         Then

                      Subtraction               If
                                         Then
348 5 · Algebra

                                   Operation              Property       Example
                                 Multiplication
                                                           If
                                                    Then

                                    Division           If

                                                 Then               for

Be careful to multiply and divide every term on each side of the equation. For example,           is solved by

multiplying BOTH sides of the equation by 3 to get                       which gives              . Using parentheses will

help you remember to use the distributive property! A division example, such as                   , can be solved

by dividing BOTH sides of the equation by 3 to get                       which then will lead to  .

EXAMPLE 5.13

Solving a Linear Equation Using Properties of Equations

Solve                            .

     Solution
Step 1: Simplify each side.

Step 2: Collect all variables on one side.

Step 3: Collect constant terms on one side.

Step 4: Make the coefficient of the variable 1. Already done!
Step 5: Check.

       YOUR TURN 5.13

1. Solve                                         .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             5.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 349

      WHO KNEW?

Who Invented the Symbol for Equals ?

Before the creation of a symbol for equality, it was usually expressed with a word that meant equals, such as aequales
(Latin), esgale (French), or gleich (German). Welsh mathematician and physician Robert Recorde is given credit for
inventing the modern sign. It first appears in writing in The Whetstone of Witte, a book Recorde wrote about algebra,
which was published in 1557. In this book, Recorde states, "I will set as I do often in work use, a pair of parallels, or
Gemowe (twin) lines of one length, thus: ===, because no two things can be more equal." Although his version of the
sign was a bit longer than the one we use today, his idea stuck and "=" is used throughout the world to indicate
equality in mathematics.

In Algebraic Expressions, you translated an English sentence into an equation. In this section, we take that one step
further and translate an English paragraph into an equation, and then we solve the equation. We can go back to the
opening question in this section: If you join your local gym at $10 per month and pay $5 per class, how many classes can
you take if your gym budget is $75 per month? We can create an equation for this scenario and then solve the equation
(see Example 5.15).

EXAMPLE 5.14

Constructing a Linear Equation to Solve an Application
The Beaudrie family has two cats, Basil and Max. Together, they weigh 23 pounds. Basil weighs 16 pounds. How much
does Max weigh?

     Solution             = Max's weight.
Let = Basil's weight and

We also know that Basil weighs 16 pounds so:
Steps 1 and 2:
Since both sides are simplified, the variable is on one side of the equation, we start in Step 3 and collect the constants on
one side:
Step 3:

Step 4: is already done so we go to Step 5:
Step 5:

Basil weighs 16 pounds and Max weighs 7 pounds.

        YOUR TURN 5.14
  1. Sam and Henry are roommates. Together, they have 68 books. Sam has 26 books. How many books does Henry

      have?
350 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.15

Constructing a Linear Equation to Solve Another Application
If you join your local gym at $10 per month and pay $5 per class, how many classes can you take if your gym budget is
$75 per month?

Solution

If we let = number of classes, the expression  would represent what you pay per month if each class is $5 and

there's a $10 monthly fee per class. $10 is your constant. If you want to know how many classes you can take if you have

a $75 monthly gym budget, set the equation equal to 75. Then solve the equation          for .

Steps 1 and 2:

Step 3:

Step 4:

Step 5:

The solution is 13 classes. You can take 13 classes on a $75 monthly gym budget.

      YOUR TURN 5.15

1. On June 7, 2021, the national average price for regular gasoline was $3.053 per gallon. If Aiko fills up his car with
    16 gallons, how much is the total cost? Round to the nearest cent.

EXAMPLE 5.16

Constructing an Application from a Linear Equation                  . Then solve your application.
Write an application that can be solved using the equation

Solution

Answers will vary. Let's say you want to rent a snowblower for a huge winter storm coming up. If = the number of days

you rent a snowblower, then the expression     represents what you pay if, for each day, it costs $50 to rent the

snowblower and there is a $35 flat rental fee. $35 is the constant. To find out how many days you can rent a snowblower

for $185, set the expression equal to 185. Then solve the equation                for .

Steps 1 and 2:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 351

Step 3:
Step 4:
Step 5:

The equation is                 and the solution is 3 days. You can rent a snowblower for 3 days on a $185 budget.

      YOUR TURN 5.16                                           . Then solve your application.
1. Write an application that can be solved using the equation

Linear Equations with No Solutions or Infinitely Many Solutions

Every linear equation we have solved thus far has given us one numerical solution. Now we'll look at linear equations for
which there are no solutions or infinitely many solutions.

EXAMPLE 5.17

Solving a Linear Equation with No Solution

Solve                        .

     Solution
Step 1: Simplify each side.

Step 2: Collect all variables to one side.

The variable disappeared! When this happens, you need to examine what remains. In this particular case, we have
         , which is not a true statement. When you have a false statement, then you know the equation has no solution;

there does not exist a value for that can be put into the equation that will make it true.

       YOUR TURN 5.17

1. Solve                        .
352 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.18

Solving a Linear Equation with Infinitely Many Solutions

Solve                            .

     Solution
Step 1:

Step 2:

As with the previous example, the variable disappeared. In this case, however, we have a true statement (  ). When
this occurs we say there are infinitely many solutions; any value for will make this statement true.

      YOUR TURN 5.18
1. Solve

Solving a Formula for a Given Variable

You are probably familiar with some geometry formulas. A formula is a mathematical description of the relationship
between variables. Formulas are also used in the sciences, such as chemistry, physics, and biology. In medicine they are
used for calculations for dispensing medicine or determining body mass index. Spreadsheet programs rely on formulas
to make calculations. It is important to be able to manipulate formulas and solve for specific variables.

To solve a formula for a specific variable means to isolate that variable on one side of the equal sign with a coefficient of
1. All other variables and constants are on the other side of the equal sign. To see how to solve a formula for a specific
variable, we will start with the distance, rate, and time formula.

EXAMPLE 5.19

Solving for a Given Variable with Distance, Rate, and Time

Solve the formula       for . This is the distance formula where = distance, = rate, and = time.

     Solution
Divide both sides by :

      YOUR TURN 5.19             for . This formula is used to calculate simple interest , for a principal , invested at a

1. Solve the formula
    rate , for years.

VIDEO
Solving for a Variable in an Equation (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_for_a_variable)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 5.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 353

EXAMPLE 5.20

Solving for a Given Variable in the Area Formula for a Triangle

Solve the formula        for . This is the area formula of a triangle where  = area, = base, and = height.

     Solution
Step 1: Multiply both sides by 2.

Step 2: Divide both sides by .

      YOUR TURN 5.20               for . This formula is used to calculate the volume of a right circular cone with

1. Solve the formula
    radius and height .

WORK IT OUT

Using Algebra to Understand Card Tricks
You will need to perform this card trick with another person. Before you begin, the two people must first decide which
of the two will be the Dealer and which will be the Partner, as each will do something different. Once you have
decided upon that, follow the steps here:
Step 1: Dealer and Partner: Take a regular deck of 52 cards, and remove the face cards and the 10s.
Step 2: Dealer and Partner: Shuffle the remaining cards
Step 3: Dealer and Partner: Select one card each, but keep them face down and don't look at them yet.
Step 4: Dealer: Look at your card (just the Dealer!). Multiply its value by 2 (Aces = 1).
Step 5: Dealer: Add 2 to this result.
Step 6: Dealer: Multiply your answer by 5.
Step 7: Partner: Look at your card.
Step 8: Partner: Calculate: 10 - your card, and tell this information to the dealer.
Step 9: Dealer: Subtract the value the Partner tells you from your total to get a final answer.
Step 10: Dealer: verbally state the final answer.
Step 11: Dealer and Partner: Turn over your cards. Now, answer the following questions
 1. Did the trick work? How do you know?
 2. Why did this occur? In other words, how does this trick work?

Check Your Understanding

 9. Is the solution strategy used in solving the linear equation correct? If it is correct, show the final step (check the
      solution). If it is not correct, explain why.
354 5 · Algebra

10. Is the solution strategy used in solving the linear equation correct? If it is correct, show the final step (check the
      solution). If it is not correct, explain why.

11. Is the solution strategy used in solving the linear equation correct? If it is correct, show the final step (check the
      solution). If it is not correct, explain why.

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The Nice Cab Company charges a flat rate of $3.00 for each fare, plus
$1.70 per mile. A competing taxi service, the Enjoyable Cab Company, charges a flat rate of $5.00 for each fare, plus
$1.60 per mile.

    12. Using the variable for number of miles, write the equation that would allow you to find the total fare
          using the Nice Cab Company.

    13. It is 22 miles from the airport to your hotel. What would be your total fare using the Nice Cab Company?
    14. Using the variable for number of miles, write the equation that would allow you to find the total fare

          using the Enjoyable Cab Company.
    15. Using the same 22-mile trip from the airport to the hotel, how much would the total fare be for using the

          Enjoyable Cab Company?
    16. Based on the cost of each cab ride, which cab company should you use for the trip from the airport to the

          hotel? Why?

17. After solving the linear equation                      , Nancy says there is no solution. Luis believes
      there are infinitely many solutions. Who is right?

18. The conversion formula between the Fahrenheit temperature scale and the Celsius temperature scale is given by

this formula:                    , where is the temperature in degrees Celsius and is the temperature in degrees

Fahrenheit. What is the correct formula when solved for ?
 a.

b.

c.

d.

19. To find a temperature on the Kelvin temperature scale, add 273 degrees to the temperature in Celsius. Which
      formula illustrates this?
       a.
       b.
       c.

Access for free at openstax.org
                          5.2 · Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications 355

       d.

20. Using the information from exercise 18 and exercise 19, which conversion formula would you use to find degrees
      Kelvin when given degrees Fahrenheit?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

21. There is a fourth temperature scale, although it is not used much today. The Rankin temperature scale varies from
      the Fahrenheit scale by about 460 degrees. So given a temperature in Fahrenheit, add 460 degrees to get the
      temperature in Rankin. Which formula represents a formula to find degrees Rankin when given degrees Celsius?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

        SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, solve the linear equations using a general strategy.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.

For the following exercises, solve the linear equations using properties of equations.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.

For the following exercises, construct a linear equation to solve an application.
    11. It costs $0.55 to mail one first class letter. Construct a linear equation and solve to find how much it costs to
          mail 13 letters.
    12. Normal yearly snowfall at the local ski resort is 12 inches more than twice the amount it received last season.
          The normal yearly snowfall is 62 inches. Construct a linear equation and solve to find what the snowfall was last
          season.
    13. Guillermo bought textbooks and notebooks at the bookstore. The number of textbooks was three more than
          twice the number of notebooks. He bought seven textbooks. Construct a linear equation and solve to find how
          many notebooks he bought.
    14. Gerry worked Sudoku puzzles and crossword puzzles this week. The number of Sudoku puzzles he completed is
          eight more than twice the number of crossword puzzles. He completed 22 Sudoku puzzles. Construct a linear
          equation and solve to find how many crossword puzzles he did.
    15. Laurie has $46,000 invested in stocks. The amount invested in stocks is $8,000 less than three times the amount
          invested in bonds. Construct a linear equation and solve to find how much Laurie invested in bonds.

For the following exercises, construct an application from a linear equation.

16.                    .

17. 0.36 for     .

18.                 .

19.  for         .

20.           .

For the following exercises, state whether each equation has exactly one solution, no solution, or infinitely many
solutions.

    21.
356 5 · Algebra

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

For the following exercises, solve the given formula for the specified variable.

27. Solve the formula   for .

28. Solve the formula          for .

29. Solve the formula          for .

30. Solve the formula          for .

31. Solve the formula                 for .

32. Solve the formula          for .

33. Solve               for .

34. Solve the formula                 for .

35. Solve the formula:         for .

5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications

Figure 5.5 These poll results, showing a margin of error at 4 percent, are an example of a real-world scenario that can be
represented by linear inequalities.

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Graph inequalities in one variable.
 2. Solve linear inequalities in one variable.
 3. Construct a linear inequality to solve applications.

In this section, we will study linear inequalities in one variable. Inequalities can be used when the possible values
(answers) in a certain situation are numerous, not just a few, or when the exact value (answer) is not known but it is
known to be within a range of possible values. There are many real-world scenarios that can be represented by linear
inequalities. For example, consider the survey of the mayoral election in Figure 5.5 Surveys and polls are usually
conducted with only a small group of people. The margin of error indicates a range of how the actual group of voters
would vote given the results of the survey. This range can be expressed using inequalities.

Another example involves college tuition. Say a local community college charges $113 per credit hour. You budget $1,500
for tuition this fall semester. What are the number of credit hours that you could take this fall? Since this answer could be
many different values, it can be expressed as an inequality.

Graphing Inequalities on the Number Line

In Algebraic Expressions, we introduced equality and the symbol. In this section, we look at inequality and the symbols
  , , , and . The table below summarizes the symbols and their meaning.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.3 · Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 357

                                            Symbol            Meaning

                                                              less than

                                                    greater than

                                                    less than or equal to

                                                    greater than or equal to

Suppose you had the inequality statement    . What possible number or numbers would make the inequality

true? If you are thinking, " could be 4," that's correct, but could also be 5, 6, 37, 1 million, or even 3.001. The number

of solutions is infinite; any number greater than 3 is a solution to the inequality  .

Rather than trying to list all possible solutions, we show all the solutions to the inequality  on the number line. All

the numbers to the right of 3 on the number line are shaded, to show that all numbers greater than 3 are solutions. At

the number 3 itself, an open parenthesis is drawn, since the number 3 is not part of the solutions of  .

We can also represent inequalities using interval notation. There is no upper end to the solution to this inequality. In

interval notation, we express     as        . The symbol is read as "infinity." Infinity is not an actual number. Figure

5.6 shows both the number line and the interval notation for  .

                 Figure 5.6 The inequality  is graphed on this number line and written in interval notation.

We used the left parenthesis symbol to show that the endpoint of the inequality is not included. Parentheses are used
when the endpoints are not included as a possible answer to the inequality. The notation for inequalities on a number
line and in interval notation use the same symbols to express the endpoints of intervals.

The inequality      means all numbers less than or equal to 1. To illustrate that solution on a number line, we first put a

bracket at       ; brackets are used when the endpoint is included. We then shade in all the numbers to the left of 1, to

show that all numbers less than one are solutions. There is no lower end to those numbers. We write       in interval

notation as         . The symbol is read as "negative infinity." Figure 5.7 shows both the number line and interval

notation for     .

                 Figure 5.7 The inequality  is graphed on this number line and written in interval notation.

Figure 5.8 summarizes the general representations in both number line form and interval notation of solutions for

,             ,     , and      .
358 5 · Algebra

                 Figure 5.8 Summary of representations in number line form and interval notation.

EXAMPLE 5.21

Graphing an Inequality           and write the solution in interval notation.
Graph the inequality

     Solution                                               , and put a bracket at  to show that the numbers are
Shade to the right of to show all the numbers greater than
greater than or equal to (Figure 5.9)

                                                                              Figure 5.9

Write in interval notation starting at with a bracket to show that is included in the solution and then infinity
because the solution includes all the numbers greater than or equal to :

      YOUR TURN 5.21                  and write the solution in interval notation.
1. Graph the inequality

EXAMPLE 5.22

Graphing a Compound Inequality

Graph the inequality             and  and write the solution in interval notation.

     Solution         (Figure 5.10).
Step 1: Graph

                                      Figure 5.10

Step 2: Graph         (Figure 5.11).

                                                                             Figure 5.11
Step 3: Graph both on the same number line and think of where the solutions are to BOTH inequalities Figure 5.12. This

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.3 · Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 359

will be where BOTH are shaded.

                                                  Figure 5.12

Step 4: Write the solution in interval notation:

YOUR TURN 5.22

1. Graph the inequality         and          and write the solution in interval notation.

      WHO KNEW?

Where Did the Inequality Symbols Come From?

The first use of the symbol to represent "less than" and to represent "greater than" appeared in a mathematics
book written by Englishman Thomas Harriot that was published in 1631. However, Harriot did not invent the
symbols...the editor of the book did! Harriot used triangular symbols to represent less than and greater than; the
editor, for reasons unknown, changed to symbols that are similar to the ones we use today. The symbols used to
represent less than or equal to, and greater than or equal to ( and ) were first used in 1731 by French hydrologist
and surveyor Pierre Bouguer. Interestingly, English mathematician John Wallis had used similar symbols as early as
1670, but he put the bar above the less than and greater than symbols instead of below them.

Solving Linear Inequalities

A linear inequality is much like a linear equation--but the equal sign is replaced with an inequality sign. A linear

inequality is an inequality in one variable that can be written in one of the forms                                   or

where , , and are all real numbers.

When we solved linear equations, we were able to use the properties of equality to add, subtract, multiply, or divide both

sides and still keep the equality. Similar properties hold true for inequalities. We can add or subtract the same quantity

from both sides of an inequality and still keep the inequality. For example, we know that 2 is less than 4, i.e.,     . If we

add 6 to both sides of this inequality, we still have a true statement:

The same would happen if we subtracted 6 from both sides of the inequality; the statement would stay true:

Notice that the inequality signs stayed the same. This leads us to the Addition and Subtraction Properties of Inequality.

FORMULA

For any numbers , , and , if         , then       and                     .
For any numbers , , and , if         , then
                                                  and                     .

We can add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an inequality and still keep the inequality the same. But

what happens to an inequality when we divide or multiply both sides by a number? Let's first multiply and divide both

sides by a positive number, starting with an inequality we know is true,     . We will multiply and divide this

inequality by 5:
360 5 · Algebra

The inequality signs stayed the same. Does the inequality stay the same when we divide or multiply by a negative

number? Let's use our inequality     to find out, multiplying it and dividing it by :

Notice that when we filled in the inequality signs, the inequality signs reversed their direction in order to make it true! To
summarize, when we divide or multiply an inequality by a positive number, the inequality sign stays the same. When we
divide or multiply an inequality by a negative number, the inequality sign reverses. This gives us the Multiplication and
Division Property of Inequality.

FORMULA

For any numbers , , and ,

                    multiply or divide by a positive: if    and  , then                and

                                                 if         and  , then                and

                    multiply or divide by a negative: if    and  , then                and

                                                 if         and  , then                and

To summarize, when we divide or multiply an inequality by:

· a positive number, the inequality sign stays the same.
· a negative number, the inequality sign reverses.

Be careful to only reverse the inequality sign when you are multiplying and dividing by a negative. You do NOT

reverse the inequality sign when you add or subtract a negative. For example,          is solved by dividing both

sides of the inequality by 2 to get  . You do NOT reverse the inequality sign because there is a negative 4. As

another example,                  is solved by adding to both sides to get             . This does not reverse the

inequality sign because we were not multiplying or diving by a negative. We then divide both sides by 5 and get

                 .

EXAMPLE 5.23

Solving a Linear Inequality Using One Operation

Solve               , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       5.3 · Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 361

                         Figure 5.13

YOUR TURN 5.23

1. Solve              , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

EXAMPLE 5.24

Solving a Linear Inequality Using Multiple Operations

Solve the inequality     , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

                         Figure 5.14

      YOUR TURN 5.24     , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in

1. Solve the inequality
    interval notation.

Solving Applications with Linear Inequalities

Many real-life situations require us to solve inequalities. The method we will use to solve applications with linear
inequalities is very much like the one we used when we solved applications with equations. We will read the problem
and make sure all the words are understood. Next, we will identify what we are looking for and assign a variable to
represent it. We will restate the problem in one sentence to make it easy to translate into an inequality. Then, we will
solve the inequality.

Sometimes an application requires the solution to be a whole number, but the algebraic solution to the inequality is not a
whole number. In that case, we must round the algebraic solution to a whole number. The context of the application will
determine whether we round up or down.

  EXAMPLE 5.25

Constructing a Linear Inequality to Solve an Application with Tablet Computers
A teacher won a mini grant of $4,000 to buy tablet computers for their classroom. The tablets they would like to buy cost
$254.12 each, including tax and delivery. What is the maximum number of tablets the teacher can buy?

     Solution
Let
362 5 · Algebra

times $254.12 has to be less than $4,000, so              .

Solve for :

The teacher can buy 15 tablets and stay under $4,000.

      YOUR TURN 5.25

1. Taleisha's phone plan costs her $28.80 per month plus $0.20 per text message. How many text messages can she
    send/receive and keep her monthly phone bill no more than $50?

EXAMPLE 5.26

Constructing a Linear Inequality to Solve a Tuition Application
The local community college charges $113 per credit hour. Your budget is $1,500 for tuition this fall semester. What
number of credit hours could you take this fall?

     Solution
Let the number of credit hours you could take.

times $113 has to be less than $1,500, so              .

Solve for :

You can take up to 13 credits and stay under $1,500.

      YOUR TURN 5.26

1. You are awarded a $500 scholarship! In addition to the $1,500 you have saved for tuition, you now have an
    additional $500 to spend on credit hours for fall semester. Now, how many credit hours could you take this fall
    semester? Assume the cost is still $113 per credit hour.

EXAMPLE 5.27

Constructing a Linear Inequality to Solve an Application with Travel Costs
Brenda's best friend is having a destination wedding and the event will last 3 days and 3 nights. Brenda has $500 in
savings and can earn $15 an hour babysitting. She expects to pay $350 for airfare, $375 for food and entertainment, and
$60 a night for her share of a hotel room. How many hours must she babysit to have enough money to pay for the trip?

     Solution
Let number of babysitting hours.

times $15 plus $500 has to be more than                      , so  .

Solve for :

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           5.3 · Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 363

Brenda must babysit at least 27 hours.

        YOUR TURN 5.27

  1. Malik is planning a 6-day summer vacation trip. He has $840 in savings, and he earns $45 per hour for tutoring.
      The trip will cost him $525 for airfare, $780 for food and sightseeing, and $95 per night for the hotel. How many
      hours must he tutor to have enough money to pay for the trip?

          TECH CHECK

  The Desmos activities called "Inequalities on a Number Line" (https://openstax.org/r/Inequalities_on_a) and
  "Compound Inequalities on a Number Line" (https://openstax.org/r/Compound_Inequalities) are ways for students to
  develop and deepen their understanding of inequalities. Teachers will need a Desmos account to assign the activity
  for student use. Once they have assigned the activity to their students, teachers need to share the code for the
  activity with their students. Students will input the code (https://openstax.org/r/will_input) to work on the activity.

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, choose the correct interval notation for the graph.

    22.
            a.
           b.
            c.
           d.
            e.

    23.
            a.
           b.
            c.
           d.
            e.

    24.
            a.
           b.
            c.
           d.
            e.

    25.
            a.
           b.
            c.
364 5 · Algebra

           d.
           e.

26.              is the solution for which inequality?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.
       e.

27.              is the solution for which inequality?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.
       e.

28.              is the solution for which inequality?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.
       e.

29.              is the solution for which inequality?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.
       e.

For the following exercises, choose the equation that best models the situation.
    30. Renaldo is hauling boxes of lawn chairs. Each box is the same size, 8 cubic feet. Renaldo's truck has a capacity of
          764 cubic feet. How many boxes of lawn chairs can Renaldo put in his truck?
            a.
           b.
            c.
           d.
            e. None of these

    31. Bernadette babysits the neighbor's kids, making on average $50 a night. How many nights will she have to
          babysit in order to earn enough money to buy a used car, whose cost is $8,120?
            a.
           b.
            c.
           d.
            e. None of these

        SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, graph the inequality on a number line and write the interval notation.
     1.
     2.
     3.

     4.
     5.
     6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           5.3 · Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications 365

     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.

For the following exercises, solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in
interval notation.

    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.

For the following exercises, construct a linear inequality to solve the application.
    23. The elevator in Yehire's apartment building has a sign that says the maximum weight is 2,100 pounds. If the
          average weight of one person is 150 pounds, how many people can safely ride the elevator?
    24. Arleen got a $20 gift card for the coffee shop. Her favorite iced drink costs $3.79. What is the maximum number
          of drinks she can buy with the gift card?
    25. Ryan charges his neighbors $17.50 to wash their car. How many cars must he wash next summer if his goal is to
          earn at least $1,500?
    26. Kimuyen needs to earn $4,150 per month in order to pay all her expenses. Her sales job pays her $3,475 per
          month plus 4 percent of her total sales. What is the minimum Kimuyen's total sales must be in order for her to
          pay all her expenses?
    27. Nataly is considering two job offers. The first job would pay her $83,000 per year. The second would pay her
          $66,500 plus 15 percent of her total sales. What would her total sales need to be for her salary on the second
          offer to be higher than the first?
    28. Kiyoshi's phone plan costs $17.50 per month plus $0.15 per text message. What is the maximum number of text
          messages Kiyoshi can use so the phone bill is no more than $56.60?
    29. Kellen wants to rent a banquet room in a restaurant for her cousin's baby shower. The restaurant charges $350
          for the banquet room plus $32.50 per person for lunch. How many people can Kellen have at the shower if she
          wants the maximum cost to be $1,500?
    30. Noe installs and configures software on home computers. He charges $125 per job. His monthly expenses are
          $1,600. How many jobs must he work in order to make a profit of at least $2,400?
366 5 · Algebra

    5.4 Ratios and Proportions

Figure 5.15 This bar graph shows popular social media app usage. (Source (https://openstax.org /r/media_apps_chart))

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Construct ratios to express comparison of two quantities.
 2. Use and apply proportional relationships to solve problems.
 3. Determine and apply a constant of proportionality.
 4. Use proportions to solve scaling problems.

Ratios and proportions are used in a wide variety of situations to make comparisons. For example, using the information
from Figure 5.15, we can see that the number of Facebook users compared to the number of Twitter users is 2,006 M to
328 M. Note that the "M" stands for million, so 2,006 million is actually 2,006,000,000 and 328 million is 328,000,000.
Similarly, the number of Qzone users compared to the number of Pinterest users is in a ratio of 632 million to 175
million. These types of comparisons are ratios.

Constructing Ratios to Express Comparison of Two Quantities

Note there are three different ways to write a ratio, which is a comparison of two numbers that can be written as: to

OR  OR the fraction . Which method you use often depends upon the situation. For the most part, we will want to

write our ratios using the fraction notation. Note that, while all ratios are fractions, not all fractions are ratios. Ratios

make part to part, part to whole, and whole to part comparisons. Fractions make part to whole comparisons only.

EXAMPLE 5.28

Expressing the Relationship between Two Currencies as a Ratio
The Euro () is the most common currency used in Europe. Twenty-two nations, including Italy, France, Germany, Spain,
Portugal, and the Netherlands use it. On June 9, 2021, 1 U.S. dollar was worth 0.82 Euros. Write this comparison as a
ratio.

     Solution                       U.S. dollar and let          Euros. Then the ratio can be written as either 1 to 0.82;
Using the definition of ratio, let
or 1:0.82; or

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.4 · Ratios and Proportions 367

      YOUR TURN 5.28
1. On June 9, 2021, 1 U.S. dollar was worth 1.21 Canadian dollars. Write this comparison as a ratio.

EXAMPLE 5.29

Expressing the Relationship between Two Weights as a Ratio
The gravitational pull on various planetary bodies in our solar system varies. Because weight is the force of gravity acting
upon a mass, the weights of objects is different on various planetary bodies than they are on Earth. For example, a
person who weighs 200 pounds on Earth would weigh only 33 pounds on the moon! Write this comparison as a ratio.

Solution

Using the definition of ratio, let          pounds on Earth and let  pounds on the moon. Then the ratio can be

written as either 200 to 33; or 200:33; or

      YOUR TURN 5.29
1. A person who weighs 170 pounds on Earth would weigh 64 pounds on Mars. Write this comparison as a ratio.

Using and Applying Proportional Relationships to Solve Problems

Using proportions to solve problems is a very useful method. It is usually used when you know three parts of the
proportion, and one part is unknown. Proportions are often solved by setting up like ratios. If and are two ratios

such that       then the fractions are said to be proportional. Also, two fractions and are proportional

if and only if      .

EXAMPLE 5.30

Solving a Proportion Involving Two Currencies
You are going to take a trip to France. You have $520 U.S. dollars that you wish to convert to Euros. You know that 1 U.S.
dollar is worth 0.82 Euros. How much money in Euros can you get in exchange for $520?

     Solution
Step 1: Set up the two ratios into a proportion; let be the variable that represents the unknown. Notice that U.S. dollar
amounts are in both numerators and Euro amounts are in both denominators.

Step 2: Cross multiply, since the ratios and are proportional, then  .

You should receive  Euros                   .

YOUR TURN 5.30

1. After your trip to France, you have 180 Euros remaining. You wish to convert them back into U.S. dollars.

Assuming the exchange rate is the same         , how many dollars should you receive? Round to the

nearest cent if necessary.
368 5 · Algebra

         EXAMPLE 5.31
       Solving a Proportion Involving Weights on Different Planets
       A person who weighs 170 pounds on Earth would weigh 64 pounds on Mars. How much would a typical racehorse (1,000
       pounds) weigh on Mars? Round your answer to the nearest tenth.

            Solution
       Step 1: Set up the two ratios into a proportion. Notice the Earth weights are both in the numerator and the Mars weights
       are both in the denominator.

       Step 2: Cross multiply, and then divide to solve.

So the 1,000-pound horse would weigh about 376.5 pounds on Mars.

      YOUR TURN 5.31

1. A person who weighs 200 pounds on Earth would weigh only 33 pounds on the moon. A 2021 Toyota Prius
    weighs 3,040 pounds on Earth; how much would it weigh on the moon? Round to the nearest tenth if necessary.

EXAMPLE 5.32

Solving a Proportion Involving Baking
A cookie recipe needs cups of flour to make 60 cookies. Jackie is baking cookies for a large fundraiser; she is told she
needs to bake 1,020 cookies! How many cups of flour will she need?

Solution

Step 1: Set up the two ratios into a proportion. Notice that the cups of flour are both in the numerator and the amounts

of cookies are both in the denominator. To make the calculations more efficient, the cups of flour  is converted to a

decimal number (2.25).

Step 2: Cross multiply, and then simplify to solve.

Jackie will need 38.25, or , cups of flour to bake 1,020 cookies.

        YOUR TURN 5.32
  1. You are going to bake cookies, using the same recipe as above. You find out that you have 27 cups of flour in

      your pantry. Assuming you have all the other ingredients necessary, how many cookies can you make with 27

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.4 · Ratios and Proportions 369

cups of flour?

Part of the definition of proportion states that two fractions and are proportional if                . This is the

"cross multiplication" rule that students often use (and unfortunately, often use incorrectly). The only time cross

multiplication can be used is if you have two ratios (and only two ratios) set up in a proportion. For example, you

cannot use cross multiplication to solve for in an equation such as             because you do not have just the

two ratios. Of course, you could use the rules of algebra to change it to be just two ratios and then you could use
cross multiplication, but in its present form, cross multiplication cannot be used.

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Eudoxus was born around 408 BCE in Cnidus (now known as Knidos) in modern-day Turkey. As a young man, he
traveled to Italy to study under Archytas, one of the followers of Pythagoras. He also traveled to Athens to hear
lectures by Plato and to Egypt to study astronomy. He eventually founded a school and had many students.

Eudoxus made many contributions to the field of mathematics. In mathematics, he is probably best known for his
work with the idea of proportions. He created a definition of proportions that allowed for the comparison of any
numbers, even irrational ones. His definition concerning the equality of ratios was similar to the idea of cross
multiplying that is used today. From his work on proportions, he devised what could be described as a method of
integration, roughly 2000 years before calculus (which includes integration) would be fully developed by Isaac Newton
and Gottfried Leibniz. Through this technique, Eudoxus became the first person to rigorously prove various theorems
involving the volumes of certain objects. He also developed a planetary theory, made a sundial still usable today, and
wrote a seven volume book on geography called Tour of the Earth, in which he wrote about all the civilizations on the
Earth, and their political systems, that were known at the time. While this book has been lost to history, over 100
references to it by different ancient writers attest to its usefulness and popularity.

Determining and Applying a Constant of Proportionality

In the last example, we were given that cups of flour could make 60 cookies; we then calculated that  cups of

flour would make 1,020 cookies, and 720 cookies could be made from 27 cups of flour. Each of those three ratios is
written as a fraction below (with the fractions converted to decimals). What happens if you divide the numerator by the
denominator in each?

The quotients in each are exactly the same! This number, determined from the ratio of cups of flour to cookies, is called

the constant of proportionality. If the values and are related by the equality  then is the constant of

proportionality between and . Note since       then  and

One piece of information that we can derive from the constant of proportionality is a unit rate. In our example (cups of
flour divided by cookies), the constant of proportionality is telling us that it takes 0.0375 cups of flour to make one
cookie. What if we had performed the calculation the other way (cookies divided by cups of flour)?

In this case, the constant of proportionality        is telling us that         cookies can be made with one

cup of flour. Notice in both cases, the "one" unit is associated with the denominator. The constant of proportionality is
also useful in calculations if you only know one part of the ratio and wish to find the other.

EXAMPLE 5.33

Finding a Constant of Proportionality
Isabelle has a part-time job. She kept track of her pay and the number of hours she worked on four different days, and
recorded it in the table below. What is the constant of proportionality, or pay divided by hours? What does the constant
370 5 · Algebra

of proportionality tell you in this situation?

                                       Pay $87.50 $50.00 $37.50 $100.00

                                 Hours              7      4      3      8

Solution

To find the constant of proportionality, divide the pay by hours using the information from any of the four columns. For

example,         . The constant of proportionality is 12.5, or $12.50. This tells you Isabelle's hourly pay: For every

hour she works, she gets paid $12.50.

YOUR TURN 5.33

1. The following table contains the lengths of four objects in both inches and centimeters. What is the constant of
    proportionality (centimeters divided by inches)? What does the constant of proportionality tell you in this
    situation?

                                       Object          floor tile book table pencil

                                 Length (in.)          24     13     60     7.5

                                 Length (cm) 60.96 33.02 152.4 19.05

EXAMPLE 5.34

Applying a Constant of Proportionality: Running mph
Zac runs at a constant speed: 4 miles per hour (mph). One day, Zac left his house at exactly noon (12:00 PM) to begin
running; when he returned, his clock said 4:30 PM. How many miles did he run?

     Solution                                                                                      where is the
The constant of proportionality in this problem is 4 miles per hour (or 4 miles in 1 hour). Since
constant of proportionality, we have

           (30 minutes is , or , hours)
               , since from the definition we know

Zac ran 18 miles.

      YOUR TURN 5.34
1. One week, Zac ran a total of 122 miles. How much time did he spend running in that week?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5.4 · Ratios and Proportions 371

EXAMPLE 5.35

Applying a Constant of Proportionality: Filling Buckets
Joe had a job where every time he filled a bucket with dirt, he was paid $2.50. One day Joe was paid $337.50. How many
buckets did he fill that day?

     Solution                                                                                         where is the
The constant of proportionality in this situation is $2.50 per bucket (or $2.50 for 1 bucket). Since
constant of proportionality, we have

Since we are solving for , and we know from the definition that

Joe filled 135 buckets.

      YOUR TURN 5.35
1. Suppose one day Joe filled 83 buckets; how much money would he make on that day?

EXAMPLE 5.36

Applying a Constant of Proportionality: Miles vs. Kilometers
While driving in Canada, Mabel quickly noticed the distances on the road signs were in kilometers, not miles. She knew
the constant of proportionality for converting kilometers to miles was about 0.62--that is, there are about 0.62 miles in 1
kilometer. If the last road sign she saw stated that Montreal is 104 kilometers away, about how many more miles does
Mabel have to drive? Round your answer to the nearest tenth.

     Solution                                                                           where is the constant of
The constant of proportionality in this situation is 0.62 miles per 1 kilometer. Since
proportionality, we have

Rounding the answer to the nearest tenth, Mabel has to drive 64.5 miles.

        YOUR TURN 5.36
  1. Later in her trip, Mabel decides to drive to the capital of Canada, Ottawa. As she left Montreal, she saw a road

      sign that read that Ottawa is 203 kilometers away. About how many miles is that? Round your answer to the
      nearest tenth.
372 5 · Algebra

     Using Proportions to Solve Scaling Problems

                                                       Figure 5.16 A map of the northeastern United States
       Ratio and proportions are used to solve problems involving scale. One common place you see a scale is on a map (as
       represented in Figure 5.16). In this image, 1 inch is equal to 200 miles. This is the scale. This means that 1 inch on the
       map corresponds to 200 miles on the surface of Earth. Another place where scales are used is with models: model cars,
       trucks, airplanes, trains, and so on. A common ratio given for model cars is 1:24--that means that 1 inch in length on the
       model car is equal to 24 inches (2 feet) on an actual automobile. Although these are two common places that scale is
       used, it is used in a variety of other ways as well.

         EXAMPLE 5.37
       Solving a Scaling Problem Involving Maps
       Figure 5.17 is an outline map of the state of Colorado and its counties. If the distance of the southern border is 380
       miles, determine the scale (i.e., 1 inch = how many miles). Then use that scale to determine the approximate lengths of
       the other borders of the state of Colorado.

       Figure 5.17 Outline Map of Colorado (credit: "Map of Colorado Counties" by David Benbennick/Wikimedia Commons,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       5.4 · Ratios and Proportions 373

Public Domain)

Solution

When the southern border is measured with a ruler, the length is 4 inches. Since the length of the border in real life is

380 miles, our scale is 1 inch  miles.

The eastern and western borders both measure 3 inches, so their lengths are about 285 miles. The northern border
measures the same as the southern border, so it has a length of 380 miles.

YOUR TURN 5.37

1.
    Outline Map of Wyoming (credit: "Blank map of Wyoming showing counties" by David Benbennick/Wikimedia
    Commons, Public Domain)

Consider the outline map of the state of Wyoming and its counties. If the distance of the southern border is 365

miles, determine the scale (i.e.,       how many miles). Then use that scale to determine the approximate

lengths of the other borders of the state of Wyoming.

  EXAMPLE 5.38

Solving a Scaling Problem Involving Model Cars
Die-cast NASCAR model cars are said to be built on a scale of 1:24 when compared to the actual car. If a model car is 9
inches long, how long is a real NASCAR automobile? Write your answer in feet.

     Solution
The scale tells us that 1 inch of the model car is equal to 24 inches (2 feet) on the real automobile. So set up the two
ratios into a proportion. Notice that the model lengths are both in the numerator and the NASCAR automobile lengths
are both in the denominator.

This amount (216) is in inches. To convert to feet, divide by 12, because there are 12 inches in a foot (this conversion from
inches to feet is really another proportion!). The final answer is:
374 5 · Algebra

The NASCAR automobile is 18 feet long.

YOUR TURN 5.38

1. A toy Jeep is built on a       scale. The website for the toy Jeep says the toy is  inches long. Based on this,
    how long is the real Jeep?

Check Your Understanding

32. If                    , then  for all non-zero whole numbers , , , and .
       a.        True
       b.        False

33. If the ratio of wolves to rabbits in a national park is , then the ratio of rabbits to (wolves and rabbits) is .
       a. True
       b. False

34. All fractions are ratios but not all ratios are fractions.
       a. True
       b. False

35. In the following equation,          , cross multiplication can be used as the first step towards solving for .

       a. True
       b. False

36. All fractions are ratios but not all ratios are fractions.
       a. True
       b. False

37. There are 16 math majors and 12 non-math majors in Ms. Kraft's class. What is not a correct way to express the
      ratio of math majors to non-math majors?

38. There are 16 math majors and 12 non-math majors in Ms. Kraft's class. What shows the ratio of math majors to all
      the students in Ms. Kraft's class?

                                                                                                           None of these

39. One U.S. dollar is worth      British pounds. Damon is traveling to Great Britain and wishes to exchange $450 U.S.

dollars for British pounds. How many British pounds should Damon get in return?

                                  625 6,250 3,456 345.6 None of these

40. The HO scale for model trains is the most common size of model trains. This scale is  . If a real locomotive is

73 feet long, how long should the model locomotive be (in inches)? Round your answer to the nearest inch.

41. Albert's Honda Civic gets 37 miles per gallon of gasoline. The gas tank on the Civic can hold  gallons of gas.

Albert is driving from Tucson, Arizona to Los Angeles, California, a distance of 485 miles. Albert thinks he can make

it on one full tank of gasoline. Can he? Explain.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.4 · Ratios and Proportions 375

42. The average price of a gallon of regular gasoline in the California on July 1, 2021 was  per gallon. Albert stops

at a gas station in California and puts 9.5 gallons of gasoline into his Civic. How much did he pay for the gas?

        SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use this scenario: Kelly opened a bag of colored chocolate coated candies and counted the
number of each color of candy. She found she had 9 green, 4 yellow, 13 black, 11 orange, 8 blue, and 7 red. What is the
ratio of the following candy colors?

     1. Red candies to green candies
     2. Green candies to black candies
     3. Yellow candies to black candies
     4. Black candies to blue candies
     5. Orange candies to non-orange candies
     6. Yellow candies to non-yellow candies
     7. Red candies to all candies
     8. Pink candies to all candies
     9. Candies with the letter `r' in their name to all candies
    10. Candies with the letter `r' in their name to candies without the letter `r' in their name

For the following exercises, solve each proportion for the unknown variable.
    11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.  (Round answer to the nearest hundredth.)

20.  (Round answer to the nearest hundredth.)

21. Pet Paradise has 20 cats and 16 dogs. Animal Acres has 15 cats. How many dogs must be at Animal Acres so that
      Pet Paradise and Animal Acres have the same ratio of cats to dogs?

22. Pet Paradise has 20 cats and 16 dogs. Critter Corral has 28 dogs. How many cats must be at Critter Corral so that
      Pet Paradise and Critter Corral have the same ratio of cats to dogs?

23. A high school has 960 students. The ratio of students to high school teachers is         . How many high school
      teachers are at the school?

24. A high school has 960 students. The ratio of students to high school teachers is         . How many more teachers

are needed to have a  ratio at the high school of students to teachers?

25. One U.S. dollar is worth $1.23 Canadian dollars. Bernice is traveling to Canada and wants to convert $550 U.S. to
      Canadian money. How much in Canadian money should she receive?

26. One U.S. dollar is worth $1.23 Canadian dollars. Rene is traveling from Canada to the United States and wants to
      convert $550 of Canadian money to U.S. money. How much in U.S. money should he receive? Round your answer
      to the nearest cent.

27. One U.S. dollar is worth $1.23 Canadian dollars. What is one Canadian dollar worth in U.S. funds? Round your
      answer to the nearest cent.

28. A salad recipe needs one cup of crushed almonds. It will serve eight people. Rashida needs to make a salad to
      serve 20 people. How many cups of crushed almonds does she need?

29. A salad recipe needs one cup of crushed almonds. It will serve eight people. Elmer has 4.75 cups of crushed
      almonds. If he uses all of the crushed almonds he has to make this salad, how many people will it serve?

30. Jorge is 6 feet tall and casts a 7-foot shadow. At the same time, a nearby tree has a shadow of 56 feet. How tall is
      the tree?
376 5 · Algebra

31. Tony can run 4 kilometers in 30 minutes. At that rate, how far could he run in 1 hour, 45 minutes?

32. Kara's parent owns a restaurant. When she came in one day, they asked her to figure out how much they were
      spending per ounce on steak they were buying from a vendor. They had their last four receipts, but unfortunately
      they spilled liquid on them and some parts were unreadable. Find out how much Kara's parent is spending per
      ounce on steak; then use that information to fill in the unreadable parts of the receipts (labeled , , and below).

                                     Receipt  1             2    3        4

                                     Ounces   128           460           541

                                     Cost $163.84                $277.76

33. The scale for a map reads "                    ." You measure the distance on the map from Fargo, North Dakota
      to Winnipeg, Manitoba and get  inches. How far is it from Fargo to Winnipeg?

34. Hot Wheels toy cars are said to be built on a scale of  when compared to the actual car. If a real car is 18 feet

long, how long should the Hot Wheels toy car be (in inches)?

35. The Eiffel Tower in Paris, France, is 1,067 feet tall. The replica Eiffel Tower in Las Vegas, Nevada, is built on the scale

of               . How tall is the replica Eiffel Tower in Las Vegas? Round your answer to the nearest foot.

5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities

Figure 5.18 How much would it cost to fill up your gas tank? (credit: "Gas Under 4 Bucks" by Mark Turnauckas, Flickr/CC
BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Graph linear equations and inequalities in two variables.
 2. Solve applications of linear equations and inequalities.

In this section, we will learn how to graph linear equations and inequalities. There are several real-world scenarios that
can be represented by graphs of linear inequalities. Think of filling your car up with gasoline. If gasoline is $3.99 per
gallon and you put 10 gallons in your car, you will pay $39.90. Your friend buys 15 gallons of gasoline and pays $59.85.
You can plot these points on a coordinate system and connect the points with a line to create the graph of a line. You'll
learn to do both in this section.

Plotting Points on a Rectangular Coordinate System

Just like maps use a grid system to identify locations, a grid system is used in algebra to show a relationship between
two variables in a rectangular coordinate system. The rectangular coordinate system is also called the -plane or the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 377

"coordinate plane."
The rectangular coordinate system is formed by two intersecting number lines, one horizontal and one vertical. The
horizontal number line is called the -axis. The vertical number line is called the -axis. These axes divide a plane into
four regions, called quadrants. The quadrants are identified by Roman numerals, beginning on the upper right and
proceeding counterclockwise. See Figure 5.19.

                           Figure 5.19 Quadrants on the Coordinate Plane

In the rectangular coordinate system, every point is represented by an ordered pair (Figure 5.20). The first number in

the ordered pair is the -coordinate of the point, and the second number is the -coordinate of the point. The phrase

"ordered pair" means that the order is important. At the point where the axes cross and where both coordinates are

zero, the ordered pair is  . The point            has a special name. It is called the origin.

                                                  Figure 5.20 Ordered Pair

We use the coordinates to locate a point on the -plane. Let's plot the point  as an example. First, locate 1 on the

-axis and lightly sketch a vertical line through  . Then, locate 3 on the -axis and sketch a horizontal line through

. Now, find the point where these two lines meet--that is the point with coordinates            . See Figure 5.21.
378 5 · Algebra

                                 Figure 5.21 Point   Plotted on the Coordinate Plane

Notice that the vertical line through  and the horizontal line through  are not part of the graph. The dotted

lines are just used to help us locate the point      . When one of the coordinates is zero, the point lies on one of the

axes. In Figure 5.22, the point        is on the -axis and the point (-2, 0) is on the -axis.

                                 Figure 5.22 Points  and  Plotted on the Coordinate Plane

EXAMPLE 5.39

Plotting Points on a Coordinate System
Plot the following points in the rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is located:

 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 379

     Solution
The first number of the coordinate pair is the -coordinate, and the second number is the -coordinate. To plot each
point, sketch a vertical line through the -coordinate and a horizontal line through the -coordinate (Figure 5.23). Their
intersection is the point.

1. Since      , the point is to the left of the -axis. Also, since  , the point is above the -axis. The point               is

in quadrant II.

2. Since      , the point is to the left of the -axis. Also, since  , the point is below the -axis. The point

          is in quadrant III.

3. Since   , the point is to the right of the -axis. Since          , the point is below the -axis. The point       is in

quadrant IV.

4. Since   , the point whose coordinates are  is on the -axis.

5. Since   , the point is to the right of the -axis. Since          , which is equal to 2.5, the point is above the -axis.

The point        is in quadrant I.

                                              Figure 5.23

      YOUR TURN 5.39

1. Plot the following points in the rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is
    located:
     a.
     b.
      c.
     d.
     e.

Graphing Linear Equations in Two Variables

Up to now, all the equations you have solved were equations with just one variable. In almost every case, when you

solved the equation, you got exactly one solution. But equations can have more than one variable. Equations with two

variables may be of the form        . An equation of this form, where and are both not zero, is called a linear

equation in two variables. Here is an example of a linear equation in two variables, and .
380 5 · Algebra

The equation                     is also a linear equation. But it does not appear to be in the form  . We can use

the addition property of equality and rewrite it in         form.

Step 1: Add to both sides.

Step 2: Simplify.

Step 3: Put it in                form.

By rewriting       as                      , we can easily see that it is a linear equation in two variables because it is of the

form               . When an equation is in the form             , we say it is in standard form of a linear equation.

Most people prefer to have , , and be integers and          when writing a linear equation in standard form,

although it is not strictly necessary.

Linear equations have infinitely many solutions. For every number that is substituted for there is a corresponding
value. This pair of values is a solution to the linear equation and is represented by the ordered pair ( , ). When we
substitute these values of and into the equation, the result is a true statement, because the value on the left side is
equal to the value on the right side.

We can plot these solutions in the rectangular coordinate system. The points will line up perfectly in a straight line. We
connect the points with a straight line to get the graph of the linear equation. We put arrows on the ends of each side of
the line to indicate that the line continues in both directions.

A graph is a visual representation of all the solutions of a linear equation. The line shows you all the solutions to that

linear equation. Every point on the line is a solution of that linear equation. And every solution of the linear equation is

on this line. This line is called the graph of the equation. Points not on the line are not solutions! The graph of a linear

equation           is a straight line.

· Every point on the line is a solution of the equation.
· Every solution of this equation is a point on this line.

EXAMPLE 5.40

Determining Points on a Line

Figure 5.24 is the graph of             .

                                           Figure 5.24 Graph of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 381

For each ordered pair, decide:
 I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
II. Is the point on the line?

     Solution
Substitute the - and -values into the equation to check if the ordered pair is a solution to the equation.

 I.

II. Plot the points         ,     ,  , and  .

                                            Figure 5.25

In Figure 5.25, the points     ,     , and  are on the line  , and the point  is not on the line.

The points that are solutions to     are on the line, but the point that is not a solution is not on the line.

YOUR TURN 5.40

The given figure is the graph of     .
382 5 · Algebra

                                                                     Graph of

For each ordered pair below, decide:
 I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
II. Is the point on the line?

    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.

The steps to take when graphing a linear equation by plotting points are:

Step 1: Find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation. Organize them in a table.

Step 2: Plot the points in a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they do not, carefully check
your work.

Step 3: Draw the line through the three points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the line.

It is true that it only takes two points to determine a line, but it is a good habit to use three points. If you only plot two
points and one of them is incorrect, you can still draw a line, but it will not represent the solutions to the equation. It will
be the wrong line. If you use three points, and one is incorrect, the points will not line up. This tells you something is
wrong, and you need to check your work.

EXAMPLE 5.41

Graphing a Line by Plotting Points

Graph the equation:              .

     Solution                                                                               as a coefficient of , we will
Find three points that are solutions to the equation. Since this equation has the fraction

choose values of carefully. We will use zero as one choice and multiples of 2 for the other choices. Why are multiples of
two a good choice for values of ? By choosing multiples of 2, the multiplication by simplifies to a whole number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 383

                                                                                         (, )
                                                                           03
                                                                           24
                                                                           45
Plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line (Figure 5.26).

                                            Figure 5.26

      YOUR TURN 5.41   by plotting points.
1. Graph the equation

Solving Applications Using Linear Equations in Two Variables

Many fields use linear equalities to model a problem. While our examples may be about simple situations, they give us
an opportunity to build our skills and to get a feel for how they might be used.

  EXAMPLE 5.42

Pumping Gas
Gasoline costs $3.53 per gallon. You put 10 gallons of gasoline in your car, and pay $35.30. Your friend puts 15 gallons of
384 5 · Algebra

gasoline in their car and pays $52.95. Your neighbor needs 5 gallons of gasoline, how much will they pay?

     Solution

Let                              and let  . If gas is $3.53 per gallon, then                               . The two

points given are (10, 35.30) and (15, 52.95). Plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line (Figure 5.27).

We can see the point at                                             Figure 5.27
$17.65.                          . The -value is found by multiplying 5 by $3.53 to get $17.65. Your neighbor will pay

      YOUR TURN 5.42

1. If a stamp costs $0.55 and you buy a book of 20 stamps, then you pay $11. If you want to mail 100 letters, you
    can buy a roll of stamps for $55. Your friend only needs 3 stamps, how much will they pay?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 385

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
René Descartes

                                           Figure 5.28 René Descartes (credit: Flickr, Public Domain)

René Descartes was born in 1596 in La Haye, France. He was sickly as a child, so much so that he was allowed to stay
in bed until 11:00 AM rather than get up at 5:00 AM like the other school children. He kept this habit of rising late for
most of the rest of his life.

After his primary schooling, Descartes attended the University of Poitiers, receiving a law degree in 1616. He then
embarked on a myriad of journeys, joining two different militaries (one in the Netherlands, the other in Bavaria) and
generally travelling around Europe until 1628, when he settled in the Netherlands. It was here that he began to delve
deeply into his ideas of science, mathematics, and philosophy.

In 1637, at the urging of his friends, Descartes published Discourse on the Method for Conducting One's Reason Well
and Seeking the Truth in the Sciences. The book had three appendices: La Dioptrique, a work on optics; Les Météores,
which pertained to meteorology; and La Géométrie, a work on mathematics. It was in this appendix that he proposed
a geometric way of representing many different algebraic expressions and equations. It is this system of
representation that almost all mathematical textbooks use today.

These publications (along with several others) brought much fame to Descartes. So renowned was his reputation that
late in 1649, Queen Christina of Sweden asked Descartes to come to Sweden to tutor her. However, she wished to do
her studies at 5:00 in the morning; Descartes had to break his lifelong habit of sleeping in late. A few months later, in
February 1650, Descartes died of pneumonia.

Graphing Linear Inequalities

Previously we learned to solve inequalities with only one variable. We will now learn about inequalities containing two

variables that can be written in one of the following forms:  ,  ,  , and

where and are not both zero. We will look at linear inequalities in two variables, which are very

similar to linear equations in two variables.

Like linear equations, linear inequalities in two variables have many solutions. Any ordered pair ( , ) that makes an
inequality true when we substitute in the values is a solution to a linear inequality.
386 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.43

Determining Solutions to an Inequality

Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality  :

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

    Solution
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

      YOUR TURN 5.43

Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality
    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.
    5.

Let us think about  . The point         separated that number line into two parts. On one side of 3 are all the

numbers less than 3. On the other side of 3 all the numbers are greater than 3. See Figure 5.29.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 387

                          Figure 5.29 Solution to     on a Number Line

Similarly, the line  separates the plane into two regions. On one side of the line are points with                    . On

the other side of the line are the points with       . We call the line          a boundary line.

For an inequality in one variable, the endpoint is shown with a parenthesis (Figure 5.30) or a bracket (Figure 5.31)
depending on whether or not is included in the solution:

                                          Figure 5.30 Endpoint with Parenthesis

                                                             Figure 5.31 Endpoint with Bracket

Similarly, for an inequality in two variables, the boundary line is shown with a solid or dashed line to show whether or
not it the line is included in the solution.

                     Boundary line is                 Boundary line is

                     Boundary line is not included in solution. Boundary line is included in solution.

                     Boundary line is dashed.                               Boundary line is solid.

Now, let us take a look at what we found in Example 5.43. We will start by graphing the line         , and then we will

plot the five points we tested, as graphed in Figure 5.32. We found that some of the points were solutions to the

inequality           and some were not. Which of the points we plotted are solutions to the inequality             ? The

points      and      are solutions to the inequality  . Notice that they are both on the same side of the

boundary line        . The two points           and   are on the other side of the boundary line                      , and

they are not solutions to the inequality           . For those two points,       . What about the point  ? Because

        , the point is a solution to the equation     , but not a solution to the inequality             . So, the point

is on the boundary line.
388 5 · Algebra

                                           Figure 5.32 Graph of

Let us take another point above the boundary line and test whether or not it is a solution to the inequality       . The

point            clearly looks to be above the boundary line, doesn't it? Is it a solution to the inequality?

Yes,             is a solution to  . Any point you choose above the boundary line is a solution to the inequality

                 . All points above the boundary line are solutions. Similarly, all points below the boundary line, the side with

       and       , are not solutions to    , as shown in Figure 5.33.

     Figure 5.33 Graph of          , with  Above the Boundary Line and  Below the Boundary Line
The graph of the inequality
                                   is shown in Figure 5.34. The line   divides the plane into two regions. The

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 389

shaded side shows the solutions to the inequality  . The points on the boundary line, those where               , are

not solutions to the inequality   , so the line itself is not part of the solution. We show that by making the

boundary line dashed, not solid.

                                  Figure 5.34 Graph of

EXAMPLE 5.44

Writing a Linear Inequality Shown by a Graph       . Write the inequality shown in Figure 5.35.
The boundary line shown in this graph is
390 5 · Algebra

                                                              Figure 5.35

Solution

The line         is the boundary line. On one side of the line are the points with               and on the other side of

the line are the points with          . Let us test the point  and see which inequality describes its position relative

to the boundary line. At         , which inequality is true:   or          ?

                                                        True   False

Since            is true, the side of the line with     , is the solution. The shaded region shows the solution of the

inequality       . Since the boundary line is graphed with a dashed line, the inequality does not include the equal

sign. The graph shows the inequality                 .

We could use an point as a test point, provided it is not on the line. Why did we choose  ? Because it is the easiest

to evaluate. You may want to pick a point on the other side of the boundary line and check that  .

       YOUR TURN 5.44

1. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line             .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 391

EXAMPLE 5.45

Graphing a Linear Inequality

Graph the linear inequality   .
392 5 · Algebra

      Solution                       Replace the inequality
                                     sign with an equal sign
     Step 1. Identify and graph
      the boundary line (Figure       to find the boundary
                                                  line.
                    5.36).
                                    Graph the boundary line
 · If the inequality is  or ,                                .
      the boundary line is solid.
                                    The inequality sign is ,
· If the inequality is < or >, the  so we draw a solid line.
      boundary line is dashed.

                                                                     Figure 5.36

 Step 2. Test a point that is       We'll test      .           At   , is                  ?
not on the boundary line. Is
                                    Is it a solution of the
      it a solution of the                inequality?
           inequality?

                                                                So,  is a solution.

    Step 3. Shade in one side of    The test point     is a
      the boundary line (Figure
                    5.37).          solution to              .

· If the test point is a solution,  So we shade in that side.
         shade in the side that
           includes the point.

   · If the test point is not a
         solution, shade in the
              opposite side.

                                                                     Figure 5.37

                                                                All points in the shaded region and on the boundary line

                                                                represent the solution to     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 393

YOUR TURN 5.45

1. Graph the linear inequality:         .

       VIDEO

      Graphing Linear Inequalities in Two Variables (https://openstax.org/r/Graphing_linear)

Solving Applications Using Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Many fields use linear inequalities to model a problem. While our examples may be about simple situations, they give us
an opportunity to build our skills and to get a feel for how they might be used.

  EXAMPLE 5.46

Working Multiple Jobs
Hilaria works two part time jobs to earn enough money to meet her obligations of at least $240 a week. Her job in food
service pays $10 an hour and her tutoring job on campus pays $15 an hour. How many hours does Hilaria need to work
at each job to earn at least $240?

 1. Let be the number of hours she works at the job in food service and let be the number of hours she works
      tutoring. Write an inequality that would model this situation.

 2. Graph the inequality.
 3. Find three ordered pairs ( ) that would be solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what that means for Hilaria.

     Solution
 1. Let be the number of hours she works at the job in food service and let be the number of hours she works

      tutoring. She earns $10 per hour at the job in food service and $15 an hour tutoring. At each job, the number of
      hours multiplied by the hourly wage will give the amount earned at that job.

2. Graph the inequality:
     Step 1: Graph the boundary line

     Create a table of values

                                        0
                                        6
                                        12

Step 2: Pick a test point. Let us pick     again:

                ?

is false and not a solution so the shading happens on the other side of the boundary line (Figure 5.38).
394 5 · Algebra

                                                  Figure 5.38

3. From the graph, we see that the ordered pairs  ,     ,      represent three of infinitely many solutions.
     Check the values in the inequality.

For Hilaria, it means that to earn at least $240, she can work 15 hours tutoring and 10 hours at her food service job, earn
all her money tutoring for 16 hours, or earn all her money while working 24 hours at the job in food service.

      YOUR TURN 5.46

Harrison works two part time jobs. One at a gas station that pays $11 an hour and the other is as an IT consultant
for $16.50 an hour. Between the two jobs, Harrison wants to earn at least $330 a week. How many hours does
Harrison need to work at each job to earn at least $330?

    1. Let be the number of hours he works at the gas station and let be the number of hours he works as an IT
         consultant. Write an inequality that would model this situation.

    2. Graph the inequality.
    3. Find three ordered pairs ( , ) that would be solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what that means for

         Harrison.

Check Your Understanding

43. Choose the correct solution to the equation      .

a.

b.

c.

d.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 395

44. Choose the correct graph for  .
396 5 · Algebra

       45. Choose the correct equation for the graph shown:

a.
b.
c.
d.

46. Choose the correct graph for  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 397

47. Choose the correct inequality for the graph shown.

       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

        SECTION 5.5 EXERCISES

 1. Plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is located.
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.
       e.
398 5 · Algebra

       For each ordered pair below, decide:
         I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
        II. Is the point on the line in the given graph?

             2.
             3.
             4.
             5.
       For each ordered pair below, decide:
         I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
        II. Is the point on the line in the given graph?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 399

     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
For each ordered pair below, decide:
 I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
II. Is the point on the line in the given graph?
400 5 · Algebra

    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
For the following exercises, graph by plotting points.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
    20.

For the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality.
    21.

    22.

    23.

    24.

    25.

26. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 401

27. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line  .

28. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line     .

29. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line        .
402 5 · Algebra

30. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line     .

31. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line  .

32. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           5.5 · Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities 403

33. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line  .

For the following exercises, graph the linear inequality.
    34.

    35.

    36.

    37.
    38.
    39.
    40.
    41.
    42.
    43.
    44.
404 5 · Algebra

    5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications

Figure 5.39 The Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri (credit: modification of work "Gateway Arch - St. Louis - Missouri" by
Sam valadi/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Multiply binomials.
 2. Factor trinomials.
 3. Solve quadratic equations by graphing.
 4. Solve quadratic equations by factoring.
 5. Solve quadratic equations using square root method.
 6. Solve quadratic equations using the quadratic formula.
 7. Solve real world applications modeled by quadratic equations.

In this section, we will discuss quadratic equations. There are several real-world scenarios that can be represented by the
graph of a quadratic equation. Think of the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri. Both ends of the arch are 630 feet apart
and the arch is 630 feet tall. You can plot these points on a coordinate system and create a parabola to graph the
quadratic equation.

Identify Polynomials, Monomials, Binomials and Trinomials

You have learned that a term is a constant, or the product of a constant and one or more variables. When it is of the

form , where is a constant and is a positive whole number, it is called a monomial. Some examples of

monomial are 8,       , , and .

A monomial or two or more monomials combined by addition or subtraction is a polynomial. Some examples include:

,                , and                        . Some polynomials have special names, based on the number of

terms. A monomial is a polynomial with exactly one term (examples: 14, ,  , and ). A binomial has exactly

two terms (examples:             ,  ,  , and  ), and a trinomial has exactly three terms (examples:

   ,                             ,     , and  ).

Notice that every monomial, binomial, and trinomial is also a polynomial. They are just special members of the "family"
of polynomials and so they have special names. We use the words monomial, binomial, and trinomial when referring to
these special polynomials and just call all the rest polynomials.

Multiply Binomials

Recall multiplying algebraic expressions from Algebraic Expressions. In this section, we will continue that work and
multiply binomials as well. We can use an area model to do multiplication.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 405

EXAMPLE 5.47

Multiply Binomials

Multiply            .

     Solution
Step 1: Use the distributive property:

In the area model (Figure 5.40) multiply each term on the side by each term on the top (think of it as a multiplication
table).

                                                                             Figure 5.40
Step 2: After we multiply, we get the following equation:

Step 3: Combine the like terms to arrive at:

YOUR TURN 5.47

1. Multiply               .

EXAMPLE 5.48

Multiplying More Complex Binomials

Multiply               .

     Solution
Step 1: Use the Distributive Property:

                                                                             Figure 5.41
Step 2: After multiplying, get the following equation:

Step 3: Combine the like terms to arrive at:
406 5 · Algebra

YOUR TURN 5.48

1. Multiply                      .

WHO KNEW?

They Are Teaching Multiplication of Binomials in Elementary School

Manipulatives are often used in elementary school for students to experience a hands-on way to experience the

mathematics they are learning. Base Ten Blocks, or Dienes Blocks, are often used to introduce place value and the

operation of whole numbers. When multiplying two-digit numbers, students can make an array to visualize the

Distributive Property. Figure 5.42 shows the value of each Base Ten Block and Figure 5.43 shows how to multiply 17

and 23 using an area model and Base Ten Blocks. You can see how this helps students visualize the multiplication

using the Distributive Property. Consider how             can easily extend to         in algebra!

                                    Figure 5.42 The Value of Each Base Ten Block

                            Figure 5.43 How to Multiply 17 and 23 Using an Area Model and Base Ten Blocks

Factoring Trinomials

We've just covered how to multiply binomials. Now you will need to "undo" this multiplication--to start with the product
and end up with the factors. Let us review an example of multiplying binomials to refresh your memory.

To factor the trinomial means to start with the product,  , and end with the factors,  . You need

to think about where each of the terms in the trinomial came from. The first term came from multiplying the first term in

each binomial. So, to get in the product, each binomial must start with an .

                                                               

The last term in the trinomial came from multiplying the last term in each binomial. So, the last terms must multiply to 6.
What two numbers multiply to 6? The factors of 6 could be 1 and 6, or 2 and 3. How do you know which pair to use?
Consider the middle term. It came from adding the outer and inner terms. So the numbers that must have a product of 6
will need a sum of 5.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 407

We'll test both possibilities and summarize the results in the following table, which will be very helpful when you work
with numbers that can be factored in many different ways.

                                                               Factors of 6 Sum of Factors
                                                                      1, 6
                                                                      2, 3

We see that 2 and 3 are the numbers that multiply to 6 and add to 5. We have the factors of       . They are
                    .

You can check if the factors are correct by multiplying. Looking back, we started with         , which is of the form

        , where       and  . We factored it into two binomials of the form                and  .

To get the correct factors, we found two number and whose product is and sum is . With the area model (Figure
5.44), start with an empty box and then put in the term and .

Continue by putting in two terms that add up to  Figure 5.44
                                                  and (Figure 5.45):

                                                                             Figure 5.45
Then you find the terms of the binomials on the top and side (Figure 5.46):

                                                 Figure 5.46

EXAMPLE 5.49

Factoring Trinomials

Factor           .

     Solution
The numbers that must have a product of 12 will need a sum of 7. We will summarize the results in a table below.
408 5 · Algebra

                                         Factors of 12 Sum of Factors
                                               1, 12
                                                2, 6
                                                3, 4

We see that 3 and 4 are the numbers that multiply to 12 and add to 7. The factors of             are                  .

      YOUR TURN 5.49

1. Factor             .

EXAMPLE 5.50

Factoring More Complex Trinomials

Factor           .

     Solution                                                   . We will summarize the results in a table.
The numbers that must have a product of 28 will need a sum of

                                         Factors of 28 Sum of Factors

We see that 4 and 7 are the numbers that multiply to 28 and add to 11. But we needed , so we will need to use

and because                         and                         . The factors of      are             .

      YOUR TURN 5.50

1. Factor:                       .

     VIDEO
     Factoring with the Box Method (Area Model) (https://openstax.org/r/Factoring_with_the_Box)

Solving Quadratic Equations by Graphing

We have already solved and graphed linear equations in Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities, equations of the

form             . In linear equations, the variables have no exponents. Quadratic equations are equations in which

the variable is squared. The following are some examples of quadratic equations:

The last equation does not appear to have the variable squared, but when we simplify the expression on the left, we will

get              . The general form of a quadratic equation is                    , where and are real numbers, with      .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 409

Remember that a solution of an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when substituted into the
equation. The solutions of quadratic equations are the values of the variables that make the quadratic equation

                         true.

To solve quadratic equations, we need methods different than the ones we used in solving linear equations. We will start

by solving a quadratic equation from its graph. Just like we started graphing linear equations by plotting points, we will

do the same for quadratic equations. Let us look first at graphing the quadratic equation  . We will choose integer

values of between and 2 and find their values, as shown in the table below.

Notice when we let  and                                   00
                                                          11

                                                                  1
                                                          24

                                                                  4

                               , we got the same value for .

The same thing happened when we let  and           . Now, we will plot the points to show the graph of  . See

Figure 5.47.

                                          Figure 5.47

The graph is not a line. This figure is called a parabola. Every quadratic equation has a graph that looks like this. When

the solution to the quadratic        is 0 because  at                .
410 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.51

Graphing a Quadratic Equation

Graph            and list the solutions to the quadratic equation.

     Solution
We will graph the equation by plotting points.

Step 1: Choose integer values for , substitute them into the equation, and solve for .

Step 2: Record the values of the ordered pairs in the chart.

                                                        0

                                                        1        0

                                                                 0

                                                        2        3

                                                                 3

Step 3: Plot the points and then connect them with a smooth curve. The result will be the graph of the equation

                 (Figure 5.48). The solutions are  and        .

                                                        Figure 5.48

YOUR TURN 5.51

1. Graph         .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 411

EXAMPLE 5.52

Solving a Quadratic Equation From Its Graph

Find the solutions of      from its graph (Figure 5.49).

                                                  Figure 5.49

Solution

The solutions of a quadratic equations are the values of  that make the equation a true statement when set equal to
                                                              .
zero (i.e. when        ).  at                and

      YOUR TURN 5.52           from its graph.
1. Find the solutions of
412 5 · Algebra

Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring

Another way of solving quadratic equations is by factoring. We will use the Zero Product Property that says that if the
product of two quantities is zero, it must be that at least one of the quantities is zero. The only way to get a product
equal to zero is to multiply by zero itself.

EXAMPLE 5.53

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring

Solve                            .

Solution

Step 1. Set each factor equal          The product equals zero, so at least one factor must
               to zero.                                             equal zero.

       Step 2. Solve the linear                Solve each equation.
               equations.

                 Step 3. Check.        Substitute each solution separately into the original
                                                                    equation.

       YOUR TURN 5.53

1. Solve                            .

EXAMPLE 5.54

Solve Another Quadratic Equation by Factoring

Solve            .

Solution

Step 1. Write the quadratic equation in        The equation is already in standard
                                                                    form.
       standard form,                  .

Step 2. Factor the quadratic expression.       Factor

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 413

Step 3. Use the Zero Product Property.       Set each factor equal to zero.
   Step 4. Solve the linear equations.
                 Step 5. Check.             We have two linear equations.

                                         Substitute each solution separately
                                               into the original equation.

YOUR TURN 5.54

1. Solve          .

VIDEO
Solving Quadratics with the Zero Property (https://openstax.org/r/Zero_Property)

Be careful to write the quadratic equation in standard form first. The equation must be set equal to zero in order for

you to use the Zero Product Property! Often students start in Step 2 resulting in an incorrect solution. For example,

                  cannot be factored to  and then solved by setting each factor equal to .

The correct way to solve this quadratic equation is to set it equal to zero FIRST:  which

becomes              , then continue to factor. See the table below for the correct way to apply the Zero Product

Property.

          Step 1     Skipped

          Step 2
          Step 3
414 5 · Algebra

                     Step 4
                     Step 5

Solving Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property

We just solved some quadratic equations by factoring. Let us use factoring to solve the quadratic equation        .

                             Step 1: Put the equation in standard form.

                                 Step 2: Factor the left side.

                             Step 3: Use the Zero Product Property.

                                 Step 4: Solve each equation.

                             Step 5: Combine the two solutions into

The solution is read as " is equal to positive or negative 3."

What happens when we have an equation like               ? Since 7 is not a perfect square, we cannot solve the equation by

factoring. These equations are all of the form           . We define the square root of a number in this way: If     , then

is a square root of . This leads to the Square Root Property.

EXAMPLE 5.55

Using the Square Root Property to Solve a Quadratic Equation

Solve using the square Root Property:           .

Solution

                                 Step 1: Use the Square Root Property.

                                       Step 2: Simplify the radical.
                             Step 3: Rewrite to show the two solutions.

YOUR TURN 5.55

1. Solve using the Square Root Property:              .

EXAMPLE 5.56

Using the Square Root Property to Solve Another Quadratic Equation

Solve using the Square Root Property:              .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 415

     Solution
Step 1: Solve for .

Step 2: Use the Square Root Property.

Step 3: Simplify the radical.

Step 4: Rewrite to show the two solutions.
          ,

YOUR TURN 5.56

1. Solve using the Square Root Property:       .

Solving Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

This last method we will look at for solving quadratic equations is the quadratic formula. This method works for all
quadratic equations, even the quadratic equations we could not factor! To use the quadratic formula, we substitute the
values of , , and into the expression on the right side of the formula. Then, we do all the math to simplify the
expression. The result gives the solution(s) to the quadratic equation.

EXAMPLE 5.57

Solving a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula

Solve using the quadratic formula:          .

Solution

This equation is in standard form.

Step 1: Identify the , , and values.
Step 2: Write the quadratic formula.
Step 3: Substitute in the values of , , .
Step 4: Simplify.
416 5 · Algebra

       Step 5: Rewrite to show two solutions.
       Step 6: Simplify.
       Step 7: Check.

YOUR TURN 5.57

1. Solve using the quadratic formula:                .

EXAMPLE 5.58

Solving Another Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula

Solve using the quadratic formula:                .

Solution

Step 1. Write the quadratic equation in standard        This equation is in standard
            form. Identify the , , values.                             form.

Step 2. Write the quadratic formula. Then               Substitute in  ,  ,
      substitute in the values of , , .

Step 3. Simplify the fraction, and solve for .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 417

Step 4. Check the solutions.           Put each answer in the original
                                               equation to check.

                                          Substitute  .

                                          Substitute     .

YOUR TURN 5.58

1. Solve using the quadratic formula:  .

       VIDEO
      Solving Quadratics with the Quadratic Formula (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_Quadratics)

Solving Real-World Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations

There are problem solving strategies that will work well for applications that translate to quadratic equations. Here's a
problem-solving strategy to solve word problems:
Step 1: Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2: Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3: Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4: Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
Step 5: Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6: Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7: Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  EXAMPLE 5.59

Finding Consecutive Integers
The product of two consecutive integers is 132. Find the integers.

     Solution
Step 1: Read the problem.
Step 2: Identify what we are looking for.
418 5 · Algebra

We are looking for two consecutive integers.

Step 3: Name what we are looking for.

Let the first integer

Let              the next consecutive integer.

Step 4: Translate into an equation. Restate the problem in a sentence.

The product of the two consecutive integers is 132. The first integer times the next integer is 132.
Step 5: Solve the equation.

Bring all the terms to one side.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the zero product property.

Solve the equations.

There are two values for that are solutions to this problem. So, there are two sets of consecutive integers that will
work.

If the first integer is          , then the next integer is 12. If the first integer is  , then the next integer is .

Step 6: Check the answer.

The consecutive integers are 11, 12 and , . The product of 11 and                        and the product of            .

Both pairs of consecutive integers are solutions.

Step 7: Answer the question.

The consecutive integers are 11, 12, and , .

        YOUR TURN 5.59

  1. The product of two consecutive odd integers is 240. Find the integers.

Were you surprised by the pair of negative integers that is one of the solutions? In some applications, negative solutions
will result from the algebra, but will not be realistic for the situation.

  EXAMPLE 5.60

Finding Length and Width of a Garden
A rectangular garden has an area 15 square feet. The length of the garden is 2 feet more than the width. Find the length
and width of the garden.

     Solution
Step 1: Read the problem. In problems involving geometric figures, a sketch can help you visualize the situation (Figure
5.50).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 419

                                                       Figure 5.50

Step 2: Identify what you are looking for.

We are looking for the length and width.

Step 3: Name what you are looking for. The length is 2 feet more than width.

Let  the width of the garden.

     the length of the garden.

Step 4: Translate into an equation.

Restate the important information in a sentence.

The area of the rectangular garden is 15 square feet.

Use the formula for the area of a rectangle.

Substitute in the variables.

Step 5: Solve the equation. Distribute first.

Get zero on one side.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property.

Solve each equation.

Since is the width of the garden, it does not make sense for it to be negative. We eliminate that value for .

Width is 3 feet.
Find the value of the length.

             length.

5
Length is 5 feet.
Step 6: Check the answer (Figure 5.51).
420 5 · Algebra

       Does the answer make sense?

                                                                             Figure 5.51
Yes, this makes sense.
Step 7: Answer the question.
The width of the garden is 3 feet and the length is 5 feet.

      YOUR TURN 5.60

1. A rectangular sign has an area of 30 square feet. The length of the sign is 1 foot more than the width. Find the
    length and width of the sign.

WORK IT OUT

Completing the Square

Recall the two methods used to solve quadratic equations of the form                      by factoring and by using the

quadratic formula. There are, however, many different methods for solving quadratic equations that were developed

throughout history. Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Chinese, Indian, and Greek mathematicians all solved various types of

quadratic equations, as did Arab mathematicians of the ninth through the twelfth centuries. It is one of these Arab

mathematicians' methods that we wish to investigate with this activity.

Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi was employed as a scholar at the House of Wisdom in Baghdad, located in
present day Iraq. One of the many accomplishments of Al-Khwarizmi was his book on the topic of algebra. In that
book, he asks, "What must be the square which, when increased by ten of its own roots, amounts to 39?" Al-
Khwarizmi, like many Arab mathematicians of his time, was well versed in Euclid's Elements. Like Euclid, he viewed
algebra very geometrically, and thus had a geometric approach to solving a problem like the one above. In his
approach, he used a method which today we refer to as completing the square.

His description of the solution method for the above problem is: halve the number of roots, which in the present
instance yields 5. This you multiply by itself; the product is 25. Add this to 39; the sum is 64. Now take the root of this
which is 8, and subtract from it half the number of the roots, which is 5; the remainder is 3. This is the root of the
square which you sought for. Thus the square is 9.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 421

So, what does all of this mean? Al-Khwarizmi would start with a square of unknown length
     of side (we will label the side length ). See Figure 5.52 So, this square has area

                                                                                            Figure 5.52

He would then proceed to halve the number of roots (i.e., there are 10 roots by which the

square is increasing) to get 5; this he would add to the first square. See Figure 5.53 The

area of the two new pieces added into the original square are both . At this point, we

                                     have            .

                                                                                            Figure 5.53

Now Al-Khwarizmi needed to "complete the square" by adding into the drawing a small
                       square. See Figure 5.54 This square has an area of 25.

                                                                                            Figure 5.54

               , or                           .

Notice that the completed square has side length     , so the large square has area         . (Notice algebraically

that the left half of the equation                   factors to  This means the area of large square

equals 64. If  , then                      ; so must be equal to 3 or to make this true. Note that Al-Kwarimi

would not have considered the possibility of a negative solution, since he approached the solution geometrically, and

negative distances do not exist.

Check Your Understanding

48. Which quadratic equation equals               ?

a.

b.

c.

d.

49. Which product is equal to              ?

a.

b.

c.

d.
422 5 · Algebra

       50. The graph shown is the graph of which quadratic equation?

     a.
     b.
     c.
     d.

51. What is the solution to          ?

     a.

     b.

     c.

     d.

52.              can be factored to     .

     a. True

     b. False

53.              can be solved using the square root method.
       a. True
       b. False

54.              can be solved using the quadratic formula.
       a. True
       b. False

55.              can be graphed as:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 423

a. True
b. False

56. Using the square root method, find the solutions to                  .

        SECTION 5.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, multiply the binomials.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.

For the following exercises, factor the trinomials.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equations by graphing.

13. Graph and list the solutions to the quadratic equation                  .
424 5 · Algebra

14. Graph and list the solutions to the quadratic equation     .

15. Graph and list the solutions to the quadratic equation  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 425

16. Find the solutions of  from its graph.

17. Find the solutions of  from its graph.
426 5 · Algebra

18. Find the solutions of  from its graph.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring.
    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation using the square root method.
    25.
    26.
    27.

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation using the quadratic formula.
    28.

Access for free at openstax.org
     5.6 · Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications 427

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34. The product of two consecutive odd integers is 99. Find the integers.

35. The product of two consecutive even integers is 168. Find the integers.

36. A rectangular patio has an area of 180 square feet. The width of the patio is three feet less than the length. Find
      the length and width of the patio.

For the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem: In any right triangle, where and are the lengths of the

legs and is the length of the hypotenuse, as shown in the given figure,      .

37. Justine wants to put a deck in the corner of her backyard in the shape of a right triangle, as shown in the given
      figure. The hypotenuse will be 17 feet long. The length of one side will be 7 feet less than the length of the
      other side. Find the lengths of the sides of the deck.

38. A boat's sail is a right triangle. The length of one side of the sail is 7 feet more than the other side. The
      hypotenuse is 13. Find the lengths of the two sides of the sail.

39. The sun casts a shadow from a flagpole. The height of the flagpole is three times the length of its shadow. The
      distance between the end of the shadow and the top of the flagpole is 21 feet. Find the length of the shadow
      and the length of the flagpole. Round to the nearest tenth of a foot.

40. Rene is setting up a holiday light display. He wants to make a "tree" in the shape of two right triangles and has
      two 10-foot strings of lights to use for the sides. He will attach the lights to the top of a pole and to two stakes
      on the ground. He wants the height of the pole to be the same as the distance from the base of the pole to
      each stake. How tall should the pole be? Round to the nearest tenth of a foot.
428 5 · Algebra

    5.7 Functions

       Figure 5.55 A small group of elementary students learning from their teacher. (credit: modification of work "Our school"
       by Woodleywonderworks/Flickr, CC BY 2.0 )

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Use function notation.
        2. Determine if a relation is a function with different representations.
        3. Apply the vertical line test.
        4. Determine the domain and range of a function.
       In this section, we will learn about relations and functions. As we go about our daily lives, we have many data items or
       quantities that are paired to our names. Our social security number, student ID number, email address, phone number,
       and our birthday are matched to our name. There is a relationship between our name and each of those items. When
       your teacher gets their class roster, the names of all the students in the class are listed in one column and then the
       student ID number is likely to be in the next column. If we think of the correspondence as a set of ordered pairs, where
       the first element is a student name and the second element is that student's ID number, we call this a relation.
       (Student name, Student ID #)
       The set of all the names of the students in the class is called the domain of the relation and the set of all student ID
       numbers paired with these students is the range of the relation. In general terms, a relation is any set of ordered pairs,
       ( ). All the -values in the ordered pairs together make up the domain. All the -values in the ordered pairs together
       make up the range.
       There are many situations similar to the student's name and student ID # where one variable is paired or matched with
       another. The set of ordered pairs that records this matching is a relation. A special type of relation, called a function,
       occurs extensively in mathematics. A function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain exactly one
       element in the range. For each ordered pair in the relation, each -value is matched with only one -value.
       Let us look at the relation between your friends and their birthdays in Figure 5.56. Every friend has a birthday, but no
       one has two birthdays. It is okay for two people to share a birthday. It is okay that Danny and Stephen share July 24 as
       their birthday and that June and Liz share August 2. Since each person has exactly one birthday, the relation is a function.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.7 · Functions 429

                              Figure 5.56 Birthday Mapping

Use Function Notation

It is very convenient to name a function; most often functions are named , , , , , or . In any function, for each
 -value from the domain, we get a corresponding -value in the range. In the function , we write this range value as
  ( ). This notation ( ) is called function notation and is read "f of " or "the value of f at ." In this case the parentheses

do not indicate multiplication.

We call the independent variable as it can be any value in the domain. We call the dependent variable as its value
depends on . Much like when you first encountered the variable , function notation may be rather unsettling. But the
more you use the notation, the more familiar you become with the notation, and the more comfortable you will be with
it.

Let's review the equation     . To find the value of when         , we know to substitute       into the equation
and then simplify.

                              Let                       .

The value of the function at  is 3. We do the same thing using function notation, the equation            can be

written as                 . To find the value when  , we write:

                              Let                    .

The value of the function at  is 3. This process of finding the value of  for a given value of is called
evaluating the function.
                              , evaluate the function.
  EXAMPLE 5.61

Evaluating the Function
For the function

 1.
 2.
 3.
430 5 · Algebra

    Solution        , substitute 3, for .
1. To evaluate

     Simplify.

2. To evaluate      , substitute for .
     Simplify.

3. To evaluate      , substitute for .
     Simplify.

      YOUR TURN 5.61             , evaluate the function.

For the function
    1.
    2.
    3.

EXAMPLE 5.62

Evaluating the Function in an Application
The number of unread emails in Sylvia's inbox is 75. This number grows by 10 unread emails a day. The function

                        represents the relation between the number of emails, , and the time, , measured in days. Find (5).
Explain what this result means.

     Solution
Find (5). Explain what this result means.

Substitute in    .

Simplify.

If 5 is the number of days,      is the number of unread emails after 5 days. After 5 days, there are 125 unread emails in
Sylvia's inbox.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                5.7 · Functions 431

YOUR TURN 5.62

1. The number of unread emails in Bryan's account is 100. This number grows by 15 unread emails a day. The

function        represents the relation between the number of emails, , and the time, , measured

in days. Find (7). Explain what the result means.

Determining If a Relation Is a Function with Different Representations

We can determine whether a relation is a function by identifying the input and the output values. If each input value
leads to only one output value, classify the relation as a function. If any input value leads to two or more outputs, do not
classify the relation as a function.

We will review three different representations of relations and determine if they are functions: ordered pairs, mapping,
and equations.

  EXAMPLE 5.63

Determining If a Relation Is a Function with a Set of Ordered Pairs
Use the set of ordered pairs to determine whether the relation is a function.

 1.
 2.

     Solution
 1. Each -value is matched with only one -value. This relation is a function.
 2. The -value 9 is matched with two -values, both 3 and . This relation is not a function.

        YOUR TURN 5.63

  Use the set of ordered pairs to determine whether the relation is a function.
      1.
      2.

A mapping is sometimes used to show a relation. The arrows show the pairing of the elements of the domain with the
elements of the range. Consider the example of the relation between your friends and their birthdays used in Figure
5.57. In this particular example, the domain is the set of people's names, and the range is the set of their birthdays. This
mapping was a function because everybody's name maps to exactly one birthday.

  EXAMPLE 5.64

Determining If a Relation Is a Function with Mapping
Use the mapping in Figure 5.57 to determine whether the relation is a function.

                                                   Figure 5.57
432 5 · Algebra

     Solution                                      -value is not matched with only one   -value. This relation is not a
Both Lydia and Marty have two phone numbers. Each
function.

      YOUR TURN 5.64
1. Use the mapping in the given figure to determine whether the relation is a function.

In algebra functions will usually be represented by an equation. It is easiest to see if the equation is a function when it is
solved for . If each value of results in only one value of , then the equation defines a function.

EXAMPLE 5.65

Determining If a Relation Is a Function with an Equation
Determine whether each equation is a function. Assume is the independent variable.

1.
2.
3.

    Solution            , we multiply it by  and then add 7 to get the -value.
1.

     For each value of

    For example, if     :

    We have that when            , then      . It would work similarly for any value of . Since each value of , corresponds

    to only one value of the equation defines a function.

2.
     For each value of , we square it and then add 1 to get the -value.

    For example, if

    We have that when            , then      . It would work similarly for any value of . Since each value of corresponds

    to only one value of , the equation defines a function.

3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5.7 · Functions 433

Isolate the term.

Let us substitute    .

This gives us two values for .

We have shown that when         , then          and  . It would work similarly for any value of . Since each value

of does not corresponds to only one value of the equation does not define a function.

      YOUR TURN 5.65

Determine whether each equation is a function.
    1.
    2.
    3.

VIDEO
Relations and Functions (https://openstax.org/r/Relationsp_and_Functions)

Applying the Vertical Line Test

We reviewed how to determine if a relation is a function. The relations we looked at were expressed as a set of ordered
pairs, a mapping, or an equation. We will now cover how to tell if a graph is that of a function.

An ordered pair      is a solution of a linear equation, if the equation is a true statement when the -values and

-values of the ordered pair are substituted into the equation. The graph of a linear equation is a straight line where

every point on the line is a solution of the equation, and every solution of this equation is a point on this line. Figure 5.58

we can see that in the graph of the equation         , for every -value there is only one -value, as shown in the

accompanying table.
434 5 · Algebra

                                 Figure 5.58 Graph of the Equation

A relation is a function if every element of the domain has exactly one value in the range. The relation defined by the

equation         is a function. If we look at the graph, each vertical dashed line only intersects the solid line at one

point. This makes sense as in a function, for every -value there is only one -value. If the vertical line hit the graph twice,

the -value would be mapped to two -values, and so the graph would not represent a function. This leads us a graphical

method of determining functions called the vertical line test, which states that a set of points in a rectangular

coordinate system is the graph of a function if every vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point. If any vertical

line intersects the graph in more than one point, the graph does not represent a function.

EXAMPLE 5.66

Applying the Vertical Line Test
Determine whether the graph (Figure 5.59) is the graph of a function applying the vertical line test.

                                 Figure 5.59

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                         5.7 · Functions 435

     Solution
On the graph (Figure 5.60), only three vertical dashed lines are drawn. However, it can be determined that any vertical
dashed line that is drawn will intersect the solid line at exactly one point. It is the graph of a function.

                                                                             Figure 5.60
        YOUR TURN 5.66
  1. Determine whether the graph is the graph of a function.

  EXAMPLE 5.67
Applying the Vertical Line Test to a Parabola
Determine whether the graph is the graph of a function (Figure 5.61).
436 5 · Algebra

                                                                                     Figure 5.61
            Solution
       Figure 5.62 does not represent a function since the vertical dashed lines shown on the graph below intersect the solid
       line at two points.

                                                                                     Figure 5.62
               YOUR TURN 5.67
         1. Determine whether the graph is the graph of a function.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             5.7 · Functions 437

Determining the Domain and Range of a Function

For the function     is the independent variable as it can be any value in the domain, and is the dependent

variable since its value depends on . For the function       , the values of make up the domain and the values of

make up the range.

EXAMPLE 5.68

Finding the Domain and Range of Ordered Pairs

For                                       :

1. Find the domain of the relation.
2. Find the range of the relation.

    Solution
1. The domain is the set of all -values of the relation:
2. The range is the set of all -values of the relation:

     YOUR TURN 5.68

For the relation                                          :

     1. Find the domain of the relation.

     2. Find the range of the relation.

  EXAMPLE 5.69

Finding the Domain and Range on a Graph
Use Figure 5.63 to:

 1. List the ordered pairs of the relation.
 2. Find the domain of the relation.
 3. Find the range of the relation.
438 5 · Algebra

                                                                            Figure 5.63                            .
                                                                                         . Notice that while repeats, it is only listed
    Solution
1. The ordered pairs of the relation are:                                                 Notice that while repeats, it is only listed
2. The domain is the set of all -values of the relation:

     once.
3. The range is the set of all -values of the relation:

     once.

      YOUR TURN 5.69

Use the given figure to:
    1. List the ordered pairs of the relation.
    2. Find the domain of the relation.
    3. Find the range of the relation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               5.7 · Functions 439

VIDEO
Domain and Range on Graphs (https://openstax.org/r/Domain)

        WHO KNEW?

Function and Function Notation

In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz, the German mathematician who co-invented calculus, seems to be the first person to use

the word function in a mathematical sense, although his use of it does not exactly fit with the modern use and

definition. The person who is credited with the modern definition of function is Swiss mathematician Johann

Bernoulli, who wrote about it in a letter to Leibniz in 1698. Supposedly, Leibniz wrote Bernoulli back, approving of this

use of the word. In 1734, the use of the notation  for a function was first used by Swiss mathematician Leonhard

Euler (pronounced "Oiler"). Euler had a knack for inventing notation. He also introduced the notation for the base of

natural logs (1727), for the square root of (1777), for summation (1755), and many others. Euler also

introduced many other ideas associated with functions. Euler defined exponential functions and defined logarithmic

functions as their inverse; he also introduced the beta and gamma functions, and was the first person to consider the

trigonometric identities (sine, cosine, etc.) as functions.

Check Your Understanding

57. If             then         .

a. True

b. False

58.                                represent the ordered pairs of a function.
       a. True
       b. False

59. The graph shown represents the graph of a function:

   a. True
   b. False

60. The figure shown represents the mapping of a function.
440 5 · Algebra

a. True
b. False

61. The domain of the mapping in the figure is  .

a. True

b. False

        SECTION 5.7 EXERCISES                                                           and  .

For the following exercises, evaluate the functions at the values
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.
     5.

     6.

For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered pairs represent a function.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.

For the following exercises, determine whether the mapping represented a function.

    12.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                         5.7 · Functions 441

    13.
For the following exercises, determine whether the equations represent as a function of .

    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine which graph represents a function.

    20.
442 5 · Algebra

           21.
           22.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   5.7 · Functions 443

23.
24.
444 5 · Algebra

           25.
       For the following exercises, use the set of ordered pairs to find the domain and the range.

           26.
           27.
           28.
           29.
       For the following exercises, use the graph to find the domain and the range.

           30.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   5.7 · Functions 445

31.
32.
446 5 · Algebra

           33.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                        5.8 · Graphing Functions 447

5.8 Graphing Functions

Figure 5.64 The ski lifts and the mountain both have a slope. (credit: modification of work "colorado springs zoo tram" by
woodleywonderworks/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this module, you should be able to:
 1. Graph functions using intercepts.
 2. Compute slope.
 3. Graph functions using slope and -intercept.
 4. Graph horizontal and vertical lines.
 5. Interpret graphs of functions.
 6. Model applications using slope and -intercept.

In this section, we will expand our knowledge of graphing by graphing linear functions. There are many real-world
scenarios that can be represented by graphs of linear functions. Imagine a chairlift going up at a ski resort. The journey a
skier takes travelling up the chairlift could be represented as a linear function with a positive slope. The journey a skier
takes down the slopes could be represented by a linear function with a negative slope.

Graphing Functions Using Intercepts

Every linear equation can be represented by a unique line that shows all the solutions of the equation. We have seen that
when graphing a line by plotting points, you can use any three solutions to graph. This means that two people graphing
the line might use different sets of three points. At first glance, their two lines might not appear to be the same, since
they would have different points labeled. But if all the work was done correctly, the lines should be exactly the same. One
way to recognize that they are indeed the same line is to look at where the line crosses the -axis and the -axis. These
points are called the intercepts of a line. Let us review the graphs of the lines in Figure 5.65.
448 5 · Algebra

                                       Figure 5.65

The table below lists where each of these lines crosses the - and -axis. Do you see a pattern? For each line, the

-coordinate of the point where the line crosses the -axis is zero. The point where the line crosses the -axis has the

form             and is called the -intercept of the line. The -intercept occurs when is zero. In each line, the -coordinate of

the point where the line crosses the -axis is zero. The point where the line crosses the -axis has the form        and is

called the -intercept of the line. The -intercept occurs when is zero.

Figure           The line crosses the  Ordered Pair for this            The line crosses the  Ordered Pair for This
                                  at:             Point                                  at:             Point

Figure (a)                       3                                      6

Figure (b)                       4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.8 · Graphing Functions 449

 Figure     The line crosses the  Ordered Pair for this    The line crosses the              Ordered Pair for This
                             at:             Point                          at:                         Point
Figure (c)
Figure (d)               5                                              0
 General
                         0
  Figure

  EXAMPLE 5.70

Finding - and -Intercepts
Find the -intercept and -intercept on the (a) and (b) graphs in Figure 5.66.

                                            Figure 5.66

Solution

In Figure 5.66, the graph crosses the -axis at the point   . The -intercept is     . The graph crosses the -axis at

the point   . The -intercept is  . In Figure 5.66, the graph crosses the -axis at the point  . The -intercept is

. The graph crosses the -axis at the point  . The -intercept is                 .

      YOUR TURN 5.70
1. Find the -intercept and -intercept on the given graph.
450 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.71

Graphing a Function Using Intercepts

Find the intercepts of             . Then graph the function using the intercepts.

     Solution

Let              to find the -intercept, and let     to find the -intercept.

                 To find the -intercept, let      .   To find the -intercept, let        .

                        Simplify.                                             Simplify.

                         The -intercept is:           The -intercept is:
Plot the intercepts to get the graph in Figure 5.67.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.8 · Graphing Functions 451

                           Figure 5.67

      YOUR TURN 5.71       and use them to graph the equation.
1. Find the intercepts of

Computing Slope

When graphing linear equations, you may notice that some lines tilt up as they go from left to right and some lines tilt
down. Some lines are very steep and some lines are flatter. In mathematics, the measure of the steepness of a line is
called the slope of the line. To find the slope of a line, we locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers.
Then we sketch a right triangle where the two points are vertices of the triangle and one side is horizontal and one side
is vertical. Next, we measure or calculate the distance along the vertical and horizontal sides of the triangle. The vertical
distance is called the rise and the horizontal distance is called the run.

We can assign a numerical value to the slope of a line by finding the ratio of the rise and run. The rise is the amount the
vertical distance changes while the run measures the horizontal change, as shown in this illustration. Slope (Figure 5.68)
is a rate of change.

                                                                           Figure 5.68
FORMULA
To calculate slope , use the formula

                                                                                          ,
where the rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the horizontal change.
452 5 · Algebra

       The concept of slope has many applications in the real world. In construction, the pitch of a roof, the slant of plumbing
       pipes, and the steepness of stairs are all applications of slope. As you ski or jog down a hill, you definitely experience
       slope.

         EXAMPLE 5.72

       Finding the Slope from a Graph
       Find the slope of the line shown in Figure 5.69.

                                               Figure 5.69

Solution

Step 1: Locate two points on the graph whose coordinates are integers, such as    and  . Starting at  , sketch

a right triangle to  as shown in Figure 5.70.

                                               Figure 5.70

Step 2: Count the rise; since it goes down, it is negative. The rise is -2.

Step 3: Count the run. The run is 3.

Step 4: Use the slope formula         substitute the values of the rise and run.

The slope of the line is .

The solution is decreases by 2 units as increases by 3 units.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   5.8 · Graphing Functions 453

      YOUR TURN 5.72
1. Find the slope of the line shown in the graph.

Sometimes we will need to find the slope of a line between two points when we don't have a graph to measure the rise
and the run. We could plot the points on grid paper, then count out the rise and the run, but there is a way to find the
slope without graphing. First, we need to introduce some algebraic notation.

We have seen that an ordered pair ( , ) gives the coordinates of a point. But when we work with slopes, we use two
points. How can the same symbol ( , ) be used to represent two different points? Mathematicians use subscripts to
distinguish such points. For example, ( , ) would be said aloud as " sub 1, sub 1" and ( , ) read " sub 2, sub
2." The "sub" is a short way of saying "subscript." We will use ( , ) to identify the first point and ( , ) to identify the
second point in our slope equation. If we had more than two points, (if we were finding more than one slope), we could
use ( , ), ( , ), and so on.

Let's review how the rise and run relate to the coordinates of the two points by taking another look at the slope of the

line between the points  and           , as shown in Figure 5.71.

                                                   Figure 5.71

On the graph, we count the rise of 3 and the run of 5. Notice on the graph that that ( , ) is the point  and ( , )

is the point  . The rise can be found by subtracting the -coordinates, 6 and 3, and the run can be found by

subtracting the -coordinates 7 and 2.

We have shown that       is really another version of              . We can use this formula to find the slope of a line.
454 5 · Algebra

         FORMULA
         To find the slope of the line between two points ( , ) and ( , ), use the formula

         EXAMPLE 5.73
       Finding the Slope of the Line Using Points
       Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line through the points (-2, -3) and (-7, 4).

            Solution
       We'll call (-2, -3) point 1 and (-7, 4) point 2.
       Step 1: Use the slope formula:
       Step 2: Substitute the values:
       Step 3: Simplify:
       Step 4: Verify the slope on the graph shown in Figure 5.72.

                                 Figure 5.72

      YOUR TURN 5.73                                                                                 and  .
1. Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line through the pair of points

Graphing Functions Using Slope and -Intercept

We have graphed linear equations by plotting points and using intercepts. Once we see how an equation in slope-

intercept form and its graph are related, we will have one more method we can use to graph lines. Review the graph of

the equation  in Figure 5.73 and find its slope and -intercept.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5.8 · Graphing Functions 455

                                      Figure 5.73 Graph of the equation    .

The vertical and horizontal lines in the graph show us the rise is 1 and the run is 2, respectively.

Substituting into the slope formula:

The -intercept is     . Look at the equation of this line.

Look at the slope and -intercept.

When a linear equation is solved for , the coefficient of the term is the slope and the constant term is the -coordinate

of the -intercept. We say that the equation  is in slope-intercept form. Sometimes the slope-intercept form

is called the -form.

EXAMPLE 5.74

Finding the Slope and -Intercept of a Line
Identify the slope and -intercept of the line from the equation:

 1.
 2.

     Solution
 1. We compare our equation to the slope-intercept form of the equation.

      Step 1: Write the slope-intercept form of the equation of the line.

Step 2: Write the equation of the line.

Step 3: Identify the slope.
456 5 · Algebra

     Step 4: Identify the -intercept.

2. When an equation of a line is not given in slope-intercept form, our first step will be to solve the equation for .
     Step 1: Solve for .

     Step 2: Subtract from each side.

     Step 3: Divide both sides by 3.

Step 4: Simplify.

Step 5: Write the slope-intercept form of the equation of the line.
Step 6: Write the equation of the line.

Step 7: Identify the slope.

Step 8: Identify the -intercept.
                                                                                               .

YOUR TURN 5.74

Identify the slope and  -intercept from the equation of the line.
    1.
    2.

  EXAMPLE 5.75                              using its slope and -intercept.
                                                       .
Graphing the Slope and -Intercept
Graph the line of the equation

     Solution
The equation is in slope-intercept form

Step 1: Identify the slope and -intercept.

, -intercept is                  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5.8 · Graphing Functions 457

Step 2: Plot the -intercept on the coordinate system (Figure 5.74).
 1. Identify the rise over the run.

 2. Count out the rise and run to mark the second point.
      rise , run 1

                                   Figure 5.74

      YOUR TURN 5.75               using its slope and -intercept.
1. Graph the line of the equation

Graphing Horizontal and Vertical Lines

Some linear equations have only one variable. They may have just without the , or just without an . This changes

how we make a table of values to get the points to plot. Let us consider the equation  . This equation has only one

variable, . The equation says that is always equal to , so its value does not depend on . No matter what the value

of is, the value of is always . To make a table of values, write in for all the -values. Then choose any values for

. Since does not depend on , you can choose any numbers you like. But to fit the points on our coordinate graph, we

will use 1, 2, and 3 for the -coordinates in the table below.

                                                               (, )

                                   -3 1
                                           2
                                           3

Plot the points from the table and connect them with a straight line (Figure 5.75). Notice that we have graphed a vertical
line.
458 5 · Algebra

                                              Figure 5.75 Graph of

What is the slope? If we take the two points  and           then the rise is 2 and the run is 0.
Using the slope formula we get:

The slope is undefined since division by zero is undefined. We say that the slope of the vertical line  is undefined.

The slope of any vertical line   (where is any number) will be undefined.

What if the equation has but no ? Let's graph the equation          . This time the -value is a constant, so in this

equation, does not depend on . Fill in 4 for all the values in the table below and then choose any values for . We

will use 0, 2, and 4 for the -coordinates.

                                                                                         (, )
                                                                           04
                                                                           24
                                                                           44

In Figure 5.76, we have graphed a horizontal line passing through the -axis at 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.8 · Graphing Functions 459

                                              Figure 5.76 Graph of

What is the slope? If we take the two points  and  then the rise is 0 and the run is 2. Using the slope formula,

we get        . The slope of the horizontal line   is 0. The slope of any horizontal line    (where is

any number) will be 0. When the -coordinates are the same, the rise is 0.

EXAMPLE 5.76

Graphing A Vertical Line

Graph:  .

     Solution                                                                                is always 2 and then put in
The equation has only one variable, , and is always equal to 2. We create a table where
any values for . The graph is a vertical line passing through the -axis at 2 (Figure 5.77).

                                                           (, )
                                              21
                                              22
                                              23
460 5 · Algebra

                                 Figure 5.77

YOUR TURN 5.76

1. Graph            .

EXAMPLE 5.77

Graphing A Horizontal Line

Graph:           .

Solution

The equation           has only one variable, . The value of is constant. All the ordered pairs in the next table have the

same -coordinate. The graph is a horizontal line passing through the -axis at -1 (Figure 5.78).

                                                    (, )
                                 0
                                 3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         5.8 · Graphing Functions 461

                          Figure 5.78

YOUR TURN 5.77

1. Graph the equation  .

The table below summarizes all the methods we have used to graph lines.

Interpreting Graphs of Functions

An important yet often overlooked area in algebra involves interpreting graphs. Oftentimes in math classes, students are
given mathematical functions and can make graphs to represent them. But the interpretation of graphs is a more
applicable skill to the real world. Being able to "read" a graph--understanding its domain and range, what the intercepts
mean, and what the slope (or curve) means-- that's a real-world skill.
462 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.78

Interpreting a Graph                                                                         -axis represents how far
In Figure 5.79 the -axis on the graph represents the 120-minute bike ride Juan went on. The
away he was from his home.

                                 Figure 5.79

1. Interpret the - and -intercept.
2. For each segment, find the slope.
3. Create an interpretation of this graph (i.e., make up a story that goes with it).

    Solution

1.               is the - and -intercept and represents Juan at home before his bike ride. The distance from home is 0 miles

    and 0 minutes have passed.

2. In the first 30 minutes, the slope is and indicates Juan is traveling 1 mile for every 5 minutes. Between 30 and 60

    minutes, the slope is 0 and indicates that he's not riding the bike (the distance is not increasing). Then between 60

    and 90 minutes, the slope is again. Finally, after 90 minutes the slope is        meaning Juan is getting 4 miles

     closer to home every 15 minutes.
3. Answers will vary. Juan left his house for a bike ride. After 30 minutes, he was 6 miles from home and he stopped for

     ice cream at his local ice-cream truck. He enjoyed his ice cream for 30 minutes. He then jumped back on his bike and
     rode to his friend's house. He arrived there 30 minutes later. His friend's house was 12 miles from his home. His
     friend was not home so he immediately turned around and quickly rode home in 45 minutes.

      YOUR TURN 5.78

In the given figure the -axis on the graph represents the years. The y-axis represents the number of teachers at
Jones High School.

                                 Teachers at Jones High

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      5.8 · Graphing Functions 463

1. Interpret the - and -intercept.
2. For each segment, find the slope.
3. Create an interpretation of this graph (i.e., make up a story that goes with it).

Modeling Applications Using Slope and -Intercept

Many real-world applications are modeled by linear equations. We will review a few applications here so you can
understand how equations written in slope-intercept form relate to real-world situations. Usually when a linear equation
model uses real-world data, different letters are used for the variables instead of using only and . The variable names
often remind us of what quantities are being measured. Also, we often need to extend the axes in our rectangular
coordinate system to bigger positive and negative numbers to accommodate the data in the application.

EXAMPLE 5.79

Converting Temperature

The equation            is used to convert temperatures from degrees Celsius ( ) to degrees Fahrenheit ( ).

1. Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 0°.
2. Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 20°.
3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
4. Graph the equation.

    Solution
1. Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 0°.

                        Find when  .

                        Simplify.

2. Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 20°.

                        Find when  .

                        Simplify.
                        Simplify.

3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
     Even though this equation uses and , it is still in slope-intercept form.

The slope means that the temperature Fahrenheit ( ) increases 9 degrees when the temperature Celsius ( )
increases 5 degrees.

The -intercept means that when the temperature is 0° on the Celsius scale, it is 32° on the Fahrenheit scale.

4. Graph the equation.                                                           , and then count out the rise of 9
     We will need to use a larger scale than our usual. Start at the -intercept
     and the run of 5 to get a second point as shown in Figure 5.80.
464 5 · Algebra

                                                        Figure 5.80

YOUR TURN 5.79

The equation                     is used to estimate a person's height in inches, , based on women's shoe size, .

1. Estimate the height of a child who wears women's shoe size 0.

2. Estimate the height of a woman with shoe size 8.

3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

4. Graph the equation.

EXAMPLE 5.80

Calculating Driving Costs                              models the relation between his weekly cost, , in dollars and the
Sam drives a delivery van. The equation
number of miles, , that he drives.

1. Find Sam's cost for a week when he drives 0 miles.
2. Find the cost for a week when he drives 250 miles.
3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
4. Graph the equation.

    Solution
1. Find Sam's cost for a week when he drives 0 miles.

                                         Find when = 0.

                                         Simplify.

     Sam's costs are $60 when he drives 0 miles.
2. Find the cost for a week when he drives 250 miles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           5.8 · Graphing Functions 465

Find when                                               .

Simplify.

     Sam's costs are $185 when he drives 250 miles.
3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

The slope, 0.5, means that the weekly cost, , increases by $0.50 when the number of miles driven, , increases by
1. The -intercept means that when the number of miles driven is 0, the weekly cost is $60.

4. Graph the equation (Figure 5.81).                                                                       , we rewrite
     We'll need to use a larger scale than usual. Start at the -intercept (0, 60). To count out the slope
     it as an equivalent fraction that will make our graphing easier.

So to graph the next point go up 50 from the intercept of 60 and then to the right 100. The second point will be (100,
110).

                                                                              Figure 5.81  models the relation between her

      YOUR TURN 5.80

Stella has a home business selling gourmet pizzas. The equation
weekly cost, , in dollars and the number of pizzas, , that she sells.

    1. Find Stella's cost for a week when she sells no pizzas.
    2. Find the cost for a week when she sells 15 pizzas.
    3. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
    4. Graph the equation.
466 5 · Algebra

Check Your Understanding

62. True or False. The -intercept of                         .

a. True

b. False

63. True or False. The slope of the line containing the points (1, 2) and (2, 4) is 1.
       a. True
       b. False

For the following exercises, use the graph shown.

64. True or False. This graph has a slope of 5.
       a. True
       b. False

65. True or False. This is the graph of the equation            .

a. True

b. False

66. True or False. All vertical lines have a slope of zero.
       a. True
       b. False

        SECTION 5.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the - and -intercepts on the graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   5.8 · Graphing Functions 467

1.
2.
3.
468 5 · Algebra

             4.
       For the following exercises, graph using the intercepts.

             5.
             6.
             7.
             8.
             9.
           10.
           11.
           12.
       For the following exercises, find the slope of the line.

           13.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.8 · Graphing Functions 469

14.
15.
470 5 · Algebra

           16.
           17.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.8 · Graphing Functions 471

18.
19.
472 5 · Algebra

20.

For the following exercises, use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between each pair of points.
    21. (2, 5), (4, 0)
    22. (-3, 3), (4, -5)
    23. (-1, -2), (2, 5)
    24. (4, -5), (1, -2)

For the following exercises, identify the slope and  -intercept of each line.
    25.
    26.
    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.

For the following exercises, graph the line of each equation using its slope and   -intercept.
    33.
    34.
    35.
    36.
    37.
    38.
    39.
    40.

For the following exercises, find the slope of each line and graph.
    41.
    42.
    43.
    44.

For the following exercises, graph and interpret applications of slope-intercept.

The equation                     models the relation between the amount of Tuyet's monthly water bill payment, , in

dollars, and the number of units of water, , used.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   5.8 · Graphing Functions 473

45. Find Tuyet's payment for a month when 0 units of water are used.
46. Find Tuyet's payment for a month when 12 units of water are used.
47. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
48. Graph the equation.

For the following exercises, graph and interpret applications of slope-intercept.

Bruce drives his car for his job. The equation           models the relation between the amount in dollars, ,

that he is reimbursed and the number of miles, , he drives in one day.

49. Find the amount Bruce is reimbursed on a day when he drives 0 miles.

50. Find the amount Bruce is reimbursed on a day when he drives 220 miles.

51. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

52. Graph the equation.

For the following exercises, graph and interpret applications of slope-intercept.                                 , in dollars.
Cherie works in retail and her weekly salary includes commission for the amount she sells. The equation

                        models the relation between her weekly salary, , in dollars and the amount of her sales,
    53. Find Cherie's salary for a week when her sales were $0.
    54. Find Cherie's salary for a week when her sales were $3,600.
    55. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.
    56. Graph the equation.

For the following exercises, graph and interpret applications of slope-intercept.

Costa is planning a lunch banquet. The equation          models the relation between the cost in dollars, , of

the banquet and the number of guests, .

57. Find the cost if the number of guests is 40.

58. Find the cost if the number of guests is 80.

59. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

60. Graph the equation.
474 5 · Algebra

    5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables

Figure 5.82 Fruits and vegetables at a farmer's market. (credit: "California Ave. Farmers' Market" by Jun Seita/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Determine and show whether an ordered pair is a solution to a system of equations.
 2. Solve systems of linear equations using graphical methods.
 3. Solve systems of linear equations using substitution.
 4. Solve systems of linear equations using elimination.
 5. Identify systems with no solution or infinitely many solutions.
 6. Solve applications of systems of linear equations.

In this section, we will learn how to solve systems of linear equations in two variables. There are several real-world
scenarios that can be represented by systems of linear equalities. Suppose two friends, Andrea and Bart, go shopping at
a farmers market to buy some vegetables. Andrea buys 2 tomatoes and 4 cucumbers and spends $2.00. Bart buys 4
tomatoes and 5 cucumbers and spends $2.95. What is the price of each vegetable?

Determining If an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to a System of Equations

When we solved linear equations in Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications and Linear Inequalities in One
Variable with Applications, we learned how to solve linear equations with one variable. Now we will work with two or
more linear equations grouped together, which is known as a system of linear equations.

In this section, we will focus our work on systems of two linear equations in two unknowns (variables) and applications of
systems of linear equations. An example of a system of two linear equations is shown below. We use a brace to show the
two equations are grouped together to form a system of equations.

A linear equation in two variables, such as  , has an infinite number of solutions. Its graph is a line. Remember,

every point on the line is a solution to the equation and every solution to the equation is a point on the line. To solve a

system of two linear equations, we want to find the values of the variables that are solutions to both equations. In other

words, we are looking for the ordered pairs ( , ) that make both equations true. These are called the solutions of a

system of equations.

To determine if an ordered pair is a solution to a system of two equations, we substitute the values of the variables into
each equation. If the ordered pair makes both equations true, it is a solution to the system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 475

  EXAMPLE 5.81

Determining Whether an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to the System
Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system.

1.
2.

    Solution

1.

    We substitute  and      into both equations.

              does not make both equations true.      is not a solution.

2. We substitute   and      into both equations.

              makes both equations true.          is a solution.

        YOUR TURN 5.81
  Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system.

      1.
      2.

  EXAMPLE 5.82
Determining Whether an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to the System
Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system

1.
2.

    Solution

1.                 for and  for into both equations.
     Substitute
476 5 · Algebra

                 is a solution.

2.               for and for into both equations.
     Substitute

                 is not a solution.

        YOUR TURN 5.82

  Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system.

      1.
      2.

Solving Systems of Linear Equations Using Graphical Methods

We will use three methods to solve a system of linear equations. The first method we will use is graphing. The graph of a
linear equation is a line. Each point on the line is a solution to the equation. For a system of two equations, we will graph
two lines. Then we can see all the points that are solutions to each equation. And, by finding what points the lines have
in common, we will find the solution to the system.
Most linear equations in one variable have one solution; but for some equations called contradictions, there are no
solutions, and for other equations called identities, all numbers are solutions. Similarly, when we solve a system of two
linear equations represented by a graph of two lines in the same plane, there are three possible cases, as shown in
Figure 5.83.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 477

                                                                             Figure 5.83
Each time we demonstrate a new method, we will use it on the same system of linear equations. At the end you will
decide which method was the most convenient way to solve this system.
The steps to use to solve a system of linear equations by graphing are shown here.
Step 1: Graph the first equation.
Step 2: Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.
Step 3: Determine whether the lines intersect, are parallel, or are the same line.
Step 4: Identify the solution to the system.
If the lines intersect, identify the point of intersection. This is the solution to the system.
If the lines are parallel, the system has no solution.
If the lines are the same, the system has an infinite number of solutions.
Step 5: Check the solution in both equations.

  EXAMPLE 5.83
Solving a System of Linear Equations by Graphing
Solve this system of linear equations by graphing.
478 5 · Algebra

 Solution                        To graph the first line,
                                 write the equation in
Step 1: Graph the first          slope-intercept form.
         equation.

    Step 2: Graph the            To graph the second
second equation on the           line, use intercepts.

    same rectangular
   coordinate system.

Access for free at openstax.org
   Step 3: Determine        Look at the graph of    5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 479
   whether the lines                the lines.
intersect, are parallel,                            The lines intersect.
 or are the same line.          Since the lines
                              intersect, find the   The lines intersect at     .
  Step 4 and Step 5:        point of intersection.
Identify the solution to     Check the point in
                               both equations.
        the system.
 If the lines intersect,                            The solution is         .
  identify the point of
intersection. Check to

    make sure it is a
    solution to both
 equations. This is the
solution to the system.

If the lines are parallel,
   the system has no
          solution.

   If the lines are the
same, the system has
 an infinite number of

         solutions.

        YOUR TURN 5.83

  1. Solve this system of linear equations by graphing.

Solving Systems of Linear Equations Using Substitution

We will now solve systems of linear equations by the substitution method. We will use the same system we used for
graphing.

We will first solve one of the equations for either or . We can choose either equation and solve for either
variable--but we'll try to make a choice that will keep the work easy. Then, we substitute that expression into the other
equation. The result is an equation with just one variable--and we know how to solve those!
After we find the value of one variable, we will substitute that value into one of the original equations and solve for the
other variable. Finally, we check our solution and make sure it makes both equations true. This process is summarized
here:
Step 1: Solve one of the equations for either variable.
Step 2: Substitute the expression from Step 1 into the other equation.
Step 3: Solve the resulting equation.
Step 4: Substitute the solution in Step 3 into either of the original equations to find the other variable.
Step 5: Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Step 6: Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.
480 5 · Algebra

         EXAMPLE 5.84
       Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Substitution
       Solve this system of linear equations by substitution:

Solution                                   We'll solve the first equation
                                                           for .
Step 1: Solve one of the equations for
                either variable.

Step 2: Substitute the expression from       We replace in the second
     Step 1 into the other equation.        equation with the expression

 Step 3: Solve the resulting equation.                               .

                                           Now we have an equation with
                                            just 1 variable. We know how

                                                       to solve this!

Step 4: Substitute the solution from Step  We'll use the first equation and
  3 into one of the original equations to            replace with 4.
            find the other variable.

Step 5: Write the solution as an ordered   The ordered pair is ( , ).
                         pair.
                                           Substitute           ,  into
Step 6: Check that the ordered pair is a
   solution to both original equations.    both equations and make sure

                                           they are both true.

                                                                             Both equations are true.
                                                                               is the solution to the system.

        YOUR TURN 5.84
  1. Solve this system of linear equations by substitution:

Solving Systems of Linear Equations Using Elimination

We have solved systems of linear equations by graphing and by substitution. Graphing works well when the variable
coefficients are small, and the solution has integer values. Substitution works well when we can easily solve one
equation for one of the variables and not have too many fractions in the resulting expression.
The third method of solving systems of linear equations is called the elimination method. When we solved a system by
substitution, we started with two equations and two variables and reduced it to one equation with one variable. This is

Access for free at openstax.org
         5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 481

what we'll do with the elimination method, too, but we'll have a different way to get there.

The elimination method is based on the Addition Property of Equality. The Addition Property of Equality says that when
you add the same quantity to both sides of an equation, you still have equality. We will extend the Addition Property of
Equality to say that when you add equal quantities to both sides of an equation, the results are equal. For any
expressions , , , and :

if

and

then  .

To solve a system of equations by elimination, we start with both equations in standard form. Then we decide which
variable will be easiest to eliminate. How do we decide? We want to have the coefficients of one variable be opposites, so
that we can add the equations together and eliminate that variable. Notice how that works when we add these two
equations together:

The 's add to zero and we have one equation with one variable. Let us try another one:

This time we do not see a variable that can be immediately eliminated if we add the equations. But if we multiply the first
equation by , we will make the coefficients of opposites. We must multiply every term on both sides of the equation
by .

Then rewrite the system of equations.

Now we see that the coefficients of the terms are opposites, so will be eliminated when we add these two equations.

Once we get an equation with just one variable, we solve it. Then we substitute that value into one of the original
equations to solve for the remaining variable. And, as always, we check our answer to make sure it is a solution to both
of the original equations. Here's a summary of using the elimination method:
Step 1: Write both equations in standard form. If any coefficients are fractions, clear them.
Step 2: Make the coefficients of one variable opposites.
Decide which variable you will eliminate.
Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.
Step 3: Add the equations resulting from Step 2 to eliminate one variable.
Step 4: Solve for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Substitute the solution from Step 4 into one of the original equations. Then solve for the other variable.
Step 6: Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Step 7: Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.
482 5 · Algebra

         EXAMPLE 5.85
       Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Elimination
       Solve this system of linear equations by elimination:

 Solution                                 Both equations are in standard

   Step 1: Write both equations in        form,                      . There are no
               standard form.
                                                      fractions.
If any coefficients are fractions, clear
                     them.

 Step 2: Make the coefficients of one         We can eliminate the 's by
             variable opposites.          multiplying the first equation by

      Decide which variable you will                            2.
                    eliminate.
                                          Multiply both sides of
Multiply one or both equations so that                        by 2.
  the coefficients of that variable are
                   opposites.

 Step 3: Add the equations resulting      We add the 's, 's, and
from Step 2 to eliminate one variable.             constants.

   Step 4: Solve for the remaining                    Solve for .
                   variable.
                                          Substitute          into the second
Step 5: Substitute the solution from      equation,                 . Then solve
    Step 4 into one of the original
                                                          for .
equations. Then solve for the other
                   variable.

    Step 6: Write the solution as an             Write it as         .
                 ordered pair.
                                          Substitute           ,        into
Step 7: Check that the ordered pair is
a solution to both original equations.                and               . Do

                                          they make both equations true?

                                                               Yes!

                                                                                     The solution is
                                                                                                    .

      YOUR TURN 5.85
1. Solve this system of linear equations by elimination:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 483

Identifying Systems with No Solution or Infinitely Many Solutions

In all the systems of linear equations so far, the lines intersected, and the solution was one point. In Example 5.86 and
Example 5.87, we will look at a system of equations that has no solution and at a system of equations that has an infinite
number of solutions.

  EXAMPLE 5.86
Solving a System of Linear Equations with No Solution
Solve the system by a method of your choice:

     Solution
Let us solve the system of linear equations by graphing.

To graph the first equation, we will use its slope and -intercept.

To graph the second equation, we will use the intercepts.

                                                           0 -2
                                                           40

Graph the lines (Figure 5.84).
484 5 · Algebra

                                                                                     Figure 5.84
       Determine the points of intersection. The lines are parallel. Since no point is on both lines, there is no ordered pair that
       makes both equations true. There is no solution to this system.

               YOUR TURN 5.86
         1. Solve the system by a method of your choice:
         EXAMPLE 5.87
       Solving a System of Linear Equations with Infinite Solutions
       Solve the system by a method of your choice:

            Solution
       Let us solve the system of linear equations by graphing.
       Find the slope and -intercept of the first equation.
       Find the intercepts of the second equation.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 485

                                0 -3
                                       0

Graph the lines (Figure 5.85).

                                                                             Figure 5.85
The lines are the same! Since every point on the line makes both equations true, there are infinitely many ordered pairs
that make both equations true.
There are infinitely many solutions to this system.

        YOUR TURN 5.87

  1. Solve the system by a method of your choice:

In the previous example, if you write the second equation in slope-intercept form, you may recognize that the equations
have the same slope and same -intercept. Since every point on the line makes both equations true, there are infinitely
many ordered pairs that make both equations true. There are infinitely many solutions to the system. We say the two
lines are coincident. Coincident lines have the same slope and same -intercept. A system of equations that has at least
one solution is called a consistent system. A system with parallel lines has no solution. We call a system of equations
like this an inconsistent system. It has no solution.
We also categorize the equations in a system of equations by calling the equations independent or dependent. If two
equations are independent, they each have their own set of solutions. Intersecting lines and parallel lines are
independent. If two equations are dependent, all the solutions of one equation are also solutions of the other equation.
When we graph two dependent equations, we get coincident lines. Let us sum this up by looking at the graphs of the
three types of systems. See Figure 5.86 and the table that follows
486 5 · Algebra

                                                   Figure 5.86

                                 Lines             Intersecting  Parallel     Coincident

                 Number of Solutions               1 point       No solution Infinitely many

                 Consistent/Inconsistent Consistent Inconsistent              Consistent

                 Dependent/Independent Independent Independent Dependent

WORK IT OUT

Using Matrices and Cramer's Rule to Solve Systems of Linear Equations
An by matrix is an array with rows and columns, where each item in the matrix is a number. Matrices are used
for many things, but one thing they can be used for is to represent systems of linear equations. For example, the
system of linear equations

can be represented by the following matrix:

To use Cramer's Rule, you need to be able to take the determinant of a matrix. The determinant of a 2 by 2 matrix ,
denoted , is

For example, the determinant of the matrix

Cramer's Rule involves taking three determinants:

1. The determinant of the first two columns, denoted ;

2. The determinant of the first column and the third column, denoted ;

3. The determinant of the third column and the first column, denoted       .

Going back to the original matrix

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 487

Now Cramer's Rule for the solution of the system will be:

Putting in the values for these determinants, we have                              The solution to the system is the

ordered pair          .

Solving Applications of Systems of Linear Equations

Systems of linear equations are very useful for solving applications. Some people find setting up word problems with two
variables easier than setting them up with just one variable. To solve an application, we will first translate the words into
a system of linear equations. Then we will decide the most convenient method to use, and then solve the system.
Step 1: Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2: Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3: Name what we are looking for. Choose variables to represent those quantities.
Step 4: Translate into a system of equations.
Step 5: Solve the system of equations using good algebra techniques.
Step 6: Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7: Answer the question with a complete sentence.

EXAMPLE 5.88

Applying System to a Real-World Application
Heather has been offered two options for her salary as a trainer at the gym. Option A would pay her $25,000 a year plus
$15 for each training session. Option B would pay her $10,000 a year plus $40 for each training session. How many
training sessions would make the salary options equal?

     Solution
Step 1: Read the problem.

Step 2: Identify what we are looking for.

We are looking for the number of training sessions that would make the pay equal.

Step 3: Name what we are looking for.

Let                      , and

Step 4: Translate into a system of equations.

Option A would pay her $25,000 plus $15 for each training session.

Option B would pay her $10,000 + $40 for each training session.

The system is shown.
488 5 · Algebra

Step 5: Solve the system of equations.

We will use substitution.

Substitute                 for in the second equation

Solve for .

Step 6: Check the answer.

Are 600 training sessions a year reasonable?

Are the two options equal when          ?

Substitute into each equation.

Step 7: Answer the question.
The salary options would be equal for 600 training sessions.

        YOUR TURN 5.88

  1. Translate to a system of equations and then solve.
      When Jenna spent 10 minutes on the elliptical trainer and then did circuit training for 20 minutes, her fitness app
      says she burned 278 calories. When she spent 20 minutes on the elliptical trainer and 30 minutes circuit training,
      she burned 473 calories. How many calories does she burn for each minute on the elliptical trainer? How many
      calories for each minute of circuit training?

       VIDEO
      Practice with Solving Applications of Systems of Equations (https://openstax.org/r/Practice_with_Solving)
      Applications of Systems of Linear Equations (https://openstax.org/r/Applications_of_Systems)

Check Your Understanding

Decide whether it would be more convenient to solve the system of equations by substitution or elimination.
    67.

    68.

    69.

    70.

    71.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     5.9 · Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables 489

    72.
    73.
    74.

        SECTION 5.9 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine if the points are solutions to the given system of equations.
     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.

For the following exercises, solve the following systems of equations by graphing.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.

    11.
    12.
For the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by substitution.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.
    19.
490 5 · Algebra

           20.

       For the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by elimination.
           21.

           22.

           23.

           24.

           25.

           26.

           27.

           28.

       For the following exercises, solve the system of equations by graphing, substitution, or elimination.
           29.

           30.

           31.

           32.

           33.

           34.

           35.

           36.

       For the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.
           37. Jackie has been offered positions by two cable companies. The first company pays a salary of $14,000 plus a
                  commission of $100 for each cable package sold. The second pays a salary of $20,000 plus a commission of $25
                  for each cable package sold. How many cable packages would need to be sold to make the total pay the same?
           38. Drew burned 1,800 calories Friday playing 1 hour of basketball and canoeing for 2 hours. Saturday she spent 2
                  hours playing basketball and 3 hours canoeing and burned 3,200 calories. How many calories did she burn per
                  hour when playing basketball? How many calories did she burn per hour when canoeing?
           39. Mitchell currently sells stoves for company A at a salary of $12,000 plus a $150 commission for each stove he
                  sells. Company B offers him a position with a salary of $24,000 plus a $50 commission for each stove he sells.
                  How many stoves would Mitchell need to sell for the options to equal?
           40. The total number of calories in 2 hot dogs and 3 cups of cottage cheese is 960 calories. The total number of
                  calories in 5 hot dogs and 2 cups of cottage cheese is 1,190 calories. How many calories are in a hot dog? How
                  many calories are in a cup of cottage cheese?
           41. Andrea and Bart go to the local farmers market to purchase some fruit. Andrea buys 4 apples and 5 oranges,
                  which cost $3.10; Bart buys 4 apples and 6 oranges, which cost $3.40. What is the cost of an orange? What is the
                  cost of an apple?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 491

    42. Jack and Jill go to a local farmers market to purchase some fruit. Jack buys 3 peaches and 2 limes, which cost
          $1.50; Jill buys 6 peaches and 5 limes, which cost $3.45. What is the cost of a peach? What is the cost of a lime?

5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Figure 5.87 Many college students find part-time jobs at places such as coffee shops to help pay for college. (credit:
modification of work "TULLY's COFFEE" by MIKI Yoshihito/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Demonstrate whether an ordered pair is a solution to a system of linear inequalities.
 2. Solve systems of linear inequalities using graphical methods.
 3. Graph systems of linear inequalities.
 4. Interpret and solve applications of linear inequalities.

In this section, we will learn how to solve systems of linear inequalities in two variables. In Systems of Linear Equations in
Two Variables, we learned how to solve for systems of linear equations in two variables and found a solution that would
work in both equations. We can solve systems of inequalities by graphing each inequality (as discussed in Graphing
Linear Equations and Inequalities) and putting these on the same coordinate system. The double-shaded part will be our
solution to the system. There are many real-life examples for solving systems of linear inequalities.

Consider Ming who has two jobs to help her pay for college. She works at a local coffee shop for $7.50 per hour and at a
research lab on campus for $12 per hour. Due to her busy class schedule, she cannot work more than 15 hours per week.
If she needs to make at least $150 per week, can she work seven hours at the coffee shop and eight hours in the lab?

Determining If an Ordered Pair Is a Solution of a System of Linear Inequalities

The definition of a system of linear inequalities is similar to the definition of a system of linear equations. A system of
linear inequalities looks like a system of linear equations, but it has inequalities instead of equations. A system of two
linear inequalities is shown here.

To solve a system of linear inequalities, we will find values of the variables that are solutions to both inequalities. We

solve the system by using the graphs of each inequality and show the solution as a graph. We will find the region on the

plane that contains all ordered pairs  that make both inequalities true. The solution of a system of linear

inequalities is shown as a shaded region in the -coordinate system that includes all the points whose ordered pairs

make the inequalities true.

To determine if an ordered pair is a solution to a system of two inequalities, substitute the values of the variables into
each inequality. If the ordered pair makes both inequalities true, it is a solution to the system.
492 5 · Algebra

         EXAMPLE 5.89
       Determining Whether an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to a System
       Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system:

1.                                    a solution?
2.
                                 and  into both inequalities.
    Solution
1. Is the ordered pair

     We substitute

The ordered pair                 made both inequalities true. Therefore  is a solution to this system.

2. Is the ordered pair           a solution?

We substitute           and           into both inequalities.

The ordered pair                 made one inequality true, but the other one false. Therefore  is not a solution to this
system.

        YOUR TURN 5.89

  Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system:

      1.
      2.

Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities Using Graphical Methods

The solution to a single linear inequality was the region on one side of the boundary line that contains all the points that
make the inequality true. The solution to a system of two linear inequalities is a region that contains the solutions to
both inequalities. We will review graphs of linear inequalities and solve the linear inequality from its graph.

  EXAMPLE 5.90
Solving a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing
Use Figure 5.88 to solve the system of linear inequalities:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 493

                                                    Figure 5.88

    Solution

To solve the system of linear inequalities we look at the graph and find the region that satisfies BOTH inequalities. To do

this we pick a test point and check. Let's us pick  .

Is  a solution to

Is  a solution to

The region containing  is the solution to the system of linear inequalities. Notice that the solution is all the

points in the area shaded twice, which appears as the darkest shaded region.

      YOUR TURN 5.90
1. Use the graph shown to solve the system of linear inequalities:
494 5 · Algebra

Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities

We learned that the solution to a system of two linear inequalities is a region that contains the solutions to both
inequalities. To find this region by graphing, we will graph each inequality separately and then locate the region where
they are both true. The solution is always shown as a graph.
Step 1: Graph the first inequality.
Graph the boundary line.
Shade in the side of the boundary line where the inequality is true.
Step 2: On the same grid, graph the second inequality.
Graph the boundary line.
Shade in the side of that boundary line where the inequality is true.
Step 3: The solution is the region where the shading overlaps.
Step 4: Check by choosing a test point.

  EXAMPLE 5.91

Solving a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing
Solve the system by graphing:

Solution

Graph            by graphing        and testing a point (Figure 5.89). The intercepts are  and  and the

boundary line will be dashed. Test  which makes the inequality false so shade the side that does not contain              .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 495

                                    Figure 5.89

Graph  by graphing                  using the slope  and -intercept  (Figure 5.90). The

boundary line will be dashed. Test  which makes the inequality true, so shade the side that contains  .

                                                                             Figure 5.90
Choose a test point in the solution and verify that it is a solution to both inequalities. The point of intersection of the two
lines is not included as both boundary lines were dashed. The solution is the area shaded twice--which appears as the
darkest shaded region.

        YOUR TURN 5.91

  1. Solve the system by graphing:
496 5 · Algebra

         EXAMPLE 5.92
       Graphing a System of Linear Inequalities
       Solve the system by graphing:

Solution

Graph      by graphing                  (Figure 5.91) and testing a point. The intercepts are       and              and

the boundary line will be dashed. Test           , which makes the inequality true, so shade the side that contains  .

                                                 Figure 5.91

Graph      by graphing           and recognizing that it is a horizontal line through          (Figure 5.92). The boundary

line will be dashed. Test        , which makes the inequality true so shade the side that contains  .

The point                                                         Figure 5.92
           is in the solution, and we have already found it to be a solution of each inequality. The point of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 497

intersection of the two lines is not included as both boundary lines were dashed. The solution is the area shaded twice,
which appears as the darkest shaded region.

        YOUR TURN 5.92
  1. Solve the system by graphing:

Systems of linear inequalities where the boundary lines are parallel might have no solution. We will see this in the next
example.

  EXAMPLE 5.93

Graphing Parallel Boundary Lines with No Solution
Solve the system by graphing:

Solution

Graph     , by graphing                (Figure 5.93) and testing a point. The intercepts are               and      and

the boundary line will be solid. Test  , which makes the inequality false, so shade the side that does not contain

.

                                       Figure 5.93

Graph     by graphing                  using the slope  and -intercept  (Figure 5.94). The

boundary line will be dashed. Test     , which makes the inequality true, so shade the side that contains       .
498 5 · Algebra

                                                                             Figure 5.94
No shared point exists in both shaded regions, so the system has no solution.

        YOUR TURN 5.93
  1. Solve the system by graphing:

Some systems of linear inequalities where the boundary lines are parallel will have a solution. We will see this in the next
example.

  EXAMPLE 5.94

Graphing Parallel Boundary Lines with a Solution
Solve the system by graphing:

Solution

Graph            by graphing        using the slope  and the -intercept                   (Figure 5.95). The

boundary line will be dashed. Test  , which makes the inequality true, so shade the side that contains  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 499

                                            Figure 5.95

Graph  by graphing                          (Figure 5.96) and testing a point. The intercepts are  and                   and

the boundary line will be dashed. Choose a test point in the solution and verify that it is a solution to both inequalities.

Test   , which makes the inequality false, so shade the side that does not contain  .

                                            Figure 5.96

No point on the boundary lines is included in the solution as both lines are dashed. The solution is the region that is

shaded twice which is also the solution to  .

      YOUR TURN 5.94
1. Solve the system by graphing:
500 5 · Algebra

Interpreting and Solving Applications of Linear Inequalities

When solving applications of systems of inequalities, first translate each condition into an inequality. Then graph the
system, as we did above, to see the region that contains the solutions. Many situations will be realistic only if both
variables are positive, so add inequalities to the system as additional requirements.

EXAMPLE 5.95

Applying Linear Inequalities to Calculating Photo Costs
A photographer sells their prints at a booth at a street fair. At the start of the day, they want to have at least 25 photos to
display at their booth. Each small photo they display costs $4 and each large photo costs $10. They do not want to spend
more than $200 on photos to display.

1. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
2. Graph the system.
3. Could they display 10 small and 20 large photos?
4. Could they display 20 large and 10 small photos?

    Solution                                                             . To find the system of equations translate
1. Let the number of small photos and

     the information. They want to have at least 25 photos.

                 The number of small plus the number of large should be at least 25.

                 $4 for each small and $10 for each large must be no more than $200

                 The number of small photos must be greater than or equal to 0.

                 The number of large photos must be greater than or equal to 0.

                                 We have our system of equations.

2. Since         and             (both are greater than or equal to) all solutions will be in the first quadrant. As a result, our

graph shows only Quadrant I. To graph     , graph                     as a solid line. Choose      as a test point.

Since it does not make the inequality true, shade the side that does not include the point     .

To graph                         , graph  as a solid line. Choose        as a test point. Since it does make the

inequality true, shade (bottom left) the side that include the point  .

                                          Figure 5.97

The solution of the system is the region of Figure 5.97 that is shaded the darkest. The boundary line sections that

border the darkly shaded section are included in the solution as are the points on the -axis from  to                               .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 501

3. To determine if 10 small and 20 large photos would work, we look at the graph to see if the point  is in the

solution region. We could also test the point to see if it is a solution of both equations. It is not, so the photographer

would not display 10 small and 20 large photos.

4. To determine if 20 small and 10 large photos would work, we look at the graph to see if the point  is in the

solution region. We could also test the point to see if it is a solution of both equations. It is, so the photographer

could choose to display 20 small and 10 large photos. Notice that we could also test the possible solutions by

substituting the values into each inequality.

        YOUR TURN 5.95

  Omar needs to eat at least 800 calories before going to his team practice. All he wants is hamburgers and cookies,
  and he doesn't want to spend more than $5. At the hamburger restaurant near his college, each hamburger has 240
  calories and costs $1.40. Each cookie has 160 calories and costs $0.50.

      1. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
      2. Graph the system.
      3. Could he eat 3 hamburgers and 2 cookies?
      4. Could he eat 2 hamburgers and 4 cookies?

       VIDEO
      Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities by Graphing (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_Systems)
      Systems of Linear Inequalities (https://openstax.org/r/Systems_of_Linear)

Check Your Understanding

Match the correct graph to its system of inequalities.
    75.

a.
502 5 · Algebra

                   b.
                   c.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 503

       d.

       e.
76.
504 5 · Algebra

                   a.
                   b.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 505

c.
d.
506 5 · Algebra

                   e.
           77.

                   a.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 507

b.
c.
508 5 · Algebra

                   d.

                   e.
           78.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 509

a.
b.
510 5 · Algebra

                   c.
                  d.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                            5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 511

       e.
79.

       a.
512 5 · Algebra

                  b.
                   c.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 513

           d.

            e.

        SECTION 5.10 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the system.
     1.
          A:
          B:
     2.
          A:
          B:
514 5 · Algebra

            3.
                 A:
                 B:

            4.
                 A:
                 B:

            5.
                 A:
                 B:

            6.
                 A:
                 B:

      For the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the darkest shaded region of the
      graph.

            7.
                 A:
                 B:

        Access for free at openstax.org
          5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 515

 8.
      A:
      B:

 9.
      A:
      B:

10.
      A:
516 5 · Algebra

                 B:

           11.
                 A:
                 B:

           12.
                 A:
                 B:

           13.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 5.10 · Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 517

          A:
          B:
For the following exercises, solve the systems of linear equations by graphing.
    14.

    15.

    16.

    17.

    18.

    19.

    20.

    21.

    22.

    23.

    24.

    25.

    26.

    27.

    28.

    29.

    30.

For the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.
A gardener does not want to spend more than $50 on bags of fertilizer and peat moss for their garden. Fertilizer costs
$2 a bag and peat moss costs $5 a bag. The gardener's van can hold at most 20 bags.

    31. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
    32. Graph the system.
    33. Can they buy 15 bags of fertilizer and 4 bags of peat moss?
    34. Can they buy 10 bags of fertilizer and 10 bags of peat moss?
For the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.
A student is studying for their final exams in chemistry and algebra. They only have 24 hours to study, and it will take
them at least 3 times as long to study for algebra than chemistry.
    35. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
    36. Graph the system.
    37. Can they spend 4 hours on chemistry and 20 hours on algebra?
518 5 · Algebra

           38. Can they spend 6 hours on chemistry and 18 hours on algebra?
      For the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.
      Mara is attempting to build muscle mass. To do this, she needs to eat an additional 80 grams of protein or more in a
      day. A bottle of protein water costs $3.20 and a protein bar costs $1.75. The protein water supplies 27 grams of protein
      and the bar supplies 16 grams. Let be the number of water bottles Mara can buy, and let be the number of protein
      bars she can buy. If Mara has $10 dollars to spend:

           39. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
           40. Graph the system.
           41. Could she buy 3 bottles of protein water and 1 protein bar?
           42. Could she buy no bottles of protein water and 5 protein bars?
      For the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.
      Mark is increasing his exercise routine by running and walking at least 4 miles each day. His goal is to burn a minimum
      of 1,500 calories from this exercise. Walking burns 270 calories/mile and running burns 650 calories/mile.
           43. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
           44. Graph the system.
           45. Could he meet his goal by walking 3 miles and running 1 mile?
           46. Could he meet his goal by walking 2 miles and running 2 miles?
      For the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.
      Tension needs to eat at least an extra 1,000 calories a day to prepare for running a marathon. He has only $25 to spend
      on the extra food he needs and will spend it on $0.75 donuts, which have 360 calories each, and $2 energy drinks,
      which have 110 calories.
           47. Write a system of inequalities that models this situation.
           48. Graph the system.
           49. Can he buy 8 donuts and 4 energy drinks and satisfy his caloric needs?
           50. Can he buy 1 donut and 3 energy drinks and satisfy his caloric needs?

    5.11 Linear Programming

      Figure 5.98 The aftermath of an earthquake and tsunami. (credit: modification of work "Earthquake and Tsunami Japan"
      by Climate and Ecosystems Change Adaptation Research University Network/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Learning Objectives

      After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Compose an objective function to be minimized or maximized.
        2. Compose inequalities representing a system application.
        3. Apply linear programming to solve application problems.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5.11 · Linear Programming 519

Imagine you hear about some natural disaster striking a far-away country; it could be an earthquake, a fire, a tsunami, a
tornado, a hurricane, or any other type of natural disaster. The survivors of this disaster need help--they especially need
food, water, and medical supplies. You work for a company that has these supplies, and your company has decided to
help by flying the needed supplies into the disaster area. They want to maximize the number of people they can help.
However, there are practical constraints that need to be taken into consideration; the size of the airplanes, how much
weight each airplane can carry, and so on. How do you solve this dilemma? This is where linear programming comes into
play. Linear programming is a mathematical technique to solve problems involving finding maximums or minimums
where a linear function is limited by various constraints.

As a field, linear programming began in the late 1930s and early 1940s. It was used by many countries during World War
II; countries used linear programming to solve problems such as maximizing troop effectiveness, minimizing their own
casualties, and maximizing the damage they could inflict upon the enemy. Later, businesses began to realize they could
use the concept of linear programming to maximize output, minimize expenses, and so on. In short, linear programming
is a method to solve problems that involve finding a maximum or minimum where a linear function is constrained by
various factors.

        WHO KNEW?

  A Mathematician Invents a "Tsunami Cannon"

  On December 26, 2004, a massive earthquake occurred in the Indian Ocean. This earthquake, which scientists
  estimate had a magnitude of 9.0 or 9.1 on the Richter Scale, set off a wave of tsunamis across the Indian Ocean. The
  waves of the tsunami averaged over 30 feet (10 meters) high, and caused massive damage and loss of life across the
  coastal regions bordering the Indian Ocean.

  Usama Kadri works as an applied mathematician at Cardiff University in Wales. His areas of research include fluid
  dynamics and non-linear phenomena. Lately, he has been focusing his research on the early detection and easing of
  the effects of tsunamis. One of his theories involves deploying a series of devices along coastlines which would fire
  acoustic-gravity waves (AGWs) into an oncoming tsunami, which in theory would lessen the force of the tsunami. Of
  course, this is all in theory, but Kadri believes it will work. There are issues with creating such a device: they would
  take a tremendous amount of electricity to generate an AGW, for instance, but if it would save lives, it may well be
  worth it.

Compose an Objective Function to Be Minimized or Maximized

An objective function is a linear function in two or more variables that describes the quantity that needs to be
maximized or minimized.

EXAMPLE 5.96

Composing an Objective Function for Selling Two Products
Miriam starts her own business, where she knits and sells scarves and sweaters out of high-quality wool. She can make a
profit of $8 per scarf and $10 per sweater. Write an objective function that describes her profit.

     Solution                                                                                        represent profit.
Let represent the number of scarves sold, and let represent the number of sweaters sold. Let                       .
Since each scarf has a profit of $8 and each sweater has a profit of $10, the objective function is

      YOUR TURN 5.96

1. For a fundraiser at school, the Robotics Club is selling bags of apples and bunches of bananas during lunch. They
    will make a profit of $4 per bag of apples and $6 per bunch of bananas. Write an objective function that
    describes the profit the Robotics Club will make.
520 5 · Algebra

EXAMPLE 5.97

Composing an Objective Function for Production
William's factory produces two products, widgets and wadgets. It takes 24 minutes for his factory to make 1 widget, and
32 minutes for his factory to make 1 wadget. Write an objective function that describes the time it takes to make the
products.

Solution

Let equal the number of widgets made; let  equal the number of wadgets made; let  represent total time. The

objective function is            .

        YOUR TURN 5.97

  1. Suppose William has a second factory that can make widgets in 20 minutes and wadgets in 28 minutes. Write an
      objective function that describes the time it takes to make the products.

Composing Inequalities Representing a System Application

For our two examples of profit and production, in an ideal world the profit a person makes and/or the number of
products a company produces would have no restrictions. After all, who wouldn't want to have an unrestricted profit?
However in reality this is not the case; there are usually several variables that can restrict how much profit a person can
make or how many products a company can produce. These restrictions are called constraints.

Many different variables can be constraints. When making or selling a product, the time available, the cost of
manufacturing and the amount of raw materials are all constraints. In the opening scenario with the tsunami, the
maximum weight on an airplane and the volume of cargo it can carry would be constraints. Constraints are expressed as
linear inequalities; the list of constraints defined by the problem forms a system of linear inequalities that, along with the
objective function, represent a system application.

  EXAMPLE 5.98

Representing the Constraints for Selling Two Products
Two friends start their own business, where they knit and sell scarves and sweaters out of high-quality wool. They can
make a profit of $8 per scarf and $10 per sweater. To make a scarf, 3 bags of knitting wool are needed; to make a
sweater, 4 bags of knitting wool are needed. The friends can only make 8 items per day, and can use not more than 27
bags of knitting wool per day. Write the inequalities that represent the constraints. Then summarize what has been
described thus far by writing the objective function for profit and the two constraints.

     Solution
Let represent the number of scarves sold, and let represent the number of sweaters sold. There are two constraints:
the number of items the business can make in a day (a maximum of 8) and the number of bags of knitting wool they can
use per day (a maximum of 27). The first constraint (total number of items in a day) is written as:

Since each scarf takes 3 bags of knitting wool and each sweater takes 4 bags of knitting wool, the second constraint,
total bags of knitting wool per day, is written as:

In summary, here are the equations that represent the new business:
                   ; This is the profit equation: The business makes $8 per scarf and $10 per sweater.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.11 · Linear Programming 521

        YOUR TURN 5.98
  1. For a fundraiser at school, the Robotics Club is selling bags of apples and bunches of bananas during lunch. They

      will make a profit of $4 per bag of apples and $6 per bunch of bananas. Due to school health regulations, the
      club is allowed to have only 20 bags and bunches of fruit on school grounds each day to sell. Another regulation:
      the container where the Robotics Club keeps the fruit has a maximum weight capacity of 70 pounds. Each bag of
      apples weighs 3 pounds, while each bunch of bananas weighs 5 pounds. Write the inequalities that represent
      these constraints. Then summarize the equations that represent this system.

  EXAMPLE 5.99
Representing Constraints for Production
A factory produces two products, widgets and wadgets. It takes 24 minutes for the factory to make 1 widget, and 32
minutes for the factory to make 1 wadget. Research indicates that long-term demand for products from the factory will
result in average sales of 12 widgets per day and 10 wadgets per day. Because of limitations on storage at the factory, no
more than 20 widgets or 17 wadgets can be made each day. Write the inequalities that represent the constraints. Then
summarize what has been described thus far by writing the objective function for time and the two constraints.

     Solution
Let equal the number of widgets made; let equal the number of wadgets made. Based on the long-term demand, we
know the factory must produce a minimum of 12 widgets and 10 wadgets per day. We also know because of storage
limitations, the factory cannot produce more than 20 widgets per day or 17 wadgets per day. Writing those as
inequalities, we have:

The number of widgets made per day must be between 12 and 20, and the number of wadgets made per day must be
between 10 and 17. Therefore, we have:

The system is:

   is the variable for time; it takes 24 minutes to make a widget and 32 minutes to make a wadget.

        YOUR TURN 5.99
  1. Suppose a second factory can make widgets in 20 minutes and wadgets in 28 minutes. Research for this factory

      indicates that long-term demand for products from this second factory will result in average sales of 15 widgets
      per day and 13 wadgets per day. Because of limitations on storage at his factory, no more than 22 widgets or 19
      wadgets can be made each day. Write the inequalities that represent the constraints. Then summarize what has
      been described thus far by writing the objective function for time and the two constraints.

Applying Linear Programming to Solve Application Problems

There are four steps that need to be completed when solving a problem using linear programming. They are as follows:
522 5 · Algebra

Step 1: Compose an objective function to be minimized or maximized.
Step 2: Compose inequalities representing the constraints of the system.
Step 3: Graph the system of inequalities representing the constraints.
Step 4: Find the value of the objective function at each corner point of the graphed region.
The first two steps you have already learned. Let's continue to use the same examples to illustrate Steps 3 and 4.

EXAMPLE 5.100

Solving a Linear Programming Problem for Two Products
Three friends start their own business, where they knit and sell scarves and sweaters out of high-quality wool. They can
make a profit of $8 per scarf and $10 per sweater. To make a scarf, 3 bags of knitting wool are needed; to make a
sweater, 4 bags of knitting wool are needed. The friends can only make 8 items per day, and can use not more than 27
bags of knitting wool per day. Determine the number of scarves and sweaters they should make each day to maximize
their profit.

     Solution
Step 1: Compose an objective function to be minimized or maximized. From Example 5.98, the objective function is

                   .

Step 2: Compose inequalities representing the constraints of the system. From Example 5.98, the constraints are

                 and  .

Step 3: Graph the system of inequalities representing the constraints. Using methods discussed in Graphing Linear

Equations and Inequalities, the graphs of the constraints are shown below. Because the number of scarves ( ) and the

number of sweaters ( ) both must be non-negative numbers (i.e.,  and                              ), we need to graph the system of

inequalities in Quadrant I only. Figure 5.99 shows each constraint graphed on its own axes, while Figure 5.100 shows the

graph of the system of inequalities (the two constraints graphed together). In Figure 5.100, the large shaded region

represents the area where the two constraints intersect. If you are unsure how to graph these regions, refer back to

Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities.

                                                           Figure 5.99 Graphs of each constraint

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     5.11 · Linear Programming 523

                                                   Figure 5.100 Graph of the System of Inequalities

Step 4: Find the value of the objective function at each corner point of the graphed region. The "graphed region" is the
area where both of the regions intersect; in Figure 5.101, it is the large shaded area. The "corner points" refer to each
vertex of the shaded area. Why the corner points? Because the maximum and minimum of every objective function will
occur at one (or more) of the corner points. Figure 5.101 shows the location and coordinates of each corner point.

                                                   Figure 5.101 Graph of Region with Corner Points
Three of the four points are readily found, as we used them to graph the regions; the fourth point, the intersection point
of the two constraint lines, will have to be found using methods discussed in Systems of Linear Equations in Two
Variables, either using substitution or elimination. As a reminder, set up the two equations of the constraint lines:

For this example, substitution will be used.

Substituting  into the first equation for , we have
524 5 · Algebra

Now, substituting the 5 in for in either equation to solve for . Choosing the second equation, we have:

Therefore,       , and           .

To find the value of the objective function,  , put the coordinates for each corner point into the equation

and solve. The largest solution found when doing this will be the maximum value, and thus will be the answer to the

question originally posed: determining the number of scarves and sweaters the new business should make each day to

maximize their profit.

                                    Corner ( , ) Objective Function

The maximum value for the profit occurs when  and         . This means that to maximize their profit, the new

business should make 5 scarves and 3 sweaters every day.

      YOUR TURN 5.100

1. For a fundraiser at school, the Robotics Club is selling bags of apples and bunches of bananas during lunch. They
    will make a profit of $4 per bag of apples and $6 per bunch of bananas. Due to school health regulations, the
    club is allowed to have only 20 bags and bunches of fruit on school grounds each day to sell. Another regulation:
    the container where the Robotics Club keeps the fruit has a maximum weight capacity of 70 pounds. Each bag of
    apples weighs 3 pounds, while each bunch of bananas weighs 5 pounds. Determine the number of bags of
    apples and the number of bags of bananas the Robotics Club should sell each day to maximize their profit.

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Leonid Kantorovich
Leonid Vitalyevich Kantorovich was born January 19, 1912, in St. Petersburg, Russia. Two major events affected young
Leonid's life: when he was five, the Russian Revolution began, making life in St. Petersburg very difficult; so much so
that Leonid's family fled to Belarus for a year. When Leonid was 10, his father died, leaving his mother to raise five
children on her own.
Despite the hardships, Leonid showed incredible mathematical ability at a young age. When he was only 14, he
enrolled in Leningrad State University to study mathematics. Four years later, at age 18, he graduated with what

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.11 · Linear Programming 525

  would be equivalent to a Ph.D. in mathematics.

  Although his primary interests were in pure mathematics, in 1938 he began working on problems in economics.
  Supposedly, he was approached by a local plywood manufacturer with the following question: how to come up with a
  work schedule for eight lathes to maximize output, given the five different kinds of plywood they had at the factory.
  By July 1939, Leonid had come up with a solution, not only to the lathe scheduling problem but to other areas as well,
  such as an optimal crop rotation schedule for farmers, minimizing waste material in manufacturing, and finding
  optimal routes for transporting goods. The technique he discovered to solve these problems eventually became
  known as linear programming. He continued to use this technique for solving many other problems involving
  optimization, which resulted in the book The Best Use of Economic Resources, which was published in 1959. His
  continued work in linear programming would ultimately result in him winning the Nobel Prize of Economics in 1975.

Check Your Understanding

80. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). The objective function for
      profit in this situation is:
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

81. Dave grows wheat ( ) and barley ( ) on a farm. Dave expects to profit $150 per acre for wheat and $180 per acre
      for barley. The objective function for profit in this situation is:
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

82. An antique music store sells two types of vinyl records; 45 rpm records ( ) and 33 rpm records ( ). It makes a profit
      of $2.50 for each 45 rpm record and $6.75 for each 33 rpm record. The objective function for profit in this situation
      is:
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d. None of these

83. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). A table requires 15 board
      feet of wood, while a chair requires 4 board feet of wood. Kellie has 70 board feet available. What is the constraint
      inequality in this situation?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

84. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). The maximum number of
      tables and chairs Kellie can make in any one day is 12. What is the constraint inequality in this situation?
       a.
       b.
       c.
       d.

85. Dave grows wheat ( ) and barley ( ) on a farm. Dave expects to profit $150 per acre for wheat and $180 per acre
      for barley. The cost of seed is $10 per acre for wheat and $15 per acre for barley. Dave can only afford to spend
      $945 on seed. What is the constraint inequality in this situation?
       a.
       b.
526 5 · Algebra

               c.
              d.

       86. Dave grows wheat ( ) and barley ( ) on a farm. Dave expects to profit $150 per acre for wheat and $180 per acre
             for barley. The cost of raising each crop is $30 per acre for wheat and $25 per acre for barley. Dave budgets $1,635
             for the raising of both crops. What is the constraint inequality in this situation?
              a.
              b.
               c.
              d.

       87. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). A table requires 15 board feet
             of wood, while a chair requires 4 board feet of wood. Kellie has 70 board feet available. The maximum number of tables
             and chairs Kellie can make in any one day is 12. The graph of the system of inequalities representing the constraints is:

88. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). A table requires 15 board
      feet of wood, while a chair requires 4 board feet of wood. Kellie has 70 board feet available. The maximum number
      of tables and chairs Kellie can make in any one day is 12. The four corner points of the system are:
       a.
       b.
       c.

89. Kellie makes tables and chairs. Kellie profits $20 from a table ( ), and $10 from a chair ( ). A table requires 15 board
      feet of wood, while a chair requires 4 board feet of wood. Kellie has 70 board feet available. The maximum number
      of tables and chairs Kellie can make in any one day is 12. The maximum profit Kellie can make in one day is:

SECTION 5.11 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the value of the objective function at each corner of the graphed region.

1. Objective Function            .

Access for free at openstax.org
                       5.11 · Linear Programming 527

2. Objective Function
3. Objective Function
4. Objective Function
528 5 · Algebra

             5. Objective Function

       For the following exercises, write the constraint inequalities. The variables to use are given in parentheses.
             6. Fernando builds birdbaths and birdhouses . Fernando can make a total of 7 birdbaths and birdhouses per
                 day. A birdbath costs $8 to make, while a birdhouse costs $6 to make. Fernando has $48 to spend on building
                 materials for the day. When he sells them, Fernando makes $12 in profit on a birdbath and $9 in profit on a
                 birdhouse.
             7. A fruit pie requires 12 ounces of fruit and 15 ounces of dough; a fruit tart requires 4 ounces of fruit and 3
                 ounces of dough. There are 72 ounces of fruit and 60 ounces of dough.
             8. One recipe for chocolate cake calls for 9 ounces of chocolate chips and 4 eggs; a recipe for dark chocolate
                 cake requires 12 ounces of chocolate chips but only 3 eggs. There are 90 ounces of chocolate chips and 36
                 eggs.
             9. To build an outdoor bench , a carpenter needs 10 pieces of wood and 26 nails; to build an outdoor chair ,
                 the carpenter need 8 pieces of wood and 33 nails. There are 92 pieces of wood and 286 nails.

       For the following exercises, graph each of the system of inequalities from Exercises 6-9. Assume all graphs are in the
       first quadrant.

           10. Graph of Exercise 6
           11. Graph of Exercise 7
           12. Graph of Exercise 8
           13. Graph of Exercise 9
       For the following exercises, use the four steps for solving linear programming problems to solve.
           14. A restaurant sells both regular milk and chocolate milk. To make a glass of regular milk ( ), it takes 16 ounces

                  of, well, milk. To make a glass of chocolate milk ( ), it takes 15 ounces of milk and 1 ounce of chocolate
                  flavoring. The restaurant makes a profit of $1.50 per glass on regular milk and $1.00 per glass on chocolate

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   5.11 · Linear Programming 529

      milk. At the beginning of the day, the restaurant has 600 ounces of milk and 24 ounces of chocolate flavoring.
      To maximize profits, how much of each should they sell that day?
15. To make a package of all-beef hot dogs ( ), a factory uses one pound of beef; to make their regular all-meat hot
      dogs ( ), they use ½ pound of beef and ½ pound of pork. The profit on the package of all-beef hot dogs is $2.40
      per pack; the profit on the all-meat hot dogs is $3.20 per pack. If there are 400 pounds of beef and 250 pounds
      of pork available, how many of each product should the factory make to maximize their profit?
16. A toy maker makes two plastic toys, the Ring ( ) and the Stick ( ). The toy maker makes $5 per Ring and $4 per
      Stick. The Ring uses 4 feet of plastic, while the Stick uses 3 feet of plastic. Today the toy maker has 36 feet of
      plastic available. The toy maker also only makes 10 plastic toys per day. To maximize profit, how many of each
      toy should the toy maker make?
17. The toy maker also makes exactly two toys out of wood, the Box ( ) and the Bat ( ). The toy maker makes $6 per
      Box and $7 per Bat. Each Box requires 25 ounces of wood, and each Bat requires 40 ounces of wood. Today the
      toy maker has 260 ounces of wood available. The toy maker also only makes 8 wooden toys per day. To
      maximize profit, how many of each wooden toy should the toy maker make?
18. Sara makes two kinds of kites out of fabric and popsicle sticks. Her Famous Flyer ( ) needs 2 yards of fabric and
      9 popsicle sticks; her Gallant Glider ( ) needs 3 yards of fabric and 18 popsicle sticks. She makes a profit of $4
      on the Famous Flyer and $6 on the Gallant Glider. Today she has 30 yards of fabric and 153 popsicle sticks. How
      many of each kite should she make to maximize her profit?
19. Randy's RV Storage stores two types of Recreational Vehicles (RVs), The Xtra RV ( ) takes up 400 square feet of
      space, while the Yosemite RV ( ) takes up 600 square feet of space. Randy has 55,000 square feet of storage
      space. By local law, he is only allowed to have a maximum of 100 RVs on his property at any one time. He
      charges $60 a month to store an Xtra RV, and $80 a month to store a Yosemite RV. How many of each should he
      store in order to maximize his profit?
20. A Belgian chocolatier wants to introduce two new chocolate bar creations. The first chocolate bar is called Super
      Dark ( ), and it consists of 90 grams of chocolate and 10 grams of sugar. The second chocolate bar is called
      Special Dark ( ), containing 80 grams of chocolate and 20 grams of sugar. She calculates that her company will
      make 1 Euro per bar of Super Dark, and 2 Euros per bar on Special Dark. She first will create some samples to
      sell out of 1,260 grams of chocolate and 240 grams of sugar. How many of each bar should the chocolatier
      create to maximize profit?
21. A juice bottler makes two kinds of specialty juices using different mixtures of pineapple ( ) and orange ( )
      juices. A 16-ounce bottle of Island Delight has 10 ounces of pineapple juice and 6 ounces of orange juice. A
      16-ounce bottle of Sun Fun has 4 ounces of pineapple juice and 12 ounces of orange juice. The bottler makes
      $1.60 per bottle on Island Delight and $1.20 per bottle on Sun Fun. The amounts of juice available today are 640
      ounces of pineapple juice and 768 ounces of orange juice. To maximize profit, how many of each bottle of juice
      should the juice bottler make?
22. Fernando builds birdbaths ( ) and birdhouses ( ). Fernando can make a total of 7 birdbaths and birdhouses per
      day. A birdbath costs $8 to make, while a birdhouse costs $6 to make. Fernando has $48 to spend on building
      materials for the day. When he sells them, Fernando makes $12 in profit on a birdbath and $9 in profit on a
      birdhouse. Determine how many of each Fernando should make to maximize his profit for the day.
23. A farmer grows wheat ( ) and barley ( ) on his 500 acres of cropland. He expects to profit $150 per acre for
      wheat and $180 per acre for barley. The cost of raising each crop (seed, pesticide, etc.) is $60 per acre for wheat
      and $90 per acre for barley. The farmer can budget $36,000 for the growing of the crops. To maximize his profit,
      how many acres of each crop should be grown?
24. A company is going to ship food ( ) and water ( ) to the victims of a tsunami. Each container of food will feed 8
      people for a day, and each container of water will give 12 people their daily water. The food containers each
      weigh 30 pounds and take up 8 cubic feet of space; each container of water weighs 120 pounds, but takes up
      only 2 cubic feet of space. The airplanes lined up to carry the supplies to the victims cannot have its cargo
      exceed 24,000 pounds; also, the total cargo area in the airplanes is 4,000 cubic feet. How many containers of
      food and water can be sent with each plane shipment that maximizes the shipment?
25. Another company will send clothing ( ) and medical supplies ( ) to the victims of the tsunami. Each container of
      clothing contains enough clothing for 12 people; each container of medical supplies can aid 8 people. The
      clothing containers each weigh 50 pounds and take up 6 cubic feet of space; each container of medical supplies
      weighs 20 pounds, and takes up 4 cubic feet of space. The airplanes lined up to carry the supplies to the victims
      cannot have its cargo exceed 24,000 pounds; also, the total cargo area in the airplanes is 3,000 cubic feet. How
      many containers of clothing and medical supplies can be sent with each plane shipment that maximizes the
      shipment?
530 5 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

5.1 Algebraic Expressions

  · variable
  · constant
  · expression
  · equation
  · equal sign
  · term
  · coefficient
  · like terms
  · Distributive Property

5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications

  · linear equation

5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications

  · linear inequality
  · Addition and Subtraction Property of Linear Inequalities
  · Multiplication and Division Property of Linear Inequalities

5.4 Ratios and Proportions

  · ratio
  · proportion
  · constant of proportionality
  · scale
  · construct ratios
  · solve proportions
  · use proportions to solve scaling problems

5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities

  · ordered pair
  · origin
  · points on the axes
  · linear equation in two variables
  · standards form of a linear equation
  · solution
  · linear inequality in two variables
  · solution to a linear inequality
  · boundary line

5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications

  · monomial
  · polynomial
  · binomial
  · trinomial
  · quadratic equation
  · Zero Product Property

5.7 Functions

  · relation
  · domain
  · function
  · mapping
  · vertical line test

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       5 · Chapter Summary 531

5.8 Graphing Functions

  · intercepts of a line
  · slope
  · slope-intercept form

5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables

  · system of linear equations
  · solutions of a system of equations
  · contradictions
  · identities
  · coincident lines
  · consistent system of linear equations
  · inconsistent system of linear equations

5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

  · system of linear inequalities

5.11 Linear Programming

  · linear programming
  · objective function
  · constraint

Key Concepts

5.1 Algebraic Expressions

  · Algebra is useful because it allows us to understand many situations in real life by modeling them with expressions.
  · Algebraic expressions are the building blocks of algebra. From algebraic expressions we can create algebraic

      equations.
  · Algebraic expressions are the building blocks of algebra. From algebraic expressions we can create algebraic

      equations.
  · Algebraic expressions are often simplified and evaluated using the four arithmetic operations.

5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications

  · Solving linear equations means discovering what the value of the variable in a linear equation represents in the
      given conditions.

  · When solving a linear equation, most often you will have one solution; however, a linear equation may have no
      solutions or infinitely many solutions.

5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications

  · Inequalities can be used when the possible values (answers) in a certain situation are numerous, or when the exact
      value (answer) is not known, but it is known to be within a range of possible values.

  · Linear inequalities can be represented using a number line or using interval notation.

5.4 Ratios and Proportions

  · A ratio is a comparison of two numbers. The ratio of two numbers and can be written as: to OR : OR the
      fraction / .

  · All fractions are ratios, but not all ratios are fractions. Ratios make part to part, part to whole, and whole to part
      comparisons. Fractions make part to whole comparisons only.

  · When two ratios are equal, we say they are in proportion or are proportional.
  · Setting up proportions allows us to solve many various situations where three of the four values of the proportion

      are known.

5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities

  · Linear equations can be represented graphically on a rectangular coordinate system.
  · Solving linear equations in two variables means finding the point where two lines intersect. There are three

      possibilities: The lines intersect at exactly one point; the lines do not intersect (they are parallel); or the lines
      intersect everywhere (they are the same line).
532 5 · Chapter Summary

· Solving linear inequalities in two variables means finding a region of possible answers. Every point in this region will
    make both inequalities true statements.

· Plotting points is a standard way to help graph linear equations and linear inequalities.

5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications

· A quadratic equation is an algebraic equation where the highest power (degree) of the equation is two.
· To solve a quadratic equation is to find the value(s) that when substituted in for the variables, will make the

    equation equal to zero.
· There can be two, one, or no solutions to any quadratic equation.
· There are several methods to solve a quadratic equation. These methods include factoring quadratic equations,

    graphic quadratic equations, using the square root method, and using the quadratic formula.

5.7 Functions

· A relation is any set of ordered pairs  . All of the -values of the set are the domain, and all of the -values of the

set are the range.

· A relation is a function if each -value in the domain is assigned to exactly one element in the range. A -value in the

range can have more than one -value assigned to it; but each -value can only be assigned to one -value.

· For the function               is the name of the function, is the domain value variable, and                   is the range

value variable.

· The vertical line test is a test that can be done on the graph of a relation to determine if it is a function.

5.8 Graphing Functions

· Every linear function can be graphically represented by a unique line that shows all the solutions of the equation.
· The points where the graph of a line intersects the -axis and -axis are called the intercepts of the line.
· Most lines will have one -intercept and one -intercept. Only if the line is straight vertical (no -intercept) or

    straight horizontal (no -intercept) will it not have both intercepts. Note that a line that is straight vertical is not a
    function, but a line that is straight horizontal is a function.
· Since any two points determine a straight line, any linear function can be graphed if both intercepts are known.
· The slope of a linear function is the ratio of the vertical change divided by the horizontal change. It is often referred
    to as .

· A formula for finding the slope of linear functions is  for any two points of the linear function               and

.

5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables

· To solve a system of linear equations means finding the point or points where the two linear equations intersect.
· Two lines can intersect at one point, no points if they are parallel, or every point if they are the same equation.
· Systems of linear equations can be solved by graphing, by using substitution, or by using the elimination method.

5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

· To solve a system of linear inequalities means to find the area(s) where the points in that area make all the linear
    inequalities true.

· Systems of linear inequalities can be solved by graphing the linear equations associated with the inequalities, then
    'testing' points to see whether the values of the point make the equation true or not.

5.11 Linear Programming

· Linear programming is a mathematical technique to solve problems involving finding maximums or minimums
    where a linear function is limited by various constraints.

· An objective function is a linear function in two or more variables that describes the quantity that needs to be
    maximized or minimized.

· In linear programming, a constraint is a restriction that affects the maximum or minimum values of an objective
    function.

· Through the creation of objective functions and restraints, a linear system can be developed and solved through
    linear programming.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 5 · Chapter Summary 533

Videos

5.1 Algebraic Expressions

· Q&A: Why We Teach Algebra (https://openstax.org/r/Teach_Algebra)

5.2 Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications

· Solving for a Variable in an Equation (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_for_a_variable)

5.5 Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities

· Graphing Linear Inequalities in Two Variables (https://openstax.org/r/Graphing_linear)

5.6 Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications

· Factoring with the Box Method (Area Model) (https://openstax.org/r/Factoring_with_the_Box)
· Solving Quadratics with the Zero Property (https://openstax.org/r/Zero_Property)
· Solving Quadratics with the Quadratic Formula (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_Quadratics)

5.7 Functions

· Relations and Functions (https://openstax.org/r/Relationsp_and_Functions)
· Domain and Range on Graphs (https://openstax.org/r/Domain)

5.9 Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables

· Practice with Solving Applications of Systems of Equations (https://openstax.org/r/Practice_with_Solving)
· Applications of Systems of Linear Equations (https://openstax.org/r/Applications_of_Systems)

5.10 Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

  · Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities by Graphing (https://openstax.org/r/Solving_Systems)
  · Systems of Linear Inequalities (https://openstax.org/r/Systems_of_Linear)

Formula Review

5.1 Algebraic Expressions

· Distributive Property:

5.3 Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications

· For any numbers , , and if           , then       and             .
· For any numbers , , and , if          , then
· For any numbers , , and ,                         and                .

    multiply or divide by a positive:

if  and        , then                  and

if  and        , then                  and

multiply or divide by a negative:

if  and        , then                  and

if  and        , then                  and

5.8 Graphing Functions

· To calculate slope , use the formula

    ,

where the rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the horizontal change.

· To find the slope of the line between two points  and             , use the formula

Projects

Ratio and Proportion--Comparing Prices, Part 1

Go to your favorite coffee shops and find out what a same sized drink costs at each. You can do something similar for
pizza as well. Find the unit rate (i.e., price per ounce or price per square inch). For example, go to your favorite coffee
place and find the price per units on all their large coffee drinks. Or go to your favorite pizza place and compare prices of
534 5 · Chapter Summary

all their extra-large pizzas (by price per square inch). Write a report on the best deals.

Ratio and Proportion--Comparing Prices, Part 2

Rather than comparing prices of different, but same sized drinks (or pizzas), compare unit prices of the same drinks but
of different sizes. Find out what the best bargain is based on price per ounce, price per square inch, etc. For example,
compare the prices of your favorite soft drink sold at a local store, but in various sizes (i.e., 12-ounce can, 16-ounce
bottle, 20-ounce bottle, 1-liter bottle, and multipacks). Or go to a pizza place and find out what the best bargain is on
their menu, based on price per square inch of pizza. Write a report on the best deals.

Systems of Linear Inequalities--Comparing Cell Phone Plans

Go to the websites of different cell phone companies and compare their plans. Write a report on "the best deals. "Best
Deals" doesn't necessarily mean "cheapest." You will need to look at what each company provides concerning restrictions
(constraints) on minutes to talk. What are the constraints on the cell phone coverage for each company? Do they cover
your area of the country well? Do they cover the entire United States well, or at least areas where you will be travelling?
Is this coverage 5G, or is it less? Can you add a phone easily? Can you bring your previous phone number to this plan?
The possibilities of constraints affecting each plan are several. So your task is to determine which plan is best, based on
not only cost but also all constraints you deem important.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             5 · Chapter Summary 535

Chapter Review

Algebraic Expressions
 1. Translate from algebra to words:

2. Translate from words to algebra: the quotient of and 7.

3. Translate from an English phrase to an expression: A gym charges $5.00 per class and a $20 membership fee.

4. Use parentheses to make the following statement true:

5. Evaluate and simplify  when             .

6. Perform the indicated operation for the expression:

Linear Equations in One Variable with Applications
 7. Solve the linear equations using a general strategy:

8. Solve the linear equations using properties of equations:

9. It costs 30 cents for an ear of corn. Construct a linear equation and solve how much it costs to buy 23 ears of corn.

10. State whether the following equation has exactly one solution, no solution, or infinitely many solutions

11. Solve the formula                 for

Linear Inequalities in One Variable with Applications

12. Graph the inequality  on a number line and write the interval notation.

13. Solve the inequality  , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

14. Construct a linear inequality to solve the application: Daniel wants to surprise his girlfriend with a birthday party at
      her favorite restaurant. It will cost $42.75 per person for dinner, including tip and tax. His budget for the party is
      $500. What is the maximum number of people Daniel can have at the party?

Ratio and Proportions
Christer opened a bag of marbles and counted the number of each color. They found they had 9 green, 4 yellow, 13
black, 11 orange, 8 blue, and 7 red.

    15. What is the ratio of green marbles to orange marbles?
    16. What is the ratio of red marbles to blue marbles?
    17. What is the ratio of sum of the marbles with an odd number of marbles to the sum of the marbles with an even

          number of marbles?
    18. What is the ratio of black marbles to all marbles?

19. Solve:

20. Basil the cat is 17 pounds and 24 inches long from head to tail. In his new movie Claws, he is supersized to 50
      pounds. How many inches long will he be? Round your answer to the nearest tenth.

Graphing Linear Equations and Inequalities
21. For each ordered pair, decide:

        I. Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
       II. Is the point on the line in the graph shown?
536 5 · Chapter Summary

22. Graph                by plotting points.

23. Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality

24. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line          .

25. Graph the linear inequality:              .

Quadratic Equations with Two Variables with Applications

26. Multiply                     .

27. Factor               .

28. Graph and list the solutions to the quadratic equation               .

29. Solve                           by factoring.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     5 · Chapter Summary 537

30. Solve  using the square root method.

31. Solve                  using the quadratic formula.

32. The height in feet, , of an object shot upwards into the air with initial velocity, , after seconds is given by the

formula                    . A firework is shot upwards with initial velocity 130 feet per second. How many seconds

will it take to reach a height of 260 feet? Round to the nearest tenth of a second.

Functions                  at the values                            ,  , , , and .
33. Evaluate the function

34. Determine whether                                     represents a function.

35. Determine whether the mappings represent a function:

36. Determine whether      represent as a function of .

37. Use the vertical line test to determine if the graph represents a function.

38. Use the set of ordered pairs to find the domain and the range.
39. Use the graph shown to find the domain and the range.
538 5 · Chapter Summary

Graphing Functions
40. Find the - and -intercepts on the graph.

41. Graph  using the intercepts.

42. Find the slope of the line in the graph shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   5 · Chapter Summary 539

43. Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between (2, 4) and (5, 7).

44. Identify the slope and -intercept of            .

45. Graph the line of              using its slope and -intercept.

The equation             models the relation between the monthly water bill payment,  , in dollars, and the

number of units of water, , used.

46. Find the payment for a month when 0 units of water were used.

47. Find the payment for a month when 15 units of water were used.

48. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

49. Graph the equation.

System of Linear Equations in Two Variables
50. Determine if (0, 1) and (2, 3) are solutions to the given system of equations.

51. Solve the system of equations by graphing.

52. Solve the system of equations by substitution.

53. Solve the systems of equations by elimination.

54. Kenneth currently sells suits for company A at a salary of $22,000 plus a $10 commission for each suit sold.
      Company B offers him a position with a salary of $28,000 plus a $4 commission for each suit sold. How many suits
      would Kenneth need to sell for the options to be equal?

Systems of Linear Inequalities in Two Variables
55. Determine whether (0, 0) and (2, 3) are solutions to the system.

56. Determine whether (0, 0) and (6, -8) are solutions to the darkest shaded region of the graph.
540 5 · Chapter Summary

57. Solve the systems of linear equations by graphing.

Jocelyn desires to increase both her protein consumption and caloric intake. She desires to have at least 35 more grams
of protein each day and no more than an additional 200 calories daily. An ounce of cheddar cheese has 7 grams of
protein and 110 calories. An ounce of parmesan cheese has 11 grams of protein and 22 calories.

    58. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
    59. Graph the system.
    60. Could she eat 1 ounce of cheddar cheese and 3 ounces of parmesan cheese?
    61. Could she eat 2 ounces of cheddar cheese and 1 ounce of parmesan cheese?

Linear Programming
A toy maker makes two plastic toys, the Ring ( ) and the Stick ( ). The toy maker makes $4 per Ring and $6 per Stick.
The Ring uses 3 feet of plastic, while the Stick uses 5 feet of plastic. Today the toy maker has 40 feet of plastic available.
The toy maker also only makes 10 plastic toys per day. To maximize profit, how many of each toy should the toy maker
make?

    62. Find the objective function.
    63. Write the constraints as a system of inequalities.
    64. Graph of the system of inequalities.
    65. Find the value of the objective function at each corner point of the graphed region.
    66. To maximize his profit, how many of each toy should the toymaker make?

Chapter Test

 1. Perform the indicated operation for the expression:

 2. Solve the linear equations using properties of equations:

 3. It costs 55 cents for a stamp. Construct a linear equation and solve how much it cost to buy 50 stamps.

4. Solve the formula             for .

5. Solve the inequality          , graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

6. Construct a linear inequality to solve the application: Bella wants to buy a round of shakes for her friends. It will
    cost $4.75 per shake, including tip and tax. Her budget is $50. What is the maximum number of friends Bella can
    buy shakes for?

7. Manneken Pis is a famous statue in Brussels, Belgium. It is 24 inches tall and weighs 37.5 pounds. The average

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5 · Chapter Summary 541

man is 69 inches tall and weighs 198 pounds. Is Manneken Pis proportional to the average male?

8. Graph   by plotting points.

9. Graph the linear inequality:

10. Graph and list the solutions to the quadratic equation     .

11. Solve  by factoring.

12. Solve                  using the quadratic formula.

13. Evaluate the function         at the values             ,  , , , and .

14. Use the vertical line test to determine if the given graph represents a function.

15. Use the graph shown to find the domain and the range.

16. Graph  using the intercepts.
542 5 · Chapter Summary

17. Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between (1, 4) and (3, 5).

18. Identify the slope and -intercept of            .

19. Graph the line of            using its slope and -intercept.

The equation                     , models the cost of visiting the Cat Café in San Diego for one hour.  , in dollars, is the

total cost and the cost per person, , is $15 plus a $4.50 reservation fee.

20. Find the payment for two people.

21. Find the payment for five people.

22. Interpret the slope and -intercept of the equation.

23. Graph the equation.

24. Solve the system of equations by graphing.

25. Solve the system of equations by substitution.

26. Solve the systems of equations by elimination.

27. Anna goes to the concession stand at a movie theater. She buys 5 popcorns and 4 large sodas and pays a total of
      $60. During intermission, Isabelle goes to the concession stand. She buys 1 popcorn and 2 large sodas and pays a
      total of $18. What is the cost of one popcorn, and the cost of one large soda?

28. Solve the systems of linear equations by graphing.

Juliette is selling fresh lemonade and cupcakes. She sells a cup of lemonade for $2 and a cupcake for $3. She needs to
make at least $100 to donate to the local cat sanctuary. She needs to sell at least 20 cups of lemonade.

    29. Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
    30. Graph the system.
    31. Could she sell 30 cups of lemonade and 10 cupcakes and make $100?
    32. Could she sell 20 cups of lemonade and 30 cupcakes and make $100?

A toy maker makes exactly two toys out of wood; the Box ( ) and the Bat ( ). He makes $5 per Box and $6 per Bat. Each
Box requires 30 ounces of wood, and each Bat requires 45 ounces of wood. Today the toy maker has 270 ounces of
wood available. The toy maker also only makes 8 wooden toys per day. To maximize profit, how many of each wooden
toy should the toy maker make?

    33. Find the objective function.
    34. Write the constraints as a system of inequalities.
    35. Graph of the system of inequalities.
    36. Find the value of the objective function at each corner point of the graphed region.
    37. To maximize profit, how many of each toy should the toymaker make?

Access for free at openstax.org
                     6 · Introduction 543

6  MONEY MANAGEMENT

Figure 6.1 Financial health helps you realize your goals. (credit: modification of work "Budget and Bills" by Alabama
Extension/Flickr, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Understanding Percent
  6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax
  6.3 Simple Interest
  6.4 Compound Interest
  6.5 Making a Personal Budget
  6.6 Methods of Savings
  6.7 Investments
  6.8 The Basics of Loans
  6.9 Understanding Student Loans
  6.10 Credit Cards
  6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car
  6.12 Renting and Homeownership
  6.13 Income Tax

      Introduction

The topic of money management is a broad and sometimes complex one. Ultimately, personal money management
involves managing both our debt and also our savings and investments.

In 2021, the average American had consumer debt balance of $96,371. Nearly $100,000 per person. And less than 25% of
Americans are debt free. Consumer debt can include mortgages, credit cards, as well as student loans. A key question all
consumers should consider is how to manage debt and not become overburdened by it. The first step is to create a
budget, which puts earnings into perspective, indicating what we can, and cannot, afford. A budget also entails setting
aside certain funds for savings and investment, which help us achieve our short- and long-term goals.

Creating a budget requires an understanding of how money--debt and savings--works. Initially, percentages and
interest need to be understood. They drive most of what happens with debt and savings. With that understanding,
discussions of buying a house, a car, or incurring credit card debt can be addressed from a financial perspective. All the
while, retirement is waiting. Preparing for retirement involves saving and saving earlier rather than later. The power of
compound interest is on full display when saving early.

This chapter covers some of the basics of money management: percentages, interest, budgeting, debt (student loans,
mortgage, car, credit cards), savings, investments, and taxes.
544 6 · Money Management

    6.1 Understanding Percent

       Figure 6.2 The federal budget describes how money is spent and how money is earned. (credit: "Breakdown of revenues
       and outlays in 2021 US Federal budget" Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Define and calculate percent.
        2. Convert between percent, decimal, and fractional values.
        3. Calculate the total, percent, or part.
        4. Solve application problems involving percents.
       In 2020, the U.S. federal government budgeted $3.5 billion for the National Park Service (https://openstax.org/r/
       National_Park_Service), which appears to be a very large number (and is!) and a large portion of the total federal budget.
       However, the total outlays from the U.S. federal government in 2020 was $6.6 trillion (https://openstax.org/r/
       U.S._federal_government). So, the amount budgeted for the National Park Service was less than one-tenth of 1 percent,
       or 1/10%, of the total outlays. This percent describes a specific number. Understanding that ratio puts the $3.5 billion
       budgeted to the National Park Service in perspective.
       This chapter focuses on percent as a primary tool for understanding money management. The interest paid on debt, the
       interest earned through investments, and even taxes are entirely determined using percent. This section introduces the
       basics of working with this invaluable tool.

     Define and Calculate Percent

       The word percent comes from the Latin phrase per centum, which means "by the hundred." So any percent is a number
       divided by 100. Changing a percent to a fraction is to write the percent in its fractional form. To write % in its fractional
       form is to write the percent as the fraction .

             A percent need not be an integer and does not have to be less than 100.

         EXAMPLE 6.1
       Rewriting a Percent as a Fraction
       Rewrite the following as fractions:
        1. 18%

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       6.1 · Understanding Percent 545

2. 84%
3. 38.7%
4. 213%

    Solution                 = 18, 18% in fractional form is .
1. Using the definition and  = 84, 84% in fractional form is .
2. Using the definition and  = 38.7, 38.7% in fractional form is .
3. Using the definition and  = 213, 213% in fractional form is .
4. Using the definition and

      YOUR TURN 6.1

Rewrite the following as fractions:
    1. 3%
    2. 94%
    3. 67.2%
    4. 670%

Convert Between Percent, Decimal, and Fractional Values

When any calculation with a percent is to be performed, the form of the percent must be changed, either to its fractional
form or its decimal form. We can change a percent into decimal form by dividing the percent by 100 and representing
the result as a decimal.

FORMULA

The decimal form of % is found by calculating the decimal value of  .

  EXAMPLE 6.2

Converting a Percent to Decimal Form
Convert the following percents to decimal form:

 1. 17%
 2. 7%
 3. 18.45%

     Solution
 1. To convert 17% to its decimal form, divide 17 by 100. This moves the decimal two places to the left, resulting in 0.17.

      The decimal form of 17% is 0.17.
 2. To convert 7% to its decimal form, divide 7 by 100. This moves the decimal two places to the left, resulting in 0.07.

      The decimal form of 7% is 0.07.
 3. To convert 18.45% to its decimal form, divide 18.45 by 100. This moves the decimal two places to the left, resulting in

      0.1845. The decimal form of 18.45% is 0.1845.

      YOUR TURN 6.2

Convert the following percents to decimal form:
    1. 9%
    2. 24%
    3. 2.18%
546 6 · Money Management

You should notice that, to convert from percent to decimal form, you can simply move the decimal two places to the left
without performing the division.

FORMULA

To convert the number from decimal form to percent, multiply by 100 and place a percent sign, %, after the

number,                   .

EXAMPLE 6.3

Converting the Decimal Form of a Percent to Percent
Convert each of the following to percent:

1. 0.34
2. 4.15
3. 0.0391

    Solution                        = 0.34, we calculate       , which gives us 34%.
1. Using the formula and            = 4.15, we calculate       , which gives us 415%.
2. Using the formula and            = 0.0391, we calculate
3. Using the formula and                                             , which gives us 3.91%.

      YOUR TURN 6.3

Convert the following to percent:
    1. 0.41
    2. 0.02
    3. 9.2481

You should notice that, to convert from decimal form to percent form, you can simply move the decimal two places to
the right without performing the multiplication.

Calculate the Total, Percent, or Part

The word "of" is used to indicate multiplication using fractions, as in "one-fourth of 56." To find "one-fourth of 56" we
would multiply 56 by one-fourth. We can think of percents as fractions with a specific denominator--100. So, to calculate
"25% of 52," we multiply 52 by 25%. But, first we need to convert the percent to either fractional form (25/100) or decimal
form. Using the decimal form of 25% we have 0.25 × 52, which equals 13.

In this problem, 52 is the total or base, 25 is the percentage, and 13 is the percentage of 52, or the part of 52. This is
sometimes referred to as the amount.

FORMULA

The mathematical formula relating the total (base), the percent in decimal form, and the part (amount) is

                             , or,                          .

      In all calculations, the percent is expressed in decimal form.

Knowing any two of the values in our formula allows us to calculate the third value. In the following example, we know
the total and the percent, and are asked to find the percentage of the total.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      6.1 · Understanding Percent 547

  EXAMPLE 6.4
Finding the Percent of a Total
 1. Determine 70% of 3,500
 2. Determine 156% of 720

     Solution
 1. The total is = 3,500, and the percent is = 70. The decimal form of 70% is 0.70. To find the part, or percent of the

      total, substitute those values into the formula and calculate.

      From this, we say that 70% of 3,500 is 2,450.
 2. The total is = 720, and the percent is = 156. The decimal form of 156% is 1.56. To find the part, or percent of the

      total, substitute those values into the formula and calculate.

      From this, we say that 156% of 720 is 1,123.2.

        YOUR TURN 6.4
      1. Determine 26% of 1,300.
      2. Determine 225% of 915.

       VIDEO
      Finding Percent of a Total (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem1)
In the previous example, we knew the total and the percent and found the part using our formula. We may instead know
the percent and the part, but not the total. We can use our formula again to solve for the total.
  EXAMPLE 6.5
Finding the Total from the Percent and the Part
 1. What is the total if 35% of the total is 70?
 2. What is the total if 10% of the total is 4,000?
     Solution
 1. Step 1: The percent is 35, which in decimal form is 0.35. We were given that 35% of the total is 70, so the part is 70.
      We are to find the total. Substituting into the formula, we have

      Step 2: To find the total, we solve the equation for the total.

      From this we see that 200 is the total, or, that 35% of 200 is 70.
548 6 · Money Management

        2. Step 1: The percent is 10, which in decimal form is 0.1. We were given that 10% of the total is 4,000, so the part is
             4,000. Substituting into the formula, we have

             Step 2: To find the total, we solve the equation for the total.

             From this we see that 40,000 is the total, or that 10% of 40,000 is 4,000.

               YOUR TURN 6.5
             1. What is the total if 18% of the total is 45?
             2. What is the total if 15% of the total is 900?
              VIDEO
             Finding the Total from the Percent and the Part (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem2)
       Similarly, the percent can be found if the total and the percent of the total (the part) are known. This will result in the
       decimal form of the percent, so it must be converted to percent form.
         EXAMPLE 6.6
       Finding the Percent from the Total and the Part
        1. What percent of 500 is 175?
        2. What percent of 228 is 155?
            Solution
        1. Step 1: The total is 500, the percent of the total is 175. Substituting into the formula, we have

             Step 2: To find the percent, we solve the equation for the percent.

             We see the percent in decimal form is 0.35. Converting from the decimal form yields 35%. We say that 175 is 35% of
             500.
        2. Step 1: The total is 228, the percent of the total is 155. Substituting into the formula, we have

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     6.1 · Understanding Percent 549

Step 2: To find the percent, we solve the equation for the percent.

We see the percent is 0.6798 (rounded to four decimal places). Converting from the decimal form yields 67.98%. We
say that 155 is 67.98% of 228.

      YOUR TURN 6.6

Find the percent in the following:
    1. Total is 40, percent of the total is 25
    2. Total is 730, percent of the total is 292

VIDEO
Finding the Percent When the Total and the Part Are Known (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem3)

Solve Application Problems Involving Percents

Percents are frequently used in finance, research, science experiments, and even casual conversation. Understanding
these types of values helps when consuming media or discussing finances, for instance. Effectively working with and
interpreting numbers and percents will help you become an informed consumer of this information.

In most cases, working through what is presented requires you to identify that you are indeed working with a question
of percents, which two of the three values that are related through percents are known, and which of the three values
you need to find.

EXAMPLE 6.7

Retention Rate at College
Justine applies to a medium size university outside her hometown and finds out that the retention rate (percent of
students who return for their sophomore year) for the 2021 academic year at the university was 84%. During a visit to
the registrar's office, she finds out that 1,350 people had enrolled in academic year 2021. How many students from the
academic year 2021 are returning for the 2022 academic year?

Solution

The percent of students who will return for the 2022 academic year (the retention rate) is 84%. The total number of

students who enrolled in the 2021 academic year was 1,350. This means the percent is known and the total is known.

From this, we can determine the number of students who will return (percent of the total) for the 2022 academic year

using the formula               . Substituting into the formula and calculating, we find that the number of

students that are returning is

So 1,134 students will return for the 2022 academic year.

        YOUR TURN 6.7
  1. Harris works the bookstore in their hometown. During one particular day, the store had total sales of $1,765, of
550 6 · Money Management

which Harris sold 30%. What were Harris's total sales that day?

EXAMPLE 6.8

Percent of Chemistry Majors
Cameron enrolls in a calculus class. In this class of 45 students, there are 18 chemistry majors. What percent of the class
are chemistry majors?

Solution

In this situation, the percent is to be determined. We know the total number of students, 45, and the part of the students

that are chemistry majors, 18. Using that information and the formula  , the percent can be found.

Substituting and solving, we have

Converting the 0.4 from decimal form, we find that 40% of the students in the calculus class are chemistry majors.

        YOUR TURN 6.8

  1. At the Fremont County fair, there were 2,532 adult visitors. Of these, 1,679 purchased the Adult Mega Pass. What
      percent of the adult visitors purchased the Adult Mega Pass?

  EXAMPLE 6.9

Total Sales and Commission
Mariel makes a 20% commission on every sale she makes. One week, her commission check is for $153.00. What were
her total sales that week?

     Solution
In this problem, Mariel's total sales is to be determined. We know the percent she earns is 20%. We also know that her
sales commission was $153.00, which is the percent of the total. Using this information and the formula

                               we can find Mariel's total sales. The decimal form of 20% is 0.2. The part, or percent of the total, is
153. Substituting and solving, we obtain

Mariel's total sales were $765.00.
        YOUR TURN 6.9

  1. Mina's family has replaced 65% of their home's older light bulbs with LED bulbs. If they now have 52 LED bulbs,
      how many total lightbulbs are in Mina's house?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      6.1 · Understanding Percent 551

        WHO KNEW?

  LED Lightbulbs
  According to the energy website from the U.S. government (https://openstax.org/r/U.S._government), LED lightbulbs
  use at least 75% less energy than incandescent bulbs. They also last up to 25 times as long as an incandescent bulb. If
  lighting is a significant percent of your electrical use, replacing all incandescent bulbs with LED bulbs will significantly
  reduce your electric bill.

Check Your Understanding

 1. What is the denominator for any percent?
 2. Convert 38.7% to decimal form.
 3. What is 68% of 280?
 4. Find the total if 41% of the total is 342. If necessary, round to two decimal places.
 5. TikTok has an estimated 80,000,000 (80 million) registered users in the United States. The population of the United

      States is 332,403,650. What percent of the U.S. population are registered TikTok users? If necessary, round to two
      decimal places.
 6. An Amazon fulfillment center needs to hire 20% more drivers. If there are currently 80 drivers, how many more
      drivers will be hired?

        SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES

For any answer, round to two decimal places, if necessary.
In the following exercises, rewrite the percent as a fraction

     1. 45%
     2. 9.1%
     3. 8%
     4. 673%
In the following exercises, rewrite the percent in decimal form.
     5. 18%
     6. 9%
     7. 71.2%
     8. 934%
 9. Find 35% of 250
10. Calculate 83.1% of 390
11. Calculate 3.1% of 500
12. Calculate 750% of 620
13. If 40% of the total is 32, how much is the total?
14. If 3% of the total is 6.32, how much is the total?
15. If 150% of the total is 61.9, how much is the total?
16. If 18.1% of the total is 18.5, how much is the total?
17. 13 is what percent of 40?
18. 89 is what percent of 500?
19. 31 is what percent of 73?
20. 593.2 is what percent of 184.5?
21. 36 people in a village of 150 want to install a new splashpad at the local playground. What percent of the village
552 6 · Money Management

      wants to install the new splashpad?

22. Mitena is enrolled in a movie appreciation course. There are 84 students (including Mitena) in the course. After
      having the students fill out a survey, the professor informs the students that 45.2% chose horror as their favorite
      movie genre. How many students in Mitena's class chose horror as their favorite movie genre? Round off to the
      nearest integer.

23. Jadyn's dorm has a "Rick and Morty night" every Wednesday during the semester. One Wednesday, 27 students
      from the dorm come to watch the TV show Rick and Morty. Jadyn knows this is 30% of the dorm's residents. How
      many students reside in the dorm?

24. Percent Error. When performing a scientific experiment that results in quantities of some sort, such as mass in
      chemistry or momentum in physics, the percent error is often computed. Percent error, % , is the percent by
      which the value obtained in an experiment, the observed value , is different than the value that was expected,
      the expected value , in the experiment. The formula is below.

Jim and Kelly are working on a chemistry experiment and expect the result to be 50 grams. However, their result
was 48.7 grams. Find Jim and Kelly's percent error.

25. Percent Error. See Exercise 24 for the definition of percent error.

Hailey and Elsbeth are using an experiment to determine Earth's gravity. The expected value is   . Their

experiment gives them a value of  . Find the percent error for Hailey and Elsbeth's experiment.

6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax

Figure 6.3 Sale prices are often described as percent discounts. (credit: "Close-up of a discount sign" by Ivan Radic/Flickr,
CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:

 1. Calculate discounts.
 2. Solve application problems involving discounts.
 3. Calculate markups.
 4. Solve application problems involving markups.
 5. Compute sales tax.
 6. Solve application problems involving sales tax.

Many people first encounter percentages during a retail transaction such as a percent discount (SALE! 25% off!!), or
through sales tax ("Wait, I thought this was $1.99?"), a report that something has increased by some percentage of the
previous value (NOW! 20% more!!). These are examples of percent decreases and percent increases. In this section, we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 553

discuss decrease, increase, and then the case of sales tax.

Calculating Discounts

Retailers frequently hold sales to help move merchandise. The sale price is almost always expressed as some amount off
the original price. These are discounts, a reduction in the price of something. The price after the discount is sometimes
referred to as the reduced price or the sale price.

When a reduction is a percent discount, it is an application of percent, which was introduced in Understanding Percent.

The formula used was  . In a discount application, the discount plays the role of the part, the

percent discount is the percentage, and the original price plays the role of the total.

FORMULA

The formula for a discount based on a percentage is                                                 , with the percent
discount expressed as a decimal. The price of the item after the discount is                                              .

These are often combined into the following formula

When the original price and the percent discount are known, the discount and the sale price can be directly computed.

EXAMPLE 6.10

Calculating Discount for a Percent Discount
Calculate the discount for the given price and discount percentage. Then calculate the sale price.

1. Original price = $75.80; percent discount is 25%
2. Original price = $168.90; percent discount is 30%

    Solution                                                                             , we find that the discount is
1. Substituting the values into the formula                                                              , or $56.85.

                                                   . The discount is $18.95.
     The sale price of the item is then

2. Substituting the values into the formula                                              , we find that the discount is
                                                     . The discount is $50.67.                               , or $118.23.

     The sale price of the item is then

      YOUR TURN 6.10

Calculate the discount for the given original price and discount percentage. Then calculate the sale price.
    1. Original price = $1,550.00; percent discount is 32%
    2. Original price = $27.50; percent discount is 10%

Sometimes the original price and the sale price of an item is known. From this, the percent discount can be computed

using the formula                                                             , by solving for the percent discount.

EXAMPLE 6.11

Calculating the Percent Discount from the Original and Sale Prices
Determine the percent discount based on the given original and sale prices.

 1. Original price = $1,200.00; sale price = $900.00
 2. Original price = $36.70; sale price = $29.52
554 6 · Money Management

    Solution
1. Step 1. Find the discount. Using the original price and the sale price, we can find the discount with the formula

                                                         . Substituting and calculating, we find the discount to be
                                                . Solving for the discount gives $300.00.

Step 2. Find the percent discount. Substituting the discount of $300.00 and the original price of $1,200.00, into the

formula                   , we can find the percent discount.

Converting to percent form, the percent discount is 25%.

2. Step 1. Find the discount. Using the original price and the sale price, we can find the discount with the formula
                                                         . Substituting and calculating, we find the discount to be

                                         . Solving for the discount gives $7.38.

Step 2. Find the percent discount. Substituting the discount of $7.38 and the original price of $36.70, into the

formula                   , we can find the percent discount.

Converting to percent form, the percent discount is 20%.

      YOUR TURN 6.11

Determine the percent discount based on the given original and sale prices.
    1. Original price = $250.00; sale price = $162.50
    2. Original price = $19.50; sale price = $17.16

Sometimes the sale price and the percent discount of an item are known. From this, the original price can be found. To

avoid multiple steps, though, the formula that we will use is                                                                             . The

original price can be found by solving this equation for the original price.

EXAMPLE 6.12

Calculating the Original Price from the Percent Discount and Sale Price
Determine the original price based on the percent discount and sale price.

 1. Percent discount 10%; sale price = $450.00
 2. Percent discount 75%, sale price = $90.00

     Solution
 1. Using the percent discount and the sale price, we can find the original price with the formula

                                                                              . Substituting and solving for the original price, we find

      The original price of the item was $500.00.
 2. Using the percent discount and the sale price, we can find the original price with the formula

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 555

                                             . Substituting and solving for the original price, we find

The original price of the item was $360.00.

        YOUR TURN 6.12

  Determine the original price based on the percent discount and sale price.
      1. Percent discount 15%; sale price = $11.05
      2. Percent discount 9%; sale price = $200.20

Solve Application Problems Involving Discounts

In application problems, identify what is given and what is to be found, using the terms that have been learned, such as
discount, original price, percent discount, and sale price. Once you have identified those, use the appropriate formula (or
formulas) to find the solution(s).

  EXAMPLE 6.13

Determine Discount and New Price a Sale Rack Item
The sale rack at a clothing store is marked "All Items 30% off." Ian finds a shirt that had an original price of $80.00. What
is the discount on the shirt? What is the sale price of the shirt?

     Solution
We are asked to find the discount, and the sale price. We know the percent discount is 30%, or 0.30 in decimal form. The
original price was $80.
Substituting into the percent discount formula, we find that the discount is

                                                                                       .
The discount is $24 on that shirt. The sale price is the original price minus the discount, so the sale price is $80 - $24 =
$56.

      YOUR TURN 6.13

1. A bed originally priced at $550, but is on sale, with a 60% discount. What is the discount on the bed? What is the
    sale price of the bed?

EXAMPLE 6.14

Determine the Percent Discount of a Bus Pass
An annual pass on the city bus is priced at $240. The student price, though, is $168. What is the percent discount for
students for the bus pass?

Solution

We know the original price of the item, $240. We also know the sale price of the item, $168. From this we know the

discount is   . Substituting these values into the formula                                                              ,

we can find the percent discount.
556 6 · Money Management

The student percent discount on the bus pass is 30%.

      YOUR TURN 6.14

1. A pharmacy offers students at a nearby college a discount. Jerry purchases ibuprofen, which had an original
    price of $15.80. The cost to Jerry after the student discount was $13.43. What is the percent discount for students
    at the pharmacy?

EXAMPLE 6.15

Finding the Original Price of a New Pair of Tires
Kendra's car developed a flat, and the tire store told her that two tires had to be replaced. She got a 10% discount on the
pair of tires, and the sale price came to $189.00. What was the original price of the tires?

Solution

Using the percent discount and the sale price, we can find the original price with the

formula                                               . Substituting and solving for the original price, we find

The original price of the two tires Kendra bought was $210.00.

        YOUR TURN 6.15
  1. Marisol needed to buy a new microwave. She got a 26% discount. The sale price Marisol paid was $43.66. What

      was the original price of the microwave?

       VIDEO
      Computing Price Based on a Percent Off Coupon (https://openstax.org/r/Computing_Price_Based)

  WORK IT OUT
  There are cases where retailers allow multiple discounts to be applied. However, it is rare that the discount
  percentages are added together. For example, if you have a 15% coupon and qualify for a 20% price reduction, the
  retailer typically does not add those two percentages together to determine the new price. The retailer instead
  applies one discount, then applies the second discount to the price obtained after the first discount was deducted.
  Research the original prices of two different laptops offered by one retail outlet. Assume you will receive a student
  discount of 12% and your outlet of choice is having a 15% off sale on all laptops.
  For each laptop:
   1. List the original price and calculate the price after applying the student discount (12%) only.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 557

2. Then find the price after applying the sale discount (15% off) to the price found in Step 1.
3. Determine the total saved on the laptop and what percent discount the total savings represents.
4. Now, apply the discounts in reverse order (first the sale discount, then the student discount).
5. Note anything interesting about your findings.

Calculate Markups

When retailers purchase goods to sell, they pay a certain price, called the cost. The retailer then charges more than that
amount for the goods. This increase is called the markup. This selling price, or retail price, is what the retailer charges
the consumer in order to pay their own costs and make a profit. Markup, then is very similar to discount, except we add
the markup, while we subtract the discount.

FORMULA

The formula for a markup based on a percentage is                               , with the percent markup
expressed as a decimal. The price of the item after the markup is                           .

These are often combined into the following formula

It should be noted that the formulas used for a markup are very similar to those for a discount, with addition replacing
the subtraction.

EXAMPLE 6.16

Determining the Retail Price Based on the Cost and the Percent Markup
Calculate the markup for the given cost and markup percentage. Then calculate the retail price.

1. Cost = $62.00; percent markup is 15%
2. Cost = $750.00; percent markup is 45%

    Solution                                                                                   , we find that the markup is
1. Substituting the values into the formula
                                                                                , or $62.00 + $9.30 = $71.30.
                                                 . The markup is $9.30.                        , we find that the markup is
     The retail price of the item is then
2. Substituting the values into the formula                                     , or $750.00 + $337.50 = $1,087.50.

                                                      . The markup is $337.50.
     The retail price of the item is then

      YOUR TURN 6.16

Calculate the markup for the given cost and markup percentage. Then calculate the retail price.
    1. Cost = $1,800.00; percent markup is 22%
    2. Cost = $10.50; percent markup is 10%

Sometimes the cost and the retail price of an item are known. From this, the percent markup can be computed using the

formula       , by solving for the percent markup.

EXAMPLE 6.17

Calculating the Percent Markup from the Cost and Retail Price
Determine the percent markup based on the given cost and retail price. Round percentages to two decimal places.

 1. Cost = $90.00; retail price = $103.50
558 6 · Money Management

2. Cost = $5.20; retail price = $9.90

Solution

1. Step 1: Using the cost and the retail price, we can find the markup with the formula                             .

Substituting and calculating, we find the markup to be                     . Solving for the markup gives

$13.50.

Step 2: After substituting the markup, $13.50, and the original price, $90.00, into the formula

                                        , we can find the percent markup.

Converting to percent form, the percent markup is 15%.

2. Step 1: Using the cost and the retail price, we can find the markup with the formula                             .

Substituting and calculating, we find the markup to be                     . Solving for the markup gives $4.70.

Step 2: After substituting the markup, $4.70, and the original price, $5.20, into the formula

                                        , we can find the percent markup.

Converting to percent form, the percent markup is 90.38%.

      YOUR TURN 6.17

Determine the percent markup based on the given cost and retail price. Round percentages to two decimal places.
    1. Cost = $120.00; retail price = $190.00
    2. Cost = $0.38; retail price = $1.14

Sometimes the retail price and the percent markup of an item are known. From this, the cost can be found. To avoid

multiple steps, though, the formula that we will use is                                                            . The cost can be found

by solving this equation for the cost.

EXAMPLE 6.18

Calculating the Cost from the Percent Markup and Retail Price
Determine the cost based on the percent markup and retail price.

 1. Percent markup 20%; retail price = $10.62
 2. Percent markup 125%; retail price = $26.55

     Solution
 1. Using the percent markup and the retail price, we can find the cost with the formula

                                                                 . Substituting and solving for the cost, we find

      The cost of the item was $8.85.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                   6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 559

2. Using the percent markup and the retail price, we can find the cost with the formula
                                                                . Substituting and solving for the original price, we find

The cost of the item was $11.80.

      YOUR TURN 6.18

Determine the cost based on the percent markup and retail price.
    1. Percent markup 15%; retail price = $40.25
    2. Percent markup 300%; retail price = $35.96

Solve Application Problems Involving Markups

As before when working with application problems, be sure to look for what is given and identify what you are to find.
Once you have evaluated the problem, use the appropriate formula to find the solution(s). These application problems
address markups.

EXAMPLE 6.19

Determine Retail Price of a Power Bar
Janice works at a convenience store near campus. It sells protein bars at a 60% markup. If a bar costs the store $1.30,
how much is the retail price at the convenience store?

Solution

We are asked to find the retail price. We know the percent markup is 60%. The cost of the bar was $1.30. Substituting

into the percent markup formula, we find that the markup is                                                         . The

markup is $0.78 on that protein bar. The retail price is the cost plus the markup, so the retail price is

                                  . The retail price is $2.08.

      YOUR TURN 6.19

1. A furniture outlet spends $360.00 to buy a bed. The store marks up the bed by 250%. What is the retail price of
    the bed?

EXAMPLE 6.20

Determine the Percent Markup of a Phone
Javi began working at a phone outlet. In a recent shipment, he noticed that the cost of the phone to the store was
$480.00. The phone sells for $840.00 in the store. What is the percent markup on the phone?

Solution

We know the cost of the phone, $480. We also know the retail price of the phone, $840.00. From this we know the

markup is                         . Substituting these values into the formula                                           ,

we can find the percent markup.
560 6 · Money Management

       The markup on the phone is 75%.

               YOUR TURN 6.20
         1. Maggie does some research into textbook costs. The Sociology of the Family text she finds sells for $234.36 but

              costs the store only $189.00. What is the percent markup on the sociology book?

         EXAMPLE 6.21
       Finding the Cost of a T-Shirt
       Bob decided to order a t-shirt for his gaming friend online for $29.50. He knows the markup on such t-shirts is 18%. What
       was the t-shirt's cost before the markup?

            Solution
       Using the percent markup and the retail price, $29.50, we can find the cost with the formula

                                                                               . Substituting and solving for cost we find

       The cost of the t-shirt was $25.00.

               YOUR TURN 6.21
         1. Tina has opened a retail shop and purchased a unique hat for resale. Tina uses a 50% markup and sells the hat

              for $57.00. How much did the hat cost Tina?

     Compute Sales Tax

       Sales tax is applied to the sale or lease of some goods and services in the United States but is not determined by the
       federal government. It is most often set, collected, and spent by individual states, counties, parishes, and municipalities.
       None of these sales tax revenues go to the federal government.
       For example, North Carolina has a state sales tax of 4.75% while New Mexico has a state sales tax of 5%. Additionally,
       many counties in North Carolina charge an additional 2% sales tax, bringing the total sales tax for most (72 of the 100)
       counties in North Carolinians to 6.75%. However, in Durham, the county sales tax is 2.25% plus an additional 0.5% tax
       used to fund public transportation, bringing Durham County's sales tax to 7%. To find the sales tax in a particular place,
       then, add other locality sales taxes to the base state sales tax rate.
       How much we pay in sales tax depends on where we are, and what we are buying.
       To determine the amount of sales tax on taxable purchase, we need to find the product of the purchase price, or marked
       price, and the sales tax rate for that locality.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 561

FORMULA

To calculate the amount of sales tax paid on the purchase price in a locality with sales tax given in decimal form,

calculate                                    The total price is then

When the sales tax calculation results in a fraction of a penny, then normal rounding rules apply, round up for half a
penny or more, but round down for less than half a penny.

You should notice that this the same as markup, except using a different term. Sales tax plays the role of markup, the
purchase price plays the role of cost, and the tax rate plays the role of percent markup. This means all the strategies
developed for markups apply to this situation, with the changes indicated.

EXAMPLE 6.22

Sales Tax in Kankakee Illinois
The sales tax in Kankakee, Illinois, is 8.25%. Find the sales tax and total price of items based on the purchase price listed.

1. Purchase price = $428.99
2. Purchase price = $34.88

Solution

1. The sales tax is found using                                    . The purchase price is $428.99 and the tax rate is

8.25%. Substituting and calculating, the sales tax is                                  . The sales tax needs

to be rounded off. Since the third decimal place (fraction of a penny) is 1, we round down and the sales tax is $35.39.

The total price is the sales tax plus the purchase price, so is                     .

2. The sales tax on the item is found using                                     . The purchase price is $34.88 and the

tax rate is 8.25%. Substituting and calculating, the sales tax is                      . The sales tax

needs to be rounded off. Since the third decimal place (fraction of a penny) is 7, we round up and the sales tax is

$2.88. The total price of the item is the sales tax plus the purchase price, so is     .

      YOUR TURN 6.22

The sales tax in Union County, Oregon, is 7%. Find the sales tax and total price of items based on the purchase price
listed.

    1. Purchase price = $1,499.00
    2. Purchase price = $26.89

As before, the information available might be different than only the purchase price and the sales tax rate. In these

cases, use either                            or                                        and solve for the

indicated tax, price, or rate. These problems mirror those for percent markup.

Be aware, almost all sales tax rates are structured as full percentages, or half percent, or one-quarter percent, or three-
quarter percent. This means the decimal value of the sales tax rate, written as a percent, will be either 0, as in 5.0%, 5 as
in 7.5%, 25 as in 3.25%, or 75 as in 4.75%. When rounding for the sales tax percentage, be sure to use this guideline.

EXAMPLE 6.23

Calculating the Sales Tax from the Purchase Price and the Total Price
Find the sales tax rate for the indicated purchase price and total price. Round using the guideline for sales tax
percentages.

 1. Purchase price = $329.50; total price = $354.21
 2. Purchase Price = $13.77; total price = $14.39
562 6 · Money Management

            Solution
        1. Step 1. Find the sales tax paid. First, the amount of sales tax must be found. Subtracting the purchase price from

             the total price, the amount of sales tax is $24.71.
             Step 2. Find the sales tax rate. Using the purchase price, the sales tax, and the formula

                                                                , the sales tax rate can be found. Substituting and solving yields

     Keeping in mind the guideline for rounding sales tax rate, the sales tax rate is 7.5%.

2. Step 1. Find the sales tax paid. First, the amount of sales tax must be found. Subtracting the purchase price from
     the total price, the amount of sales tax is $0.62.
     Step 2. Find the sales tax rate. Using the purchase price, the sales tax, and the formula
                                                        , the sales tax rate can be found. Substituting and solving yields

Keeping in mind the guideline for rounding sales tax rate, the sales tax rate is 4.5%.

      YOUR TURN 6.23

Find the sales tax rate for the indicated purchase price and total price. Round using the guideline for sales tax
percentages.

    1. Purchase price = $83.90; total price = $88.30
    2. Purchase price = $477.00; total price = $509.20

EXAMPLE 6.24

Calculating the Purchase Price from the Sales Tax and Total Price
Find the purchase price for the indicated sales tax rate and total price.

1. Sales tax rate = 5.75%; total price = $36.56
2. Sales tax rate = 4.25%; total price = $97.17

Solution

1. When the sales tax rate and the total price are known, the formula                                              can

be used to find the purchase price. Substituting the tax rate and total price into the formula and solving, we find

The purchase price, the price before tax, was $34.57.

2. When the sales tax rate and the total price are known, the formula                                              can

be used to find the purchase price. Substituting the tax rate and total price into the formula and solving, we find

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 563

     The purchase price, the price before tax, was $93.21.

        YOUR TURN 6.24

  Find the purchase price for the indicated sales tax rate and total price.
      1. Sales tax rate = 8.25%; total price = $157.81
      2. Sales tax rate = 6.75%; total price = $522.01

Solve Application Problems Involving Sales Tax

Solving problems involving sales tax follows the same ideas and steps as solving problems for markups. But here we will
use the following formula:

We can also use the formula:
                                                                                                                        .

This can be seen in the following examples.

EXAMPLE 6.25

Compute Sales Tax for Denver, Colorado
The sales tax rate in Denver Colorado is 8.81%. Keven buys a TV in Denver, and the purchase price (before taxes) is
$499.00. How much will Keven pay in sales tax and what will be the total amount he spends when he buys the TV?

     Solution

The sales tax rate in Denver is 8.81%. To find the sales tax Keven will pay, find 8.81% of the purchase price. In decimal

form, that sales tax rate is 0.0881. Using the formula and substituting 499.00 for purchase price, we find that Keven will

pay            in sales tax for the TV.

The total price that Keven will pay is the purchase price plus the sales tax, or                                           .

        YOUR TURN 6.25

  1. Daryl decides to buy a new scooter in St. Louis, Missouri, where the sales tax is 9.68%. The scooter he chooses
      has a purchase price of $1,149. How much will Daryl pay in sales tax and what is the total price he spends on the
      scooter?

  EXAMPLE 6.26

Compute Sales Tax for Austin, Texas
Jillian visits Austin, Texas, and purchases a new set of weights for her home. She spends, including sales tax, $467.64. The
sales tax rate in Austin Texas is 8.25%. How much of the total price is sales tax?

     Solution
The sales tax paid for this purchase is the difference in the total price and the purchase price. We know the total price is
$467.64. We also know the sales tax rate, which is 8.25%. In decimal form, this is 0.0825. Using these values and the
564 6 · Money Management  to find the purchase price.

       formula

Knowing both the total price and the now the purchase price, we can find the difference, which is the sales tax.
The total price was $467.64. The purchase price was $432. The difference of the total price and the purchase price, or the
sales tax, is then $467.64 - $432.00, which is $35.64. Jillian pays $35.64 in sales tax.

        YOUR TURN 6.26

  1. Elizabeth decides to buy new running shoes in her hometown of Springfield, Illinois, where the sales tax rate is
      6.25%. If her total bill comes to $153, how much of the total price is sales tax?

       VIDEO
      Finding Sales Tax Percentage (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_Sales_Tax)

        WHO KNEW?

  West Virginia was the first state to impose a sales tax. This happened on May 3, 1921.

Look up your locality on this website that lists standard state-level sales tax rates (https://openstax.org/r/
resources_rates) and compare the sales tax structure in your state to two nearby states (for the lower 48) and for any two
states (Alaska and Hawaii).

Check Your Understanding

 7. What is a discount?
 8. What is a markup?
 9. An item has a retail price of $45.00. What is the sale price after a 32% discount?
10. A retailer buys an item for $311.00. What is the retail price if their markup is 60%?
11. Does sales tax have the same formula as markup?
12. If the sales tax is 6.8%, what is the total price for an item that has a purchase price of $39.95?

        SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the given values to find the indicated value. Round percent results to 2 decimal places.
Round money results to the penny (2 decimal places).

     1. Retail price = $399.00, percent discount = 30%, find the sale price.
     2. Retail Price = $75.00, percent discount = 65%, find the sale price.
     3. Retail price = $125.00, sale price = $90.00, find the percent discount.
     4. Retail price = $47.00, sale price = $41.50, find the percent discount.
     5. Sale price = $145.70, percent discount = 20%, find the retail price.
     6. Sale price = $1,208.43, percent discount = 13%, find the retail price.
     7. Retail price = $26,790.00, percent discount = 8%, find the sale price.
     8. Sale price = $314.06, percent discount = 33%, find the retail price.
     9. Retail price = $145.50, sale price = $117.90, find the percent discount.
    10. Retail price = $28.90, percent discount = 18%, find the sale price.
    11. Sale price = $17.59, percent discount = 12%, find the retail price.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                     6.2 · Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax 565

    12. Retail price = $57.50, sale price = $46.00, find the percent discount.
    13. Cost = $130.00, percent markup = 34%, find the retail price.
    14. Cost = $2.27, percent markup = 42%, find the retail price.
    15. Cost = $68.45, retail price = $109.90, find the percent markup.
    16. Cost = $466.16, retail price = $699.00, find the percent markup.
    17. Retail price = $98.99, percent markup = 25%, find the cost.
    18. Retail price = $799.00, percent markup = 55%, find the cost.

In the following exercises, find the sales tax and total paid.
    19. Retail price = $17.99; sales tax = 7.5%
    20. Retail price = $799.00; sales tax = 8.5%
    21. Retail price = $176.83; sales tax = 6.25%
    22. Retail price = $223.93; sales tax = 4.5%

In the following exercises, find the sales tax rate.
    23. Purchase price = $257.45; total price = $273.54
    24. Purchase price = $14.99; total price = $15.74
    25. Purchase price = $26.83; total price = $28.84
    26. Purchase price = $2,399.90; total price = $2,609.89

In the following exercises, find the purchase price.
    27. Sales tax rate = 4.75%; total price = $50.15
    28. Sales tax rate = 8%; total price = $1,069.20
    29. Sales tax rate = 9.5%; total price = $51.45
    30. Sales tax rate = 5.75%; total price = $3,065.69

31. Harris has a coupon for 20% off for any purchase. She finds a new tennis racket for $278.00. How much is the price
      after the coupon is applied?

32. After the employee discount, Mariam will pay $46.55. What is her employee discount rate if the retail price was
      $53.50? Round to nearest full percent.

33. Resa purchased a new game for her cousin. After sales tax, she paid $41.13. Find the sales tax rate she paid if the
      purchase price of the game was $38.99.

34. Larissa opens a new secondhand bookstore. She buys a book for $2.75. What is her percent markup if the sells the
      book for $8.50. Round to the nearest percent.

35. Doug opens a used auto parts store. He pays $30 for a car door. How much will he charge if his percent markup is
      60%?

36. Gaia and Seth live in Osceola County in Florida, where the sales tax rate is 7.5%. They purchased some new
      camping gear. The price before taxes came to $784.62. How much do they pay after the sales tax is applied?

37. Theresa decides to purchase a new phone, which has a retail price of $799.00. Her discount is 20% through a
      friends and family plan. The sales tax in her county is 6.75%. How much will she pay after the discount? How much
      will she pay after the tax is applied?

38. Sakari manages a retail outlet. They receive a shipment of shirts. She sees on the shipping list that each shirt cost
      24.50 to the store. The store marks up the shirts by 45%. The county in which she lives charges sales tax of 6.5%.
      What is the retail price of one of the shirts? After sales tax, how much will a customer pay for the shirt?
566 6 · Money Management

    6.3 Simple Interest

                   Figure 6.4 Interest is how savings earns money. (credit: "Interest Rates" by Mike Mozart/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Compute simple interest.
        2. Understand and compute future value.
        3. Compute simple interest loans with partial payments.
        4. Understand and compute present value.
       There is truth in the phrase "You need to have money to make money." In essence, if you have money to lend, you can
       lend it at a cost to a borrower and make money on that transaction.
       When money is borrowed, the person borrowing the money (borrower) typically has to pay the person or entity that lent
       the money (the lender) more than the amount of money that was borrowed. This extra money is the interest that is to
       be paid. Interest is sometimes referred to as the cost to borrow, the cost of the loan, or the finance cost.
       This idea also applies when someone deposits money in a bank account or some other form of investment. That person
       is essentially lending the money to the bank or company. The money earned by the depositor is also called interest. The
       interest is typically based on the amount borrowed, or the principal.
       The pairing of borrower and lender can take various forms. The borrower may be a consumer using a credit card or
       taking out a loan from a bank, the lender. Companies also borrow from lending banks. Someone who invests in a
       company's stock is the lender in this case; the company is essentially the borrower.
       In this section, we examine the basic building block of interest paid on loans and borrowed credit and also the returns on
       investments like bank accounts, simple interest.

     Compute Simple Interest

       Let's get some terminology understood. Interest to be paid by a borrower is often expressed as an annual percentage
       rate, which is the percent of the principal that is paid as interest for each year the money is borrowed. This means that
       the more that is borrowed, the more that must be paid back. Sometimes, the interest to be paid back is simple interest,
       which means that the interest is calculated on the amount borrowed only.
       The length of time until the loan must be paid off is the term of the loan. The date when the loan must be paid off is
       when the loan is due. The day that the loan is issued is the origination date. We'll put this terminology to use in the
       following examples. Note that in this section we will use letters, called variables, to represent the different parts of the
       formulas we'll be using. This will help keep our formulas and calculations manageable.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.3 · Simple Interest 567

Simple Interest Loans with Integer Year Terms

Calculating simple interest is similar to the percent calculations we made in Understanding Percent and Discounts,
Markups, and Sales Tax, but must be multiplied by the term of the loan (in years, if dealing with an annual percentage
rate).

FORMULA

The simple interest, , to be paid on a loan with annual interest rate for a number of years (term of the loan) , with

principal , is found using        , where the decimal form of the interest rate, , is used. The total repaid, then

is            or, more directly,     . This total is often referred to as the loan payoff amount, or more

simply just the payoff.

When the annual interest rate, the principal, and the number of years that the money is borrowed is known, the interest
to be paid can be found and from there the total to be repaid can be calculated.

      Be aware, interest paid to a lender is almost uniformly rounded up to the next cent.

EXAMPLE 6.27

Simple Interest on Loans with Integer Year Terms
Calculate the simple interest to be paid on a loan with the given principal, annual percentage rate, and number of years.
Then, calculate the loan payoff amount.

1. Principal  = $4,000, annual interest rate = 5.5%, and number of years = 4
2. Principal  = $14,800, annual interest rate = 7.9%, and number of years = 7

    Solution

1. Substitute the principal = $4,000, the decimal form of the annual interest rate = 0.055, and number of years = 4

    into the formula for simple interest, and calculate.

                                  .

    The simple interest, or cost of the loan, to be paid on the loan is $880.

    The loan payoff amount, or the total to be repaid, is                         , or $4,880.00.

2. Substitute the principal = $14,800, the decimal form of the annual interest rate = 0.079, and number of years =

    7 into the formula for simple interest, and calculate.

                                     .

    The simple interest, or cost to borrow, to be paid on the loan is $8,184.40.

    The loan payoff amount, or the total to be repaid, is                         , or $22,984.40.

      YOUR TURN 6.27

Calculate the simple interest to be paid on a loan with the given principal, annual percentage rate, and number of
years. Then calculate the loan payoff, or total to be repaid.

    1. Principal = $6,700, annual interest rate = 11.99%, and number of years = 3
    2. Principal = $25,800, annual interest rate = 6.9%, and number of years = 5

EXAMPLE 6.28

Simple Interest Equipment Loan
Riley runs an auto repair shop, and needs to purchase a new brake lathe, which costs $11,995. She takes out a two-year,
simple interest loan at an annual interest rate of 14.9%. How much interest will she pay and how much total will she
repay on the loan?

     Solution                                                            is the cost of the brake lathe, so  = $11,995.
Step 1. Determine the variables, or parts of the formula. The principal
568 6 · Money Management

The interest rate Riley pays is 14.9%, or = 0.149 in decimal form. The length of the loan is two years, so = 2. We are first
asked to find , the interest Riley will pay.

Step 2. Substitute the known variables into the formula for simple interest         and solve for .

From Step 1 we have                                   .

This tells us that the simple interest, or cost to borrow, to be paid on the loan is $3,574.51.

Step 3. Use the formula          to determine the total amount Riley will repay, .

The total to be repaid is                                , or $15,569.51.

      YOUR TURN 6.28

1. Beth is the owner of a small retail store in downtown St. Louis. The windows in the storefront need replacing, so
    she needs to take out a $9,500 loan to get the repairs done. The rate she secures is 9.25% and the term of the
    loan is one year. How much interest will she pay and how much total will she repay on the loan?

Simple Interest Loans with Other Lengths of Terms

In the previous example and Your Turn exercise, the loans were paid back in one payment after an integer number of
years. However, there are also loans lasting a length of time not equal to an integer number of years (like 1, 2, or 3 years
or more), but in a number of months (like 4 months, 18 months, and so on). What model would apply to these situations?

When the loan is paid back after a term that is not an integer number of years but is instead a number of months, the
term of the loan, or time, , is expressed as a fraction of the year. So for a 2-month loan, the time, in years, is 2/12 = 1/6.
For a 5-month loan, the time in years is 5/12. For an 18-month term, the term in years is 18/12 = 1.5.

EXAMPLE 6.29

Loan to Purchase Equipment
Abeje needs a loan to purchase equipment for the gym she is going to open. She visits the bank and secures a 4-month
loan of $20,000. Her annual percentage rate is 6.75%. How much interest will Abeje pay and what is her loan payoff
amount?

Solution

Abeje's loan is for $20,000, so her principal is = 20,000. The interest rate Abeje will pay is 6.75%, or = 0.0675 in

decimal form. The length of the loan is 4 months, so  . Substituting these in the formula for simple interest, we find

her interest to be

The simple interest, or cost to borrow, to be paid on the loan is $450.00.

The payoff is                    , or $20,450.00.

        YOUR TURN 6.29

  1. Samuel needs to borrow $8,400 to pay for repairs to his small manufacturing facility. He manages to get a simple
      interest loan at 17.33%, to be paid after 6 months. How much interest will Samuel pay and what is Samuel's loan
      payoff amount?

Those examples dealt in months. However, some loans are for days only (45 days, 60 days, 120 days). In such cases, we
find the daily interest rate. The fraction we will use for the daily interest rate is the interest rate (as a decimal) divided by
365. This may be referred to as Actual/365. In order to find the term of the loan, divide the number of days in the term of
the loan by 365.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.3 · Simple Interest 569

FORMULA

To determine the interest, , on a loan with term expressed in days, with principal of , and interest rate in decimal

form of , calculate                    . Here, represents the daily interest rate.

Alternately, the above formula is equivalent to            , where the interest rate remains an annual rate, but
the time is expressed as a fraction of the year.

      WHO KNEW?

It seems reasonable to use 365 as the number of days in the year, since there are 365 days in most years. However,
sometimes, banks have used (and continue to use) 360 as the number of days in a year. They may also treat all
months as if they have 30 days. These differences lead to (sometimes small) differences in how much interest is paid.
Since the number of days is in the denominator, a smaller denominator (360) will result in larger numbers (interest)
that is 365 is used for the denominator. See this page from ACRE (https://openstax.org/r/ACRE) for a comparison.

EXAMPLE 6.30

Loan for Moving Costs
David plans to move his family from Raleigh, North Carolina to Tempe, Arizona. His company will reimburse (pay after
the move) David for the move. David does research and determines that movers will cost $5,600 to move his family's
belongings to Tempe. He takes out a simple interest, 45-day loan at 11.75% interest to pay this cost. How much interest
will be paid on this 45-day loan, and what is David's loan payoff amount?

     Solution                                                        , where t is the number of days and is the
This loan is in terms of days, so we will use the formula
annual interest rate.

The principal for the loan is the moving cost, or = 5,600. The annual interest rate that David will pay is 11.75%, which in
decimal is 0.1175. The length of time for the loan is 45 days, so = 45.

Substituting these values into the formula and calculating, we find that the interest to be paid is
                                              , or $81.13 (remember, interest is almost always rounded up to the next cent).

The payoff for the loan is $5,681.13.

      YOUR TURN 6.30

1. Heather runs a silk screen t-shirt shop, and seeks a short-term loan to pay for new inventory (paints, blades,
    shirts). They secure a $3,700 simple interest loan for 60 days, at an annual rate of 18.99%. How much will
    borrowing the money cost Heather, and what is her loan payoff amount?

Understand and Compute Future Value

Money can be invested for a specific amount of time and earn simple interest while invested. The terminology and
calculations are the same as we've already seen. However, instead of the total to be paid back, the investor is interested
in the total value of the investment after the interest is added. This is called the future value of the investment.

FORMULA

The future value, , of an investment that yields simple interest is                 , where is the

principal (amount invested at the start), is the annual interest rate in decimal form, and is the length of time the
570 6 · Money Management

money is invested. The time will be an integer if the term of the deposit is an integer number of years, will be
number of months/12 if the term is in months, will be actual/365 if the deposit is for a number of days.

EXAMPLE 6.31

Simple Interest on a Deposit
In the following, determine how much interest was earned on the investment and the future value of the investment, if
the investment yields simple interest.

1. Principal is $1,000, annual interest rate is 2.01%, and time is 5 years
2. Principal is $5,000, annual interest rate is 1.85%, and time is 30 years
3. Principal is $10,000, annual interest rate is 1.25%, and time is 18 months
4. Principal is $7,000, annual interest rate is 3.26%, and time is 100 days

Solution

1. The principal is = $1,000, the annual interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.0201, and the term is 5 years, or = 5.

Since the term is an integer number of years, the interest earned on the investment is

                                              , or the interest earned was $100.50.

To find the future value, we use the formula  . Substituting the values and calculating, we find the future

value of the investment to be                                          . The future value of the investment at the end

of 5 years is $1,100.50.

Notice that the future value could have been calculated directly with

2. The principal is = $5,000, the annual interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.0185, and the term is 30 years, or = 30.

Since the term is an integer number of years, the interest earned on the investment is

                                              , or the interest earned was $2,775.00. To find the future value, we use

the formula                      . Substituting the values and calculating, we find the future value of the investment to be

                                 . The future value of the investment at the end of 30 years is $7,775.00.

3. The principal is = $10,000, the annual interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.0125, and the term is 18 months. Since

the term is in months, we have to write the months in terms of years. For 18 months, we use 18/12 as . The interest

earned on the investment is                                                    , or the interest earned was $187.50. To

find the future value, we use the formula     . Substituting the values and calculating, we find the future

value of the investment to be                                                  . The future value of the investment at the

end of 18 months is $10,187.50.

4. Principal is $7,000, annual interest rate is 3.26%, and time is 100 days. The principal is = $7,000, the annual

interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.0326, and the term is 100 days. Since the term is in days, we have to write the

time using actual/365, or = 100/365. The interest earned on the investment is

                                              , or the interest earned was $62.52. To find the future value, we use

the formula                      . Substituting the values and calculating, we find the future value of the investment to be
                                                        . The future value of the investment at the end of 100 days is $7,062.52.

        YOUR TURN 6.31

  In the following, determine how much interest was earned on the investment and the future value of the investment
  if the investment yields simple interest.

      1. Principal is $4,500, annual interest rate is 1.88%, and time is 3 years
      2. Principal is $2,000, annual interest rate is 2.03%, and time is 10 years
      3. Principal is $120,000, annual interest rate is 3.1%, and time is 100 days
      4. Principal is $4,680, annual interest rate is 1.55%, and time is 42 months

You may have noticed that for these problems, the future value was rounded down. When the future value is paid, the
amount is typically rounded down.
A certificate of deposit (CD) is a savings account that holds a single deposit (the principal) for a fixed term at a fixed
interest rate. Once the term of the CD is over, the CD may be redeemed (cashed in or withdrawn) and the owner of the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 6.3 · Simple Interest 571

CD receives the original principal plus the interest earned. The deposit often cannot be withdrawn until the term is up; if
it can be withdrawn early, there is often a penalty imposed to do so.

  EXAMPLE 6.32

Certificate of Deposit
Jonas deposits $2,500 in a CD bearing 3.25% simple interest for a term of 3 years. When he redeems his CD at the end of
the 3 years, how much will he receive?

     Solution
This is a future value example. We know that = $2,500 is the amount deposited. The annual simple interest rate in
decimal form is = 0.0325. The term of the investment is = 3 years.
Substituting those values into the future value formula, we have

                                                                                                                  .
When the CD is redeemed, Jonas will receive $2,743.75.

        YOUR TURN 6.32

  1. Mia deposits $4,900 in a CD bearing 3.95%. The CD term is 7 years. When she redeems the CD, how much will
      Mia receive?

  WORK IT OUT

  The reason CD (certificate of deposit) rates look so small is because they are extremely safe investments. Though
  overall interest rates for CDs change over time and individual returns vary with the terms of the CD, investors are
  offered predictable interest income for their investments.
  To investigate this yourself, search online to determine the strengths and weaknesses of CDs (investopedia.com
  offers good, basic information on investing). Then, online, identify five national banks and two local banks who offer
  CDs.

    · Track the interest rates for the CDs at various terms (1 year, 3 years, 5 years) for each of the banks you found that
        offer CDs.

    · Calculate the amount of interest earned for a $10,000 deposit for each CD at each of the terms.
    · Compare the results from the various banks, CDs, and terms and decide which is the best investment. You may

        want to consider both the length of time that the money is locked up, and the return.

Paying Simple Interest Loans with Partial Payments

In every example above, there was one payment for the loan, or one withdrawal for the investment. However, for many
loans (house, car, in-ground swimming pool), the loan will be paid back in two or more payments. Such a payment is
called a partial payment, because they only pay off part of the loan.
When a partial payment is made, some of the payment pays for the principal, but the rest of the payment pays for
interest on the principal. When making the first partial payment, the interest is calculated on the principal for the time
between the origination date of the loan and the date of the payment. If another partial payment is made, the interest is
calculated based on the remaining principal and the time between the previous partial payment and the current partial
payment date.

  EXAMPLE 6.33

Interest Paid in a Partial Payment on a Loan
 1. A simple interest loan for $6,500 is taken out at 12.6% annual percentage rate. A partial payment is made 45 days

      into the loan period. How much of the partial payment will be for interest?
572 6 · Money Management

2. A simple interest loan for $13,700 is taken out at 6.55% annual interest rate. A partial payment is to be made after
     60 days. How much of the partial payment will be for interest?

    Solution
1. To find the interest paid in this partial payment, we calculate the interest on the principal for the time between the

     origination of the loan and the payment day, or 45 days.
     The principal is $6,500. The annual interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.126.
     The interest paid for 45 days is found by substituting the values for principal , rate , and time into the formula

                            .

Calculating, we have                                               . Rounding up, the portion of the partial

payment that will be paid for interest is $100.98.

2. To find the interest paid in this partial payment, we calculate the interest on the principal for the time between the

origination of the loan and the payment day, or 60 days.

The principal is $13,700. The annual interest rate, in decimal form, is 0.0655.

The interest paid for those 60 days is found by substituting those values into the formula  .

Calculating, we have                                                           . Rounding up, the portion of the partial

payment that will be paid for interest is $147.51.

  YOUR TURN 6.33

1. A simple interest loan for $50,000 is taken out at 5.15% annual percentage rate. A partial payment is made
    120 days into the loan period. How much of the partial payment will be for interest?

2. A simple interest loan for $8,500 is taken out at 9.9% annual interest rate. A partial payment is to be made
    after 75 days. How much of the partial payment will be for interest?

Remaining Balance

The previous examples demonstrated how to determine the interest paid in a partial payment. Using this, we can
determine the remaining balance after a partial payment.

Step 1: determine the amount of the payment, , that is applied to interest, .

Step 2: subtract the amount paid in interest from the payment,     . This is the amount applied to the balance.

Step 3: subtract the amount applied to the balance (the value obtained in Step 2) from the balance of the loan,
                 . This is the remaining balance after the partial payment.

EXAMPLE 6.34

Determining the Remaining Balance on a Loan After a Partial Payment
 1. A simple interest loan for $45,500 is taken out at 11.8% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $20,000 is

      made 50 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance of the loan be?
 2. A simple interest loan for $150,000 is taken out at 5.85% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $50,000 is

      made 70 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance of the loan be?

Solution

1. The principal is $45,500, which will be treated as the balance, , of the loan. The annual simple interest rate, in

decimal form, is 0.118. The time is = 50 days.

Step 1: Determine the amount of the partial payment that is applied to interest. To find this, substitute the values

above into the formula           and calculate. Calculating, the amount of the payment that is applied to

interest is                                     . Rounding up, we have = $735.48.

Step 2: The amount of the payment that is to be applied to the balance of the loan is partial payment minus the

amount of the partial payment that is applied to the interest. The payment is $2,000. The amount that is applied to

the balance is                                            .

Step 3: The remaining balance is found by subtracting the amount applied to the balance from the previous

balance, or                                                     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             6.3 · Simple Interest 573

The remining balance after the partial payment is $26,235.48.

2. The principal is $150,000, which will be treated as the balance, , of the loan. The annual simple interest rate, in

decimal form, is 0.0585. The time is = 70 days.

Step 1: Determine the amount of the partial payment that is applied to interest. To find this, substitute the values

above into the formula     and calculate. Calculating, the amount of the payment that is applied to

interest is                                      . Rounding up, we have = $1,682.88.

Step 2: The amount of the payment that is to be applied to the balance of the loan is partial payment minus the

amount of the partial payment that is applied to the interest. The payment is $50,000. The amount that is applied to

the balance is                                             .

Step 3: The remaining balance is found by subtracting the amount applied to the balance from the previous

balance, or                                                         .

The remining balance after the partial payment is $101,682.88.

  YOUR TURN 6.34

1. A simple interest loan for $1,400 is taken out at 12.5% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $700 is
    made 20 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance of the loan be?

2. A simple interest loan for $23,000 is taken out at 7.25% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $10,000
    is made 40 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance of the loan be?

Loan Payoff

Finally, we will determine the amount to be paid at the end of the loan. To do so, we apply the formula for the loan
payoff to the remaining balance. However, the length of time for that remaining balance is the time between the partial
payment and the day the loan is paid off.

Step 1: Determine the remaining balance after the partial payment.

Step 2: Calculate the number of days between the partial payment and the date the loan is paid off. This will be the time
 in the payment formula.

Step 3: Calculate the amount to be paid at the end of the loan, or the payoff amount, using                             ,

where is the remaining balance and is the time found in Step 2.

EXAMPLE 6.35

Finding Loan Pay Off After a Partial Payment
Laura takes out an $18,400 loan for 120 days at 17.9% simple interest. She makes a partial payment of $7,500 after 45
days. What is her payoff amount at the end of the loan?

     Solution
The initial balance, or principal, of her loan is $18,400. The interest rate in decimal form is 0.179. Her partial payment of
$7,500 is made after 45 days. Using these values, we can determine how much of the partial payment is applied to the
balance. From there, we can determine her final loan payoff after 120 days.

Step 1: Determine the remaining balance after the partial payment. Using the partial payment process outlined in the
previous example, we first find that the amount of the partial payment that is applied to the balance. Their interest paid

in the partial payment is                                                   , or $406.07 (remember to round up!). Using

this and that the loan amount was for $18,400, the remaining balance on the loan after the partial payment is
                                                                                    .

Step 2: The number of days between the partial payment and the date that the loan is to be paid off is 120 - 45 = 75. This
means that the time between the partial payment and the final payment is 75 days.

Step 3: To calculate the payoff amount, use                         , with  = $11,306.07 (the remaining balance), =
75 (from Step 2) and = 0.179. The payoff amount, then, is                                                                              .
Rounding up, the payoff amount is $11,721.92.
574 6 · Money Management

      YOUR TURN 6.35

1. Paola takes out a 75-day loan for $3,500.00. Her interest rate is 11.2%. If she makes a partial payment of
    $1,250.00 after 30 days, what will her payoff be at the end of the loan?

Repeated Partial Payments

Car loans and mortgages (loans for homes) are paid off through repeated partial payments, most often monthly
payments. Since car loans are often 3 to 6 years, and mortgages 15 to 30 years, calculating each individual monthly
payment one at a time is time consuming and tedious. Even a 3-year loan would involve applying the above steps 36
times! Fortunately, there is a formula for determining the amount of each partial payment for monthly payments on a
simple interest loan.

FORMULA

The amount of monthly payments, , for a loan with principal , monthly simple interest rate (in decimal form), for

number of months is found using the formula                               . The monthly interest rate is the annual rate

divided by 12. The number of months is the number of years times 12.

EXAMPLE 6.36

Calculating Car Payments
Desiree buys a new car, by taking a loan out from her credit union. The balance of her loan is $27,845.00. The annual
interest rate that Desiree will pay is 7.3%. She plans to pay this off over 4 years. How much will Desiree's monthly
payment be?

Solution

To use the formula for monthly payments, we need the principal, the interest rate, and the number of years. The

principal is $27,845. The annual rate, in decimal form, is 0.073. Dividing 0.073 by 12 gives the monthly interest rate

                          . She takes the loan out for 4 years, which is  months. Substituting these values into

the formula,              , we calculate:

Using the formula and rounding up to the next cent, we see that Desiree's monthly payment will be $670.67.
        YOUR TURN 6.36

  1. Russell buys a new car, by taking a loan out from the dealership. After all of the discussions are over, he finances
      (gets a loan for) $23,660. The annual interest rate that Russell will pay is 4.76%. He plans to pay this off over 5
      years. How much will Russell's monthly payment be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               6.3 · Simple Interest 575

        TECH CHECK

The calculation of payments is long, and involves many steps. However, most spreadsheet programs, including
Google Sheets, have a payment function. In Google Sheets, that function is PMT. To find the payment for an
installment loan (like for a car), you need to enter the interest rate per period, the number of payments, and the loan
amount. From Your Turn 6.36, the rate was 0.0476/12, the number of payments was 60, and the loan amount was
$23,660. In Google Sheets, select any cell and enter the following:
=PMT(0.0476/12,60,23660)
And click the enter key. Immediately, in the cell you selected, the payment of $443.90 appears, though with a negative
sign. The negative sign indicates it is a payment out of an account. Since we want to know the payment amount, we
ignore the negative sign. The result, with the formula in the formula bar, is shown in Figure 6.5.

                                                    Figure 6.5 Google Sheets payment function
In general, to use the PMT function in Google Sheets, enter
=PMT( /12, *12, )
where is the annual interest rate, is the number of years, and is the principal of the loan.

Understand and Compute Present Value for Simple Interest Investments

When finding the future value of an investment, we know how much is deposited, but we have no idea how much that
money will be worth in the future. If we set a goal for the future, it would be useful to know how much to deposit now so
an account reaches the goal. The amount that needs to be deposited now to hit a goal in the future is called the present
value.

FORMULA

The present value, , of money deposited at an annual, simple interest rate of (in decimal form) for time (in

years) with a specified future value of , is calculated with the formula      .

Note: Present value, in this calculation, is always rounded up. Otherwise, future value may fall short of the target
future value.

Understanding what this tells you is important. When you find the present value, that is how much you need to invest
now to reach the goal , under the conditions (time and rate) at which the money will be invested.

EXAMPLE 6.37

Compute the present value of the investment described. Interpret the result.

1.  = $10,000, = 15 years, annual simple interest rate of 5.5%

2.  = $150,000, = 20 years, annual simple interest rate of 6.25%

3.  = $250,000, = 486 months, annual simple interest rate of 4.75%
576 6 · Money Management

    Solution
1. The future value is = $10,000. The time of the investment is in years, so = 15. The annual, simple interest rate is

     5.5%, which in decimal form is 0.055. We substitute those values into the formula and calculate.
                                                                                                          . Rounding up, we see that the present value

     of $10,000 invested at a simple annual interest rate of 5.5% for 15 years is $5,479.46. This means that $5,479.46
     needs to be invested so that, after 15 years at 5.5% interest, the investment will be worth $10,000.
2. The future value is = $150,000. The time of the investment is in years, so = 20. The annual, simple interest rate
     is 6.25%, which in decimal form is 0.0625. We substitute those values into the formula and calculate.

                                                                                                         . Rounding up, we see that the present value

of $150,000 invested at a simple annual interest rate of 6.25% for 20 years is $66,666.67. This means that $66,666.67

needs to be invested so that, after 20 years at 6.25% interest, the investment will be worth $150,000.

3. The future value is = $250,000. The time of the investment is 486 months. This needs to be converted to years. To

do so, divide the number of months by 12, giving                 , so = 40.5 years. The annual, simple interest

rate is 4.75%, which in decimal form is 0.0475. We substitute those values into the formula and calculate.
                                                                                                                   . Rounding up, we see that the

present value of $250,000 invested at a simple annual interest rate of 4.75% for 486 months is $129,954.52. This
means that $129,954.52 needs to be invested so that, after 486 months at 4.75% interest, the investment will be
worth $150,000.

YOUR TURN 6.37

Compute the present value of the investment described. Interpret the result.

1.  = $25,000, = 10 years, annual simple interest rate of 7.5%

2.  = $320,000, = 35 years, annual simple interest rate of 6.5%

3.  = $90,000, = 270 months, annual simple interest rate of 3.75%

  EXAMPLE 6.38

Present Value of a CD
Beatriz will invest some money in a CD that yields 3.99% simple interest when invested for 30 years. How much must
Beatriz invest so that after those 30 years, her CD is worth $300,000?

     Solution
Beatriz needs to know how much to deposit now so that her CD is worth $300,000 after 30 years. This means she needs
to know the present value of that $300,000. The time is 30 years and the annual simple interest rate, in decimal form, is
0.0399. Using that information and the formula for present value, we calculate the present value of that $300,000.

                                                                                                            . Rounding up, Beatriz needs to invest
$136,549.85 so that she has $300,000 in 30 years.

        YOUR TURN 6.38

  1. Kentaro will invest some money in a CD that yields 2.75% simple interest when invested for 5 years. How much
      must Kentaro invest so that after those 5 years his CD is worth $12,000?

Check Your Understanding

13. What is interest?
14. What is the principal in a loan?
15. Calculate the simple interest to be paid for a 6-year loan with principal $1,500.00 and annual interest rate of

      12.99%

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 6.3 · Simple Interest 577

16. A simple interest loan for $24,200 is taken out at 10.55% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $13,000 is
      made 25 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance of the loan be?

17. Find the monthly payment for a $9,800.00 loan at a 13.8% interest for 4 years.

18. Find the present value of an investment with future value $30,000 with a simple interest rate of 3.75% invested for
      10 years.

        SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES

 1. If $1,500.00 is invested in an account bearing 3.5% interest, what is the principal?

 2. If $1,500 is invested in an account bearing 3.5% interest, what is the interest rate?

 3. What is simple interest?

 4. What is the present value of an investment?

 5. What is the future value of an investment?

 6. What is a partial payment on a loan?

In the following exercises, calculate the simple interest and payoff for the loan with the given principal, simple interest
rate, and time.

     7. Principal = $5,000, annual interest rate = 6.5%, and number of years = 6
     8. Principal = $3,500, annual interest rate = 12%, and number of years = 7
     9. Principal = $7,800, annual interest rate = 11.5%, and number of years = 10
    10. Principal = $62,500, annual interest rate = 4.88%, and number of years = 4
    11. Principal = $4,600, annual interest rate = 9.9%, for 18 months
    12. Principal = $19,000, annual interest rate = 16.9%, for 14 months
    13. Principal = $8,500, annual interest rate = 10.66%, for 6 months
    14. Principal = $17,600, annual interest rate = 17.9%, for 20 months
    15. Principal = $4,000, annual interest rate = 8.5%, for 130 days
    16. Principal = $9,900, annual interest rate = 15.9%, for 90 days
    17. Principal = $600, annual interest rate = 16.8%, for 25 days
    18. Principal = $890, annual interest rate = 9.75%, for 200 days

In the following exercises, find the future value of the investment with the given principal, simple interest rate, and
time.

    19. Principal is $5,300, annual interest rate is 2.07%, and time is 18 years.
    20. Principal is $14,700, annual interest rate is 3.11%, and time is 10 years.
    21. Principal is $5,600, annual interest rate is 2.55%, for 30 months.
    22. Principal is $10,000, annual interest rate is 1.99%, for 15 months.
    23. Principal is $2,000, annual interest rate is 3.22%, for 100 days.
    24. Principal is $900, annual interest rate is 3.75%, for 175 days.

In the following exercises, determine the amount applied to principal for the indicated partial payment on the loan with
the given principal, interest rate, and time when the partial payment was made.

    25. A simple interest loan for $2,700 is taken out at 11.6% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $1,500 is
          made 28 days into the loan period.

    26. A simple interest loan for $900 is taken out at 18.9% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $400 is made
          30 days into the loan period.

    27. A simple interest loan for $13,500 is taken out at 14.8% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $8,000 is
          made 75 days into the loan period.

    28. A simple interest loan for $9,900 is taken out at 9.875% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $4,000 is
          made 65 days into the loan period.

In the following exercises, determine the remaining principal for the indicated partial payment on the loan with the
given principal, interest rate, and time when the partial payment was made.

    29. A simple interest loan for $2,700 is taken out at 11.6% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $1,500 is
          made 28 days into the loan period.

    30. A simple interest loan for $900 is taken out at 18.9% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $400 is made
          30 days into the loan period
578 6 · Money Management

31. A simple interest loan for $13,500 is taken out at 14.8% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $8,000 is
      made 75 days into the loan period.

32. A simple interest loan for $9,900 is taken out at 9.875% annual percentage rate. A partial payment of $4,000 is
      made 65 days into the loan period.

In the following exercises, find the payoff value of the loan with the given principal, annual simple interest rate, term,
partial payment, and time at which the partial payment was made.

    33. Principal = $1,500, rate = 6.99%, term is 5 years, partial payment of $900 made 2 years into the loan.
    34. Principal = $21,500, rate = 7.44%, term is 10 years, partial payment of 15,000 made after 6 years.
    35. Principal = $6,800, rate = 11.9%, term is 200 days, partial payment of $4,000 made after 100 days.
    36. Principal = $800, rate = 13.99%, term is 150 days, partial payment of $525 made after 50 days.

In the following exercises, find the monthly payment for a loan with the given principal, annual simple interest rate and
number of years.

    37. Principal = $4,500, rate = 8.75%, years = 3
    38. Principal = $2,700, rate = 15.9%, years = 5
    39. Principal = $13,980, rate = 10.5%, years = 4
    40. Principal = $8,750, rate = 9.9%, years = 10

In the following exercises, find the present value for the given future value,  , annual simple interest rate , and

number of years .

41.  = $25,000, = 15 years, annual simple interest rate of 6.5%

42.  = $12,000, = 10 years, annual simple interest rate of 4.5%

43.  = $15,000, = 16 years, annual simple interest rate of 3.5%

44.  = $100,000, = 30 years, annual simple interest rate of 5.5%

45. Rita takes out a simple interest loan for $4,000 for 5 years. Her interest rate is 7.88%. How much will Rita pay when
      the loan is due?

46. Humberto runs a private computer networking company, and needs a loan of $31,500 for new equipment. He
      shops around for the lowest interest rate he can find. He finds a rate of 8.9% interest for a 10-year term. How much
      will Humberto's payoff be at the end of the 10 years?

47. Jaye needs a short-term loan of $3,500. They find a 75-day loan that charges 14.9% interest. What is Jaye's payoff?

48. Theethat's car needs new struts, which cost $1,189.50 installed, but he doesn't have the money to do so. He asks
      the repair shop if they offer any sort of financing. It offers him a short-term loan at 18.9% interest for 60 days.
      What is Theethat's payoff for the struts?

49. Michelle opens a gaming shop in her small town. She takes out an $8,500 loan to get started. The loan is at 9.5%
      interest and has a term of 5 years. Michelle decides to make a partial payment of $4,700 after 3 years. What will
      Michelle pay when the loan is due?

50. A small retailer borrows $3,750 for a repair. The loan has a term of 100 days at 13.55% interest. If the retailer pays
      a partial payment of $2,000 after 30 days, what will the loan payoff be when the loan is due?

51. Sharon invests $2,500 in a CD for her granddaughter. The CD has a term of 5 years and has a simple interest rate
      of 3.11%. After that 5-year period, how much will the CD be worth?

52. Jen and Fred have a baby, and deposit $1,500 in a savings account bearing 1.76% simple interest. How much will
      the account be worth in 18 years?

53. Yasmin decides to buy a used car. Her credit union offers 7.9% interest for 5-year loans on used cars. The cost of
      the car, including taxes and fees, is $11,209.50. How much will Yasmin's monthly payment be?

54. Cleo runs her own silk-screening company. She needs new silk-screening printing machines, and finds two that will
      cost her, in total, $5,489.00. She takes out a 3-year loan at 8.9% interest. What will her monthly payments be for the
      loan?

55. Kylie wants to invest some money in an account that yields 4.66% simple interest. Her goal is to have $20,000 in 15
      years. How much should Kylie invest to reach that goal?

56. Ishraq wants to deposit money in an account that yields 3.5% simple interest for 10 years, to help with a down
      payment for a home. Her goal is to have $25,000 for the down payment. How much does Ishraq need to deposit to
      reach that goal?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            6.4 · Compound Interest 579

In the following exercises, use the Cost of Financing. The difference between the total paid for a loan, along with all
other charges paid to obtain the loan, and the original principal of the loan is the cost of financing. It measures how
much more you paid for an item than the original price. In order to find the cost of financing, find the total paid over
the life of the loan. Add to that any fees paid for the loan. Then subtract the principal.

    57. Yasmin decides to buy a used car. Her credit union offers 7.9% interest for 5-year loans on used cars. The cost of
          the car, including taxes and fees, is $11,209.50. How much did she pay the credit union over the 5 years? What
          was the cost of financing for Yasmin?

    58. Cleo runs her own silk-screening company. She needs new silk-screening printing machines, and finds two that
          will cost her, in total, $5,489.00. She takes out a 3-year loan at 8.9% interest. What was the cost of financing for
          Cleo?

6.4 Compound Interest

            Figure 6.6 The impact of compound interest (credit: "English Money" by Images Money/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Compute compound interest.
 2. Determine the difference in interest between simple and compound calculations.
 3. Understand and compute future value.
 4. Compute present value.
 5. Compute and interpret effective annual yield.
For a very long time in certain parts of the world, interest was not charged due to religious dictates. Once this restriction
was relaxed, loans that earned interest became possible. Initially, such loans had short terms, so only simple interest was
applied to the loan. However, when loans began to stretch out for years, it was natural to add the interest at the end of
each year, and add the interest to the principal of the loan. After another year, the interest was calculated on the initial
principal plus the interest from year 1, or, the interest earned interest. Each year, more interest was added to the money
owed, and that interest continued to earn interest.
Since the amount in the account grows each year, more money earns interest, increasing the account faster. This growth
follows a geometric series (Geometric Sequences). It is this feature that gives compound interest its power. This module
covers the mathematics of compound interest.

Understand and Compute Compound Interest

As we saw in Simple Interest, an account that pays simple interest only pays based on the original principal and the term
of the loan. Accounts offering compound interest pay interest at regular intervals. After each interval, the interest is
added to the original principal. Later, interest is calculated on the original principal plus the interest that has been added
previously.
After each period, the interest on the account is computed, then added to the account. Then, after the next period, when
interest is computed, it is computed based on the original principal AND the interest that was added in the previous
periods.
580 6 · Money Management

The following example illustrates how compounded interest works.

EXAMPLE 6.39

Interest Compounded Annually
Abena invests $1,000 in a CD (certificate of deposit) earning 4% compounded annually. How much will Abena's CD be
worth after 3 years?

     Solution
Since the interest is compounded annually, the interest will be computed at the end of each year and added to the CD's
value. The interest at the end of the following year will be based on the value found form the previous year.

Step 1: After the first year, the interest in Abena's CD is computed using the interest formula  . The principal

is = 1,000, the rate, as a decimal, is 0.04, and the time is one year, so = 1. Using that, the interest earned in the first

year is                                        , so the interest earned in the first year was $40.00. This is added to the

value of the CD, making the CD worth           .

Step 2: At the end of the second year, interest is again computed, but is computed based on the CD's new value, $1,040.
Using this new value and the interest formula ( and are still 0.04 and 1, respectively), we see that the CD earned

                                                         , or $41.60. This is added to the value of the CD, making the CD now worth
                                              .

Step 3: At the end of the third year, interest is again computed, but is computed based on Abena's CD's new value,

$1,081.60. Using this value and the interest formula ( and are still 0.04 and 1, respectively), we see that the CD earned

                                               , or $43.26 (remember to round down). This is added to the value of the

CD, making the CD now worth                       .

After 3 years, Abena's CD is worth $1,124.86.

      YOUR TURN 6.39
1. Oksana deposits $5,000 in a CD that earns 3% compounded annually. How much is the CD worth after 4 years?

Determine the Difference in Interest Between Simple and Compound Calculations

It is natural to ask, does compound interest make much of a difference? To find out, we revisit Abena's CD.

EXAMPLE 6.40

Comparing Simple to Compound Interest on a 3-Year CD
Abena invested $1,000 in a CD that earned 4% compounded annually, and the CD was worth $1,124.86 after 3 years. Had
Abena invested in a CD with simple interest, how much would the CD have been worth after 3 years? How much more
did Abena earn using compound interest?

Solution

Had Abena invested $1,000 in a 4% simple interest CD for 3 years, her CD would have been worth

                                               , or $1,120.00. With interest compounded annually, Abena's CD was

worth $1,124.86. The difference between compound and simple interest is                          . So

compound interest earned Abena $4.86 more than the simple interest did.

      YOUR TURN 6.40

1. Oksana deposits $5,000 in a CD that earned 3% compounded annually and was worth $5,627.54 after 4 years.
    Had Oksana invested in a CD with simple interest, how much would the CD have been worth after 4 years? How
    much more did Oksana earn using compound interest?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 6.4 · Compound Interest 581

       VIDEO

      Compound Interest (https://openstax.org/r/compound_interest_beginners)

Understand and Compute Future Value

Imagine investing for 30 years and compounding the interest every month. Using the method above, there would be 360
periods to calculate interest for. This is not a reasonable approach. Fortunately, there is a formula for finding the future
value of an investment that earns compound interest.

FORMULA

The future value of an investment, , when the principal is invested at an annual interest rate of (in decimal form),

compounded times per year, for years, is found using the formula                         . This is also referred to as the

future value of the investment.

Note, sometimes the formula is presented with the total number of periods, , and the interest rate per period, . In

that case the formula becomes    .

EXAMPLE 6.41

Computing Future Value for Compound Interest
In the following, compute the future value of the investment with the given conditions.

1. Principal is $5,000, annual interest rate is 3.8%, compounded monthly, for 5 years.
2. Principal is $18,500, annual interest rate is 6.25%, compounded quarterly, for 17 years.

    Solution                                                     = 0.038, compounded monthly so  = 12, and for = 5
1. The principal is = $5,000, interest rate, in decimal form,

     years. Substituting these values into the formula, we find

     The future value of the investment is $6,044.43.
2. The principal is = $18,500, interest rate, in decimal form, = 0.0625, compounded quarterly so = 4, and for = 17

     years. Substituting these values into the formula, we

     The future value of the investment is $53,093.54.

       YOUR TURN 6.41
In the following, compute the future value of the investment with the given conditions.

     1. Principal is $7,600, annual interest rate is 4.1%, compounded monthly, for 10 years.
582 6 · Money Management

             2. Principal is $13,250, annual interest rate is 2.79%, compounded quarterly, for 25 years.

         EXAMPLE 6.42
       Interest Compounded Quarterly
       Cody invests $7,500 in an account that earns 4.5% interest compounded quarterly (4 times per year). Determine the
       value of Cody's investment after 10 years.

            Solution
       Cody's initial investment is $7,500, so = $7,500. The annual interest rate is 4.5%, which is 0.045 in decimal form.
       Compounding quarterly means there are four periods in a year, so = 4. He invests the money for 10 years. Substituting
       those values into the formula, we calculate

       After 10 years, Cody's initial investment of $7,500 is worth $11,732.82.

               YOUR TURN 6.42
         1. Maggie invests $3,000 in an account that earns 5.1% interest compounded monthly. How much is the account

              worth after 13 years?

         EXAMPLE 6.43
       Interest Compounded Daily
       Kathy invests $10,000 in an account that yields 5.6% compounded daily. How much money will be in her account after 20
       years?

            Solution
       Kathy's initial investment is $10,000, so = $10,000. The annual interest rate is 5.6%, which is 0.056 in decimal form.
       Compounding daily means there are 364 periods in a year, so = 365. She invests the money for 20 years, so = 20.
       Substituting those values into the formula, we calculate

       After 20 years, Kathy's initial investment of $10,000 is worth $30,645.90.

               YOUR TURN 6.43
         1. Jacob invests $3,000 in a CD that yields 3.4% compounded daily for 5 years. How much is his CD worth after 5

              years?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         6.4 · Compound Interest 583

     VIDEO
           Compare Simple Interest to Interest Compounded Annually (https://openstax.org/r/
           compare_simple_compound_interest1)
           Compare Simple Interest and Compound Interest for Different Number of Periods Per Year
           (https://openstax.org/r/compare_simple_compound_interest2)

WORK IT OUT

To truly grasp how compound interest works over a long period of time, create a table comparing simple interest to
compound interest, with different numbers of periods per year, for many years would be useful. In this situation, the
principal is $10,000, and the annual interest rate is 6%.
 1. Create a table with five columns. Label the first column YEARS, the second column SIMPLE INTEREST, the third

      column COMPOUND ANNUALLY, the fourth column COMPOUND MONTHLY and the last column COMPOUND
      DAILY, as shown below.

           YEARS SIMPLE INTEREST COMPOUND ANNUALLY COMPOUND MONTHLY COMPOUND DAILY

   2. In the years column, enter 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 20, and 30 for the rows.
   3. Calculate the account value for each column and each year.
   4. Compare the results from each of the values you find. How do the number of periods per year (compoundings

        per year) impact the account value? How does the number of years impact the account value?
   5. Redo the chart, with an interest rate you choose and a principal you choose. Are the patterns identified earlier

        still present?

Understand and Compute Present Value

When investing, there is often a goal to reach, such as "after 20 years, I'd like the account to be worth $100,000." The
question to be answered in this case is "How much money must be invested now to reach the goal?" As with simple
interest, this is referred to as the present value.

  FORMULA

  The money invested in an account bearing an annual interest rate of (in decimal form), compounded times per
  year for years, is called the present value, , of the account (or of the money) and found using the formula

                             , where is the value of the account at the investment's end. Always round this value up to the

  nearest penny.

EXAMPLE 6.44

Computing Present Value
Find the present value of the accounts under the following conditions.

1. = $250,000, invested at 6.75 interest, compounded monthly, for 30 years.
2. = $500,000, invested at 7.1% interest, compounded quarterly, for 40 years.

    Solution                          = $250,000, invested at 6.75% interest, in decimal form = 0.0675 (decimal
1. To reach a final account value of  = 12, for 30 years, substitute those values into the formula for present value.

     form!), compounded monthly, so
584 6 · Money Management

             Calculating, we find the present value of the $250,000.

             In order for this account to reach $250,000 after 30 years, $33,186.23 needs to be invested.
        2. To reach a final account value of = $500,000, invested at 7.1% interest, in decimal form = 0.071, compounded

             quarterly, so = 4, for 40 years, substitute those values into the formula for present value. Calculating, we find the
             present value of the $500,000.

             In order for this account to reach $500,000 after 40 years, $29,949.69 needs to be invested.
               YOUR TURN 6.44

         Find the present value of the accounts under the following conditions.
             1. = $1,000,000, invested at 5.75% interest, compounded monthly, for 40 years.
             2. = $175,000, invested at 3.8% interest, compounded quarterly, for 20 years.

         EXAMPLE 6.45
       Investment Goal with Compound Interest
       Pilar plans early for retirement, believing she will need $1,500,000 to live comfortably after the age of 67. How much will
       she need to deposit at age 23 in an account bearing 6.35% annual interest compounded monthly?

            Solution
       Knowing how much to deposit at age 23 to reach a certain value later is a present value question. The target value for
       Pilar is $1,500,000. The interest rate is 6.35%, which in decimal form is 0.0635. Compounded monthly means = 12. She's
       23 and will leave the money in the account until the age of 67, which is 44 years, making = 44. Using this information
       and substituting in the formula for present value, we calculate

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.4 · Compound Interest 585

Pilar will need to invest $92,442,51 in this account to have $1,500,000 at age 67.

      YOUR TURN 6.45

1. Hajun turns 30 this year and begins to think about retirement. He calculates that he will need $1,200,000 to retire
    comfortably. He finds a fund to invest in that yields 7.23% and is compounded monthly. How much will Hajun
    need to invest in the fund when he turns 30 so that he can reach his goal when he retires at age 65?

Compute and Interpret Effective Annual Yield

As we've seen, quarterly compounding pays interest 4 times a year or every 3 months; monthly compounding pays 12
times a year; daily compounding pays interest every day, and so on. Effective annual yield allows direct comparisons
between simple interest and compound interest by converting compound interest to its equivalent simple interest rate.
We can even directly compare different compound interest situations. This gives information that can be used to identify
the best investment from a yield perspective.

Using a formula, we can interpret compound interest as simple interest. The effective annual yield formula stems from
the compound interest formula and is based on an investment of $1 for 1 year.

Effective annual yield is  where = effective annual yield, = interest rate in decimal form, and =

number of times the interest is compounded in a year. is interpreted as the equivalent annual simple interest rate.

EXAMPLE 6.46

Determine and Interpret Effective Annual Yield for 6% Compounded Quarterly
Suppose you have an investment paying a rate of 6% compounded quarterly. Determine and interpret that effective
annual yield of the investment.

     Solution
Here, = 4 (quarterly) and = 0.06 (decimal form). Substituting into the formula we find that the effective annual yield is

Therefore, a rate of 6% compounded quarterly is equivalent to a simple interest rate of 6.14%.

        YOUR TURN 6.46
  1. Calculate and interpret the effective annual yield for an investment that pays at a 7% interest compounded

      quarterly.
586 6 · Money Management

EXAMPLE 6.47

Determine and Interpret Effective Annual Yield for 5% Compounded Daily
Calculate and interpret the effective annual yield on a deposit earning interest at a rate of 5% compounded daily.

     Solution                                                          , we have
In this case, the rate is = 0.05 and = 365 (daily). Using the formula

This tells us that an account earning 5% compounded daily is equivalent to earning 5.13% as simple interest.

      YOUR TURN 6.47
1. Calculate and interpret the effective annual yield on a deposit earning 2.5% compounded daily.

  EXAMPLE 6.48

Choosing a Bank
Minh has a choice of banks in which he will open a savings account. He will deposit $3,200 and he wants to get the best
interest he can. The banks advertise as follows:

                                 Bank      Interest Rate

                                 ABC Bank 2.08% compounded monthly

                                 123 Bank 2.09% compounded annually

                                 XYZ Bank  2.05% compounded daily

Which bank offers the best interest?
     Solution

To compare these directly, Minh could change each interest rate to its effective annual yield, which would allow direct
comparison between the rates. Computing the effective annual yield for all three choices gives:
ABC Bank:

123 Bank:

XYZ Bank:
ABC Bank has the highest effective annual yield, so Minh should choose ABC bank.

      YOUR TURN 6.48

1. Isabella decides to deposit $5,500 in a CD but needs to choose between banks that offer CDs. She identifies four
    banks and finds out the terms of their CDs. Her findings are in the table below.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         6.4 · Compound Interest 587

Bank        Interest Rate

Smith Bank  3.08% compounded quarterly

Park Bank   3.11% compounded annually

Town Bank   3.09% compounded daily

Community Bank 3.10% compounded monthly

      Which bank has the best yield?

Check Your Understanding

19. What is compound interest?

20. Which yields more money, simple interest or compound interest?

21. Find the future value after 15 years of $8,560.00 deposited in an account bearing 4.05% interest compounded
      monthly.

22. $10,000 is deposited in an account bearing 5.6% interest for 5 years. Find the difference between the future value
      when the interest is simple interest and when the interest is compounded quarterly.

23. Find the present value of $75,000 after 28 years if money is invested in an account bearing 3.25% interest
      compounded monthly.

24. What can be done to compare accounts if the rates and number of compound periods per year are different?

25. Find the effective annual yield of an account with 4.89% interest compounded quarterly.

        SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES

 1. What is the difference between simple interest and compound interest?

 2. What is a direct way to compare accounts with different interest rates and number of compounding periods?

 3. Which type of account grows in value faster, one with simple interest or one with compound interest?

How many periods are there if interest is compounded?
     4. Daily
     5. Weekly
     6. Monthly
     7. Quarterly
     8. Semi-annually

In the following exercises, compute the future value of the investment with the given conditions.
     9. Principal = $15,000, annual interest rate = 4.25%, compounded annually, for 5 years
    10. Principal = $27,500, annual interest rate = 3.75%, compounded annually, for 10 years
    11. Principal = $13,800, annual interest rate = 2.55%, compounded quarterly, for 18 years
    12. Principal = $150,000, annual interest rate = 2.95%, compounded quarterly, for 30 years
    13. Principal = $3,500, annual interest rate = 2.9%, compounded monthly, for 7 years
    14. Principal = $1,500, annual interest rate = 3.23%, compounded monthly, for 30 years
    15. Principal = $16,000, annual interest rate = 3.64%, compounded daily, for 13 years
    16. Principal = $9,450, annual interest rate = 3.99%, compounded daily, for 25 years

In the following exercises, compute the present value of the accounts with the given conditions.
    17. Future value = $250,000, annual interest rate = 3.45%, compounded annually, for 25 years
    18. Future value = $300,000, annual interest rate = 3.99%, compounded annually, for 15 years
    19. Future value = $1,500,000, annual interest rate = 4.81%, compounded quarterly, for 35 years
588 6 · Money Management

           20. Future value = $750,000, annual interest rate = 3.95%, compounded quarterly, for 10 years
           21. Future value = $600,000, annual interest rate = 3.79%, compounded monthly, for 17 years
           22. Future value = $800,000, annual interest rate = 4.23%, compounded monthly, for 35 years
           23. Future value = $890,000, annual interest rate = 2.77%, compounded daily, for 25 years
           24. Future value = $345,000, annual interest rate = 2.99%, compounded daily, for 19 years

       In the following exercises, compute the effective annual yield for accounts with the given interest rate and number of
       compounding periods. Round to three decimal places.

           25. Annual interest rate = 2.75%, compounded monthly
           26. Annual interest rate = 3.44%, compounded monthly
           27. Annual interest rate = 5.18%, compounded quarterly
           28. Annual interest rate = 2.56%, compounded quarterly
           29. Annual interest rate = 4.11%, compounded daily
           30. Annual interest rate = 6.5%, compounded daily

       The following exercises explore what happens when a person deposits money in an account earning compound
       interest.

           31. Find the present value of $500,000 in an account that earns 3.85% compounded quarterly for the indicated
                  number of years.
                   a. 40 years
                   b. 35 years
                   c. 30 years
                   d. 25 years
                   e. 20 years
                   f. 15 years

           32. Find the present value of $1,000,000 in an account that earns 6.15% compounded monthly for the indicated
                  number of years.
                   a. 40 years
                   b. 35 years
                   c. 30 years
                   d. 25 years
                   e. 20 years
                   f. 15 years

           33. In the following exercises, the number of years can reflect delaying depositing money. 40 years would be
                  depositing money at the start of a 40-year career. 35 years would be waiting 5 years before depositing the
                  money. Thirty years would be waiting 10 years before depositing the money, and so on. What do you notice
                  happens if you delay depositing money?

           34. For each 5-year gap for exercise 32, compute the difference between the present values. Do these differences
                  remain the same for each of the 5-year gaps, or do they differ? How do they differ? What conclusion can you
                  draw?

       35. Daria invests $2,500 in a CD that yields 3.5% compounded quarterly for 5 years. How much is the CD worth after
             those 5 years?

       36. Maurice deposits $4,200 in a CD that yields 3.8% compounded annually for 3 years. How much is the CD worth
             after those 3 years?

       37. Georgita is shopping for an account to invest her money in. She wants the account to grow to $400,000 in 30 years.
             She finds an account that earns 4.75% compounded monthly. How much does she need to deposit to reach her
             goal?

       38. Zak wants to create a nest egg for himself. He wants the account to be valued at $600,000 in 25 years. He finds an
             account that earns 4.05% interest compounded quarterly. How much does Zak need to deposit in the account to
             reach his goal of $600,000?

       39. Eli wants to compare two accounts for their money. They find one account that earns 4.26% interest compounded
             monthly. They find another account that earns 4.31% interest compounded quarterly. Which account will grow to
             Eli's goal the fastest?

       40. Heath is planning to retire in 40 years. He'd like his account to be worth $250,000 when he does retire. He wants to
             deposit money now. How much does he need to deposit in an account yielding 5.71% interest compounded semi-

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 589

      annually to reach his goal?
41. Jo and Kim want to set aside some money for a down payment on a new car. They have 6 years to let the money

      grow. If they want to make a $15,000 down payment on the car, how much should they deposit now in an account
      that earns 4.36% interest compounded monthly?
42. A newspaper's business section runs an article about savings at various banks in the city. They find six that offer
      accounts that offer compound interest.
      Bank A offers 3.76% compounded daily.
      Bank B offers 3.85% compounded annually.
      Bank C offers 3.77% compounded weekly.
      Bank D offers 3.74% compounded daily.
      Bank E offers 3.81% compounded semi-annually.
      To earn the most interest on a deposit, which bank should a person choose?
43. Paola reads the newspaper article from exercise 32. She really wants to know how different they are in terms of
      dollars, not effective annual yield. She decides to compute the future value for accounts at each bank based on a
      principal of $100,000 that are allowed to grow for 20 years. What is the difference in the future values of the
      account with the highest effective annual yield, and the account with the second highest effective annual yield?
44. Paola reads the newspaper article from exercise 32. She really wants to know how different they are in terms of
      dollars, not effective annual yield. She decides to compute the future value for accounts at each bank based on a
      principal of $100,000 that are allowed to grow for 20 years. What is the difference in the future values of the
      account with the highest effective annual yield, and the account with the lowest effective annual yield?
45. Jesse and Lila need to decide if they want to deposit money this year. If they do, they can deposit $17,400 and allow
      the money to grow for 35 years. However, they could wait 12 years before making the deposit. At that time, they'd
      be able to collect $31,700 but the money would only grow for 23 years. Their account earns 4.63% interest
      compounded monthly. Which plan will result in the most money, depositing $17,400 now or depositing $31,700 in
      12 years?
46. Veronica and Jose are debating if they should deposit $15,000 now in an account or if they should wait 10 years
      and deposit $25,000. If they deposit money now, the money will grow for 35 years. If they wait 10 years, it will grow
      for 25 years. Their account earns 5.25% interest compounded weekly. Which plan will result in the most money,
      depositing $15,000 now or depositing $25,000 in 10 years?

6.5 Making a Personal Budget

Figure 6.7 Calculating a budget is important to your financial health. (credit: "Budget planning concept on white desk" by
Marco Verch Professional Photographer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
590 6 · Money Management

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:

        1. Create a personal budget with the categories of expenses and income.
        2. Apply general guidelines for a budget.

       "That doesn't fit in the budget."

       "We didn't budget for that."

       "We need to figure out our budget and stick to it."

       A budget is an outline of how money and resources should be spent. Companies have them, individuals have them, your
       college has one. But do you have one?

       Creating a realistic budget is an important step in careful stewardship of your financial health. Designing your budget
       will help understand the financial priorities you have, and the constraints on your life choices. You want to have enough
       income to pay not only for the necessities, but also for things that represent your wants, like trips or dinner out. You also
       may want to save money for large purchases or retirement. You do not want to just get by, and you do not want the
       problems associated with overdue balances, rising debt, and possibly losing something you have worked hard to obtain.

       While creating a budget may seem intimidating at first, coming up with your basic budget outline is the hardest part.
       Over time, you will adjust not only the numbers, but the categories.

     Creating a Budget

       You should view creating a budget as a financial tool that will help you achieve your long-term goals. A budget is an
       estimation of income and expenses over some period of time. You will be able to track your progress, which will help you
       to prepare for the future by making smart investment decisions.

       There are several budget-creating tools available, such as the apps Good budget and Mint, and Google Sheets. Getting
       started, though, begins well before you find an app. The following are steps that can be used to create your monthly
       budget.

        1. Track your income and expenses Review your income and expenses for the past 6 months to a year. This will give
             you an idea of your current habits.

        2. Set your income baseline Determine all the sources of income you will have. This income may from paychecks,
             investments, or freelance work. It even includes child support and gifts. Be sure to use income after taxes. This
             allows you to determine your maximum expenditures per month.

             For income that is not steady, such as gig work or freelance work, use the previous 6 to 12 months of income to find
             an average income from that gig or freelance work. Use this average in the budgeting process.

        3. Determine your expenses Review your bills from the past 6 months. You should include mortgage payments or
             rent, insurance, car payments, utilities, groceries, transportation expenses, personal care, entertainment, and
             savings. Using your credit card statements and bank statements will help you determine these amounts. Be aware
             that some of the expenses will not change over time. These are referred to as fixed expenses, like rent, car
             payments, insurance, internet service, and the like. Other expenses may vary widely from month to month and are
             appropriately called variable expenses, and include such expenses as gasoline, groceries.

             Some expenses are yearly, such as insurance or property taxes. Other expanses may be quarterly (four times per
             year) or semiannual (twice per year). To budget for such bills by month, divide the bill total by the number of months
             the bill covers.

        4. Categorize your expenses These categories may be housing, transportation, or food, for broad categories, or may
             get more specific, where you categorize car payments, car insurance, and gasoline separately. The categories are
             your choices. Be sure to account for the cost of maintaining a vehicle or home. The more specific you are, the better
             you'll understand your spending needs and habits.

        5. Total your monthly income and monthly expenses and compare These values should be compared. If your
             expenses are higher than your income, then adjustments have to be made. Decisions of what to do with any extra
             income is part of the planning process also.

        6. Make plans for unplanned expenses Ask anyone, an unexpected car repair can ruin a carefully crafted budget.
             Have a plan for how you can be ready for these random expenses. This often means creating a cushion in your

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 591

     budget.
7. Use your budget to make decisions and adjust for any changes Your budget is a changeable document. Add to it

     when you wish, refer to it when special purchases are to be made. Keeping your budget up to date helps
     accommodate changes in income and expenses.

      VIDEO

     Creating a Budget (https://openstax.org/r/creating_budget)

In this section, we will focus on income and expenses. One of the easiest ways to manage a budget is to create a table,
with one column containing income sources, another with income values, a third with expense categories, and a last
containing expenses. An example is shown in Table 6.1.

Income Source Amount         Expense      Amount

Full-time job  $3,565        Rent         $975

Uber           $185          Car Payment  $355

TOTAL          $3,750 Student Loan        $418

                             Electric     $76

                             Food         $400

                             Gasoline     $250

                             Car Insurance $165

                             Clothing     $100

                             Entertainment $100

                             TOTAL        $2,839

Table 6.1 Table with Budget

      WHO KNEW?

Gross Pay and Take Home Pay

If you've ever had a paycheck, you know that taxes are taken out of your pay before you get your check. This amount
of money varies from state to state, and sometimes even city to city. For a person making $50,000 per year gross
salary in Salt Lake City, Utah, take home pay is about 75.6% of gross salary. In Detroit, Michigan, take home pay is
about 74.5% of gross salary. Lakeland, Florida, take home pay is about 80.5% of gross salary. These also change based
on how much a person earns! Before choosing a place to live, it makes sense to determine how much deductions
from pay will impact your income.

  EXAMPLE 6.49

Creating a Budget
Heather has graduated college and currently works as a nurse for a rural medical group. Her net monthly income from
that job is $3,765.40. She also works part-time on the weekends, earning another $672.00 per month. Her monthly
expenses are rent at $1,050, car payments at $489, student loan payments at $728, car insurance at $139, utilities at
$130, clothing at $150, entertainment (going out with friends, Netflix, Amazon Prime, movies) at $300, credit card debt at
592 6 · Money Management

       $200, food at $360, and gasoline at $275. Create her budget in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and
       determine how much excess income per month she has or how much she falls short by each month.

            Solution
       Step 1: To begin, we create the table with appropriate headings.

                                                         Income Source Amount Expense Amount

Step 2: Her income categories are her nursing job, with $3,765.40 per month, and her part-time job, with $672.00 per
month. Entering these into the table, we have the following.

                                 Income Source Amount Expense Amount

                                 Nursing    $3,765.40

                                 Part-time  $672.00

Step 3: Her monthly expenses are listed above. Entering the categories and the amount for each of those expenses, the
table is now

                                 Income Source Amount  Expense       Amount

                                 Nursing    $3,765.40  Rent          $1,050

                                 Part-time  $672.00 Car Payment      $489

                                                       Student Loan  $728

                                                       Car Insurance $139

                                                       Utilities     $130

                                                       Clothing      $150

                                                       Entertainment $300

                                                       Credit Card   $200

                                                       Food          $400

                                                       Gasoline      $250

Step 4: Totaling the income and expenses, we see that her total income is $4,437.40 per month, and her total expenses
are $3,836 per month. Comparing these, we see that Heather has $601.40 in excess income per month. This provides a
cushion in her budget.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 593

        YOUR TURN 6.49

  1. Mateo works as a union electrician in a suburban area. Monthly, his take home pay is $3,375. He sometimes does
      small side jobs for family or friends, and averages about $300 per month from these little jobs. His monthly
      expenses are his mortgage at $986.78, truck payments at $589.00, truck insurance at $312, utilities at $167,
      clothing at $150, entertainment at $400, credit card debt at $325, food at $470, and gasoline at $375. Create
      Mateo's budget in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and determine how much excess income
      per month he has or how much he falls short by each month.

  EXAMPLE 6.50

Creating a Budget
Carol is working in a dental lab, creating dentures and bridges. Monthly her take home pay is $2,816 (based on $22 per
hour minus payroll taxes). She also receives $320 per month in child support for her one daughter. Her monthly
expenses are rent at $700, car payments at $229, student loan payments at $250, car insurance at $119, health insurance
at $225, utilities at $80, clothing at $75, entertainment at $200, food at $275, and gasoline at $275. Create Carol's budget
in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and determine how much excess income per month she has or
how much she falls short by each month.

     Solution
Step 1: To begin, we create the table with appropriate headings.

                                                 Income Source Amount Expense Amount

Step 2: Her income categories are from work, $2,816, and child support, $320, per month. Entering these into the table,
we have the following.

Income Source Amount Expense Amount

     Job  $2,816.00

Child support $320.00

Step 3: Her monthly expenses are listed above. Entering the categories and the amount for each of those expenses, the
table is now

Income Source Amount   Expense        Amount

Job       $2,816.00    Rent           $700

Child support $320.00  Car Payment    $229

                       Student Loan   $250

                       Car Insurance  $119

                       Utilities      $80
594 6 · Money Management

                                 Income Source Amount   Expense        Amount

                                                        Health insurance $225

                                                        Clothing       $75

                                                        Entertainment  $200

                                                        Food           $275

                                                        Gasoline       $275

Step 4: Totaling the income and expenses, we see that her total income is $3,136.00 per month, and her total expenses
are $2,428.00 per month. Comparing these, we see that Carol has $708.00 in excess income per month. This is the
cushion in her budget.

      YOUR TURN 6.50

1. Maddy works as a mechanical engineer, making $6,093.75 monthly after payroll taxes. Her monthly expenses are
    her mortgage at $1,452.89, car payments at $627.38, car insurance at $179.00, health insurance at $265.00,
    utilities at $320, clothing at $150, entertainment at $400, credit card debt at $450, food at $370, and gasoline at
    $175. Create Maddy's budget in a table, compare the total income to total expenses, and determine how much
    excess income per month she has or how much she falls short by each month.

Using the budget process, we can make decisions on adding expenses to the budget. To do so, check the cushion of the
budget to see if there is room in the budget for the new expense.

  EXAMPLE 6.51

Adding to an Existing Budget
In the example above, Carol had excess income of $708.00. She looks up the cost of before-school care for her daughter.
She finds that, monthly, the cost would be $252.00 per month. Is this an affordable program for Carol? Add this expense
to her budget table.

     Solution
She can afford this, as the cost for the before school program is $252.00 and she had extra income of $708.00. Adding
this to her budget, her budget table is now

                                 Income Source Amount   Expense        Amount

                                 Job  $2,816.00         Rent           $700

                                 Child support $320.00  Car Payment    $229

                                                        Student Loan   $250

                                                        Car Insurance  $119

                                                        Utilities      $80

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 595

Income Source Amount                              Expense           Amount

                                                  Health insurance  $225

                                                  Clothing          $75

                                                  Entertainment     $200

                                                  Food              $275

                                                  Gasoline          $275

                                                  Before-school care $252

Now, she has $456.00 in excess income per month.

        YOUR TURN 6.51

  1. Recall Heather's budget from Example 6.49. She decides she wants to buy her own home, which would increase
      her expenses. Instead of $1,050.00 in rent, she would pay $1,240.00 for her mortgage. Her utilities costs would
      increase to $295.00 per month. Add these to Heather's budget to determine if the changes are affordable.

The 50-30-20 Budget Philosophy

It isn't clear, obvious, or easy to decide how much of your income to allocate to various categories of expenses. Many
people pay their bills and then consider all the leftover money to be spending money. However, when developing your
own budget, you may want to follow the 50-30-20 budget philosophy, which provides a basic guideline for how your
income could be allocated. Fifty percent of your budget is allotted to your needs, 30% of your budget is allotted to pay
for your wants, and 20% of your budget is allotted for savings and debt service (paying off your debts).

Knowing what expenses are necessary and what expenses are wants is important, since wants and needs are often
confused. The following are necessary expenses that represent basic living requirements and debt services. This list
isn't complete: mortgage/rent, utilities, car, car insurance, health care, groceries, gasoline, child care (for working
parents), and minimum debt payments. The 50-30-20 budget philosophy suggests that 50%, or half, your income go to
these necessities.

Wants, though, are things you could live without but still wish to have, such as Amazon Prime, restaurant dinners, coffee
from Starbucks, vacation trips, and hobby costs. Even a gym membership or that new laptop are wants. Creating the
room to afford these wants is important to our mental health. Not budgeting for things we want will negatively impact
our quality of life.

The remaining 20% should be set aside, either in retirement funds, stocks, other investments, an emergency fund
(recommendations are that an emergency fund have 3 months of income), and perhaps extra spent to pay down debt.
This 20% is very useful for addressing those unexpected costs, such as repairs or replacement of items that no longer
work. Without budgeting this cushion, any expense that is a surprise can cause us to miss necessary payments.

The list of necessary expenses was not complete. There are other expenses that could be included.

Necessary Expenses and Expenses that are Wants

For some people, an expense will be necessary while the same expense for someone else will be a want. A good example
of this is internet service. Many people consider internet service as a need, especially those who work from home or who
are not able to leave their homes. One could also call internet service a need if they have children in school. For others,
internet service is a want. If a person's job doesn't require them to be online, if they are not in school, if they do not have
kids, then internet service can be dropped. There are public options for internet service. One could even use their phone
as a hot spot.

Cars often fall into the category of need, but could also fall into the want category, depending on where and how you
596 6 · Money Management

live. Bikes, public transportation, and walking are all options that could replace a car. This would then remove the cost of
gasoline and car insurance.

Another consideration when deciding if an item on your budget is a need or a want is about your choices and priorities.
A car is a need for many. But the need for a car is not the same as the need for a specific car. If you choose to buy a car
with payments that exceed your budgeted amount for the car, then that car is a want. The amount you exceed the
budget now belongs in the want category.

The same can be said for housing. If you want an apartment that costs $1,250 per month, but your budget only allows
for an apartment that costs $900, then $350 of the rent is a want.

The point of that is to carefully consider if an expense is a need as opposed to a want.

When your expenses exceed your income, you may want to change how you budget your income to line up with these
guidelines. This may mean cutting back, finding less-expensive living arrangements, finding a less-expensive (and more
fuel-efficient) car, or sacrificing some specialty groceries. Using these guidelines keeps your financial life manageable.

Better still, they can guide you as you begin your life after graduation.

  EXAMPLE 6.52

Evaluate a Budget Using 50-30-20 model
In the example above, after Carol added before school care for her daughter to the budget, her budget was as shown
below. Evaluate Carol's budget using the 50-30-20 budget philosophy.

                                 Income Source Amount           Expense        Amount

                                 Job  $2,816.00                 Rent              $700

                                 Child support $320.00          Car Payment       $229

                                                                Student Loan      $250

                                                                Car Insurance     $119

                                                                Utilities         $80

                                                        Health insurance          $225

                                                                Clothing          $75

                                                                Entertainment     $200

                                                                Food              $275

                                                                Gasoline          $275

                                                        Before-school care $252

     Solution
Carol's total income is $3,136.00. Applying the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to this income requires the calculation of
each of those percentages.

For the necessities, Carol should budget 50% of her income, or                          .

For her wants, she should budget 30% of her income, or                         .

For savings and extra debt service, she should budget 20% of her income, or                .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 597

In her budget, her necessities include all expenses except for entertainment. These expenses total $2,480, which exceeds
the suggested budget amount of $1568.00. To follow the guidelines, Carol would have to cut back on these necessities.

For her wants, she spends $200.00 on entertainment, which is well below the suggested budget amount of $940.80. If
she modifies how much she spends on needs, she may be able to increase the spending on her wants.

Her excess income is $456.00, which is below what she should be saving and using to pay down extra debt. If she does
adjust how much she spends on needs, she could increase the amount for savings.

YOUR TURN 6.52

1. Recall Heather's budget from Example 6.49, before she thought of moving. That budget is below. Evaluate
    Heather's budget using the 50-30-20 budget philosophy.

                Income Source Amount               Expense       Amount

                Nursing                 $3,765.40  Rent          $1,050

                Part-time               $672.00 Car Payment      $489

                                                   Student Loan  $728

                                                   Car Insurance $139

                                                   Utilities     $130

                                                   Clothing      $150

                                                   Entertainment $300

                                                   Credit Card   $200

                                                   Food          $400

                                                   Gasoline      $250

EXAMPLE 6.53

Creating a Budget Based on the 50-30-20 Budget Philosophy
Carmen is about to graduate and has been offered a job at a bank as a data scientist. She estimates her monthly take
home pay to be $5,662.50. Apply the 50-30-20 philosophy to that monthly income. How should Carmen use this
information?

Solution

Step 1. To apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to Carmen's income, she needs to calculate 50%, 30%, and 20% of her

income. Fifty percent of her income is             . Thirty percent of her income is

                . Twenty percent of her income is                        .

Step 2. She would then budget $2,831.25 for her needs, $1,698.75 for her wants, and $1,132.50 for savings and debt
service.

Step 3. When choosing where to live, what to eat, and what to drive, she should make choices that keep those costs,
combined with her debt service costs, gasoline, and utilities, below $2,831.25. This means she will have to make
598 6 · Money Management

decisions about what her priorities are.

Step 4. She should then figure out what she wants to do with her money, and stay within the limits, that is, keep those
costs below $1,698.75.

Step 5. Finally, she can begin building her savings with the remaining $1,132.50.

      YOUR TURN 6.53

1. Elijah has finished an apprenticeship and is about to start his first job as an HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air
    conditioning) tech. He estimates that his net monthly income will be $3,263.44. Apply the 50-30-20 budget
    philosophy to his income to set guidelines for Elijah's budget. How should Elijah use this information?

EXAMPLE 6.54

Using the 50-30-20 Budget Philosophy to Analyze Affordability
Steve is thinking of moving out of his family's home. He currently works at a full-time job making $18 per hour, which will
give him, approximately, a net annual income of $29,180 (working 40 hours per week for 52 weeks per year). He has
student debt that he pays off at $218.00 per month, and already owns a car that he pays $162.00 per month for.

1. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to Steve's income.
2. If he follows the budget, how much does he have, after paying his car payment and student loan, to spend on

     necessities.
3. If he follows the budget, how much will he set aside for wants? For savings?
4. Discuss the affordability of moving out, based on Steve's budget.

Solution

Before the 50-30-20 philosophy can be applied, Steve's monthly income needs to be determined. This is found by

dividing his annual income by 12. This gives  . This will be used for his monthly budget.

1. To apply the 50-30-20 philosophy to Steve's income, find 50%, 30%, and 20% of his monthly income.

Needs (50%): 50% of his income is             .

Wants (30%):

Savings (20%):

2. The total for Steve's needs is $1,215.83. From this, he already pays $218.00 for his student loans, and $162.00 for his

car payment. Together that is $380.00. Subtracting from the amount he should budget for his needs, he can spend

$835.83 on other needs.

3. Steve budgeted $729.50 for wants, and $486.33 for savings and other debt servicing.

4. Steve will have other needs to pay for, including rent, utilities, food, heath care, gasoline, and car insurance. It is

difficult to imagine Steve being able to afford to move out, unless he reallocates money that he would want to save,

or use for entertainment and other wants, or takes on another job. Even if Steve uses all the money that the

50-30-20 budget sets aside for savings, he still only has $1,322.16 to spend on those necessities. It does not appear

he can afford to move out.

      YOUR TURN 6.54

Fran wants to take a new job but will have to move to an area with a higher cost of living. With her current income,
she can use the 50-30-20 budget philosophy. The new job will have a net pay of $43,700 annually. She will still have
to pay her car payment of $295.00, her student loans that cost $264.00 per month, and her outstanding credit card
debt, on which she pays $200 per month.

    1. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to Fran's new income.
    2. If she follows the budget, how much does she have, after paying her credit card debt, car payment and

         student loan, to spend on necessities.
    3. If she follows the budget, how much will she set aside for wants? For savings?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 6.5 · Making a Personal Budget 599

      4. Discuss the affordability of changing jobs and moving, based on Fran's budget.

       VIDEO

      50-30-20 Budget Philosophy (https://openstax.org/r/50-30-20_budgeting_rule)

Check Your Understanding

26. What is a budget?

27. What are necessary expenses?

28. David gathers his paystubs and bills from the past 6 months. His income, after taxes, is $3,450 per month. His rent,
      utilities included, is $925. His car payments are $178.54 per month, his car insurance is $129.49 per month, his
      credit cards cost him $117.00 per month, he spends $195 per month on gas, his food costs are $290 per month. He
      also spends $21.99 on Amazon prime, $49.99 on his internet bill, and $400 per month going out. Create David's
      monthly budget, including totals, based on that information.

29. Using David's Budget from Exercise 28, how much income does he have per month after accounting for his
      expenses?

30. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to David's budget.

31. Evaluate David's budget with respect to the 50-30-20 budget philosophy.

        SECTION 6.5 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, categorize each expense as a necessary expense or an expense that is a want.
     1. Rent
     2. Dinner at a restaurant.
     3. Car payment
     4. New game system
     5. Gym membership
     6. Electric bill
     7. Heating bill
     8. Phone bill
     9. Netflix
    10. Student Loan Payment

11. Explain how a necessary expense for one person could be a want expense for another person.

12. Explain how a necessary expense may be partly a necessary expense and partially a want expense.

In the following exercises, create the budget, including totals and how much the income exceeds or falls short of the
expenses, based on the information given.

    13. Per month: paychecks = $3,680, consulting = $900, Mortgage = $1,198.00, Utilities = $376, Cell phone = $67.50,
          Car payments = $627.85, Car insurance = $183.50, Student loans = $833, Food = $450, Gasoline = $275, Internet
          = $69, Dining out = $250, Credit cards = $375, entertainment = $300

    14. Per month: paychecks = $2,750, child support = $500, Mortgage = $945.50, Utilities = $195, Cell phone = $37.50,
          Car payments = $298.23, Car insurance = $163.50, Student loans = $438, Food = $250, Gasoline = $175, Internet
          = $49, Netflix = $15, After school care = $711, Credit cards = $150, entertainment = $150

    15. Per month: paychecks = $4,385, Rent = $1095, Utilities = $165, Cell phone = $67.50, Car payments = $467.35, Car
          insurance = $243.75, Student loans = $1,150, Food = $325, Gasoline = $260, Internet = $99, Netflix = $15,
          Amazon = $23, Gym membership = $49, entertainment = $650

    16. Per month: paychecks = $3,460, Gig job = $173, Rent = $895, Utilities = $165, Car payments = $195.80, Car
          insurance = $123.30, Food = $265, Gasoline = $185, Internet = $39, Hulu = $15, Amazon = $23, Credit cards
          $97.60, Entertainment = $600

In the following exercises, determine the amount of money that should be allocated to each of the three categories of
the 50-30-20 budget philosophy guidelines.

    17. Referring to Exercise 13: Monthly income = $4,580.00
    18. Referring to Exercise 14: Monthly income = $3,250.00
600 6 · Money Management

           19. Referring to Exercise 15: Monthly income = $4,385.00
           20. Referring to Exercise 16: Monthly income = $3,633.00

       In the following exercises, evaluate the given budget with respect to the 50-30-20 budget philosophy guidelines.
           21. The budget and 50-30-20 rule from exercises 13 and 17.
           22. The budget and 50-30-20 rule from exercises 14 and 18.
           23. The budget and 50-30-20 rule from exercises 15 and 19.
           24. The budget and 50-30-20 rule from exercises 16 and 20.

       For the following exercises, Kiera and Logan sit down to make their budget. Kiera works full time as a mental health
       counselor and sells kids toys on her own. Logan works as a branch manager at a local bank and works part-time at the
       nearby bar. They collect their financial document to work out their budget. Kiera's paychecks from her job as a mental
       health counselor, after taxes and per month, total $3,021. Logan's paychecks from the bank, after taxes and per month,
       total $3,827. Kiera's income from toy sales for the last 3 months were $140, $87, and $475. Logan's take-home pay from
       the bartending job for the last 3 months were $540, $310, and $449.

           25. Determine how much income Kiera and Logan have per month.
           26. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to their income.

       For the following exercises, Kiera and Logan gather their bills from the last 6 months. Their fixed expenses, with costs,
       are rent for $1,350, Kiera's car payment for $275, Logan's car payment of $380, student loans (they each have students
       loans) for $934, car insurance for $289, internet service for $39, Netflix for $15, Amazon Prime for $24, gym
       membership for $99, and cell phones for $250. The variable cost expenses, and their average costs for the last 6
       months, are utilities for $370, gasoline for $500, food for $475, clothing for $225, and miscellaneous entertainment
       expenses for $535. They always pay off their credit card bill and carry no balance.

           27. Create their budget, using the income from Exercise 25.
           28. Categorize each expense as a need or a want. Find the total for each, along with remaining income.
           29. Compare their budget to the guidelines from the 50-30-20 budget from Exercise 27.
           30. Determine if Kiera and Logan can afford to buy a new computer, which would cost $330 per month for the next

                  6 months.

       In the following exercises, the Federal Paycheck Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/smartasset) was used to estimate
       monthly take-home pay. The annual salary, before taxes and deductions, is provided. Then, the monthly take-home pay
       after taxes and deductions is given (which means the monthly take-home pay is not just the annual salary divided by
       12!). In each case, apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to the monthly take-home income. Note: These are based on
       living in Indianapolis, Indianapolis, unmarried and with no dependents.

           31. Annual salary: $30,000. Monthly take home: $1,938
           32. Annual salary: $40,000.00. Monthly take home: $2,564
           33. Annual salary: $50,000. Monthly take home: $3,144
           34. Annual salary: $70,000. Monthly take home: $4,229
           35. Annual salary: $100,000. Monthly take home: $5,840
           36. Annual salary: 150,000. Monthly take home: $8,506

       In the following exercises, the Federal Paycheck Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/smartasset) was used to estimate
       monthly take-home pay. The hourly pay, before taxes and deductions, is provided. Then, the monthly take-home pay
       after taxes and deductions is given (which means the monthly take-home pay is not just the hourly pay times 174
       hours!). In each case, apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to the monthly take-home income. Note: These are based
       on living in Tempe, Arizona, unmarried and with no dependents.

           37. Hourly pay: $12.15 (minimum wage in Tempe, Arizona as of September 2022). Monthly take home: $1,698
           38. Hourly pay: $15.00. Monthly take home: $2,083
           39. Hourly pay: $17.50. Monthly take home: $2,421
           40. Hourly pay: $19.75. Monthly take home: $2,725
           41. Hourly pay: $25.00. Monthly take home: $3,369
           42. Hourly pay: $35.00. Monthly take home: $4,547

        Access for free at openstax.org
                        6.6 · Methods of Savings 601

6.6 Methods of Savings

 Figure 6.8 Money wisely invested grows over time. (credit: "Stack of Cash" by Janak Raja/Flickr, Public Domain Mark 1.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:

 1. Distinguish various basic forms of savings plans.
 2. Compute return on investment for basic forms of savings plans.
 3. Compute payment to reach a financial goal.

The stock market crash of 1929 led to the Great Depression, a decade-long global downturn in productivity and
employment. A state of shock swept through the United States; the damage to people's lives was immeasurable.
Americans no longer trusted established financial institutions. By October 1931, the banking industry's biggest challenge
was restoring confidence to the American public. In the next 10 years, the federal government would impose strict
regulations and guidelines on the financial industry. The Emergency Banking Act of 1933 created the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which insures bank deposits. The new federal guidelines helped ease suspicions among
the general public about the banking industry. Gradually, things returned to normal, and today we have more
investment instruments, many insured through the FDIC, than ever before.

In this section, we will first look at the different types of savings accounts and proceed to discuss the various types of
investments. There is some overlap, but we will try to differentiate among these financial instruments. Saving money
should be a goal of every adult, but it can also be a difficult goal to attain.

Distinguish Various Basic Forms of Savings Plans

There are at least three types of savings accounts. Traditional savings accounts, certificates of deposit (CDs), and money
market accounts are three main savings account vehicles.

Savings Account

A savings account is probably the most well-known type of investment, and for many people it is their first experience
with a bank. A savings account is a deposit account, held at a bank or other financial institution, which bears some
interest on the deposited money. Savings accounts are intended as a place to save money for emergencies or to achieve
short-term goals. They typically pay a low interest rate, but there is virtually no risk involved, and they are insured by the
FDIC for up to $250,000.

Savings accounts have some strengths. They are highly flexible. Generally, there are no limitations on the number of
withdrawals allowed and no limit on how much you can deposit. It is not unusual, however, that a savings account will
have a minimum balance in order for the bank to pay maintenance costs. If your account should dip below the
minimum, there are usually fees attached.
602 6 · Money Management

      WHO KNEW?

Many banks are covered by FDIC insurance. The FDIC is the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and is an
independent agency created by the U.S. Congress. One of its purposes is to provide insurance for deposits in banks,
including savings accounts. Be aware, not all banks are FDIC insured. The FDIC insures up to $250,000 for a savings
account, so you do not want your balance to exceed that federally insured limit.

Having your savings account at the same bank as your checking account does offer a real advantage. For example, if
your checking account is approaching its lower limit, you can transfer funds from your savings account and avoid any
bank fees. Similarly, if you have an excess of funds in your checking account, you can transfer funds to your savings
account and earn some interest. Checking accounts rarely pay interest.

                 PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

  J.P. Morgan

  J.P. Morgan was a wealthy banker around the turn of the 20th century. His business interests included railroads and
  the steel industry. However, it was in 1907 that a financial crisis, caused by poor banking decisions and followed by
  such great distrust in the banking system that a frenzy of withdrawals from banks occurred, that J.P. Morgan and
  other wealthy bankers lent from their own funds to help stabilize and save the system.

There are some weaknesses to savings accounts. Primarily, it is because savings accounts earn very low interest rates.
This means they are not the best way to grow your money. Experts, though, recommend keeping a savings account
balance to cover 3 to 6 months of living expenses in case you should lose your job, have a sudden medical expense, or
other emergency.

Around tax time, you will receive a 1099-INT form stating the amount of interest earned on your savings, which is the
amount that must be reported when you file your tax return. A 1099 form is a tax form that reports earnings that do not
come from your employer, including interest earned on savings accounts. These 1099 forms have the suffix INT to
indicate that the income is interest income.

Savings accounts earn interest, and those earnings can be found using the interest formulas from previous sections. The
final value of these accounts is sometimes called the future value of the account.

EXAMPLE 6.55

Single Deposit in a Savings Account
Violet deposits $4,520.00 in a savings account bearing 1.45% interest compounded annually. If she does not add to or
withdraw any of that money, how much will be in the account after 3 years?

Solution

To find the compound interest, use the formula from Compound Interest,  , where represents the

amount in the account after years, with initial deposit (or principal) of , at an annual interest rate, in decimal form, of

, compounded times per year. Violet has a principal of $4,520.00, which will earn an interest of = 0.0145,

compounded yearly (so = 1), for = 3 years. Substituting and calculating, we find that Violet's account will be worth

Or, Violet will have $4,719.48 after 3 years.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      6.6 · Methods of Savings 603

      YOUR TURN 6.55

1. Brian deposits $5,600 in a savings account that yields 1.23% interest compounded annually. If he leaves that
    deposit in the account and adds nothing new to the account, what will the account be worth in 5 years?

      WHO KNEW?

Banks have not always offered interest on savings accounts. An 1836 publication from Indiana noted that banks in
other states allow small interest on deposits. It specifically says that in these other states, these deposits are what
business transactions are based upon. And that giving interest would encourage deposits, and thus increase the
business that banks can do.

Journal of the House of Representatives of the Sate of Indiana (https://openstax.org/r/onepage)

Certificates of Deposit, or CDs

We discussed certificates of deposit (CDs) in earlier sections. CDs differ from savings accounts in a few ways. First, the
investment lasts for a fixed period of time, agreed to when the money is invested in the CD. These time periods often
range from 6 months to 5 years. Money from the CD cannot be withdrawn (without penalty) until the investment period
is up. Also, money cannot be added to an existing CD.

Certificates of deposit have features similar to savings accounts. They are insured by the FDIC. They are entirely safe.
They do, though, offer a better interest rate. The trade-off is that once the money is invested in a CD, that money is
unavailable until the investment period ends.

EXAMPLE 6.56

5-Year CD
Silvio deposits $10,000 in a CD that yields 2.17% compounded semiannually for 5 years. How much is the CD worth after
5 years?

Solution

This also uses the compound interest formula from Compound Interest,  , Substituting the values =

$10,000, = 0.0217, = 2 (semiannually means twice per year), and = 5, we find the account will be worth

The CD will be worth $11,219.53 after 5 years.

        YOUR TURN 6.56

  1. Denise deposits $3,500 in a CD bearing 2.23% interest compounded quarterly for 3 years. How much will Denise's
      CD be worth after those 3 years?

Money Market Account

A money market account is similar to a savings account, except the number of transactions (withdrawals and transfers)
is generally limited to six each month. Money market accounts typically have a minimum balance that must be
maintained. If the balance in the account drops below the minimum, there is likely to be a penalty. Money market
accounts offer the flexibility of checks and ATM cards. Finally, the interest rate on a money market account is typically
604 6 · Money Management

higher than the interest rate on a savings account.

EXAMPLE 6.57

Single Deposit to a Money Market Account
Marietta opens a money market account, and deposits $2,500.00 in the account. It bears 1.76% interest compounded
monthly. If she makes no other transactions on the account, how much will be in the account after 4 years?

Solution

This, once again, uses the compound interest formula from Compound Interest:       , Substituting the

values = $25,000, = 0.0176, = 12, and = 4, we find the account will be worth

The money market account will be worth $2,682.20 after 4 years.

      YOUR TURN 6.57

1. Chuck opens a money market account, and deposits $8,500.00 in the account. It bears 1.83% interest
    compounded quarterly. If he leaves makes no other transactions on the account, how much will be in the
    account after 3 years?

Return on Investment

If we want to compare the profitability of different investments, like savings accounts versus other investment tools, we
need a measure that evens the playing field. Such a measure is return on investment.

FORMULA

The return on investment, often denoted ROI, is the percent difference between the initial investment,  , and the

final value of the investment, , or                  , expressed as a percentage.

      The length of time of the investment is not considered in ROI.

  EXAMPLE 6.58

Calculating Return on Investment
 1. Determine the return on investment for the 5-year CD from Example 6.56. Round the percentage to two decimal

      places.
 2. Determine the return on investment for the money market account from Example 6.57. Round the percentage to

      two decimal places.
     Solution
 1. The initial deposit in the CD was $10,000, so = $10,000. The value at the end of 5 years was $11,239.53. so =
      $11,239.53. Substituting and computing we find the return on investment.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               6.6 · Methods of Savings 605

     The ROI is 12.40%.

2. The initial deposit in the money market was $2,500, so = $2,500. The value at the end of 4 years was $2,682.20. so
           = $2,682.20. Substituting and computing we find the return on investment.

The ROI is 7.29%.

  YOUR TURN 6.58

1. The amount of $13,000 is invested in a savings account. After 10 years the account has $15,250.00. Find the
    return on investment for this account.

2. The amount of $6,500 is deposited in a money market account. After 7 years, the account has $7,358.00. Find
    the return on investment for this account.

VIDEO
Return on Investment, ROI (https://openstax.org/r/This_video)

Annuities as Savings

In Compound Interest, we talked about the future value of a single deposit. In reality, people often open accounts that
allow them to add deposits, or payments, to the account at regular intervals. This agrees with the 50-30-20 budget
philosophy, where some income is saved every month. When a deposit is made at the end of each compounding period,
such a savings account is called an ordinary annuity.

The formula for the future value of an ordinary annuity is     , where is the future value

of the annuity, is the payment, is the annual interest rate (in decimal form), is the number of compounding
periods per year, and is the number of years.

It is important to note that the number of deposits per year and the number of periods per year are the same.

Another form of annuity if the annuity due, which has deposits at the start of each compounding period. This other
annuity type has different formulas and is not addressed in this text.

  EXAMPLE 6.59

Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity
Jill has an account that bears 3.75% interest compounded monthly. She decides to deposit $250.00 each month, at the
606 6 · Money Management

       end of the compounding period, into this account. What is the future value of this account, after 8 years?
            Solution

       These are regular payments into an account bearing compound interest. She is depositing them at the end of each
       compounding period. This makes this an ordinary annuity. Substituting the values = 250, = 0.0375, = 12, and = 8
       into the formula, we find the future value of the account.

       The account, after 8 years, will contain $27,938.20.

               YOUR TURN 6.59
         1. Kelly invests $525 every third month, at the end of the compounding period, into an account bearing 3.89%

              interest compounded quarterly. How much will be in the account after 15 years?

                WHO KNEW?
         Setting Savings Account Interest Rates
         There are a number of factors that contribute to the amount a bank gives for savings accounts. The interest rate
         reflects how much the bank values deposits. It also reflects the money that the bank will earn when they lend out
         money. Finally, interest rates are impacted by the Federal Reserve Bank. When the Fed raises interest rates, so do
         banks.

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
         The Federal Reserve Chairperson
         The Federal Reserve Board monitors the risks in the financial system to help ensure a healthy economy for
         individuals, companies, and communities. The Board oversees the 12 regional reserve banks. The Chairperson of the
         Federal Reserve Board testifies to Congress twice per year, meets with the secretary of the Treasury, chairs the Federal
         Open Market Committee, and is the face of federal monetary policy. Currently, the Fed Chair is Jerome Powell, who
         has served since 2018.

         EXAMPLE 6.60
       Saving for College
       When Yusef was born, Rita and George began to save for Yusef's college years by investing $2,500 each year in a savings
       account bearing 3.4% interest compounded annually. How much will they have saved after 18 years?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              6.6 · Methods of Savings 607

Solution

To find the future value of the account, we use the ordinary annuity formula  . The

payment is $2,500, rate is 0.034, the number of compounding periods is 1, and the number of years is 18. Substituting
these values and computing, we have

After saving for 18 years, Rita and George will have $60,694.77 for Yusef's college.

        YOUR TURN 6.60
  1. Bemnet saves $280 per month in a savings account bearing 3.11% interest compounded monthly. After 20 years,

      how much does Bemnet have in the account?

          TECH CHECK
  Google Sheets offers a function to calculate the future value of an ordinary annuity. To get Google Sheets to calculate
  the future value, you use the following:
  =fv(rate,number_of_periods, payment, present_value, end_or_beginning).
  To explain, the rate is the rate per compounding period. From our formula, that is . Also, the number of periods
  must be entered. From our formula, that is . The payment is the amount deposited each period. Present value is
  0 if we begin with no money and rely only on the payments to be made. However, if some money is available to put in
  the account before the payments start, that amount, an initial deposit, would be the value of . Finally, for an
  ordinary annuity, enter 0 for end or beginning. Using the values for Jill, the payment amount is $250, = 0.0375, =
  12, = 8, and that there is no initial deposit, = 0, the Google Sheets formula is
  =fv(0.0375/12,12*8,250,0,0).
  Figure 6.9 shows the formula in Google Sheets.

                                                             Figure 6.9 Google Sheets formula
  Hitting the enter key shows the payment value (Figure 6.10).
608 6 · Money Management

                                                                Figure 6.10 Payment value
Notice that the future value is negative, since it is a payment leaving an account.

       VIDEO

      Future Value Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/cell_references)

Compute Payment to Reach a Financial Goal

The formula used to get the future value of an ordinary annuity is useful, finding out what the final amount in the
account will be. However, that isn't how planning works. To plan, we need to know how much to put into the ordinary
annuity each compounding period in order to reach a goal. Fortunately, that formula exists.

FORMULA

The formula for the amount that needs to be deposited per period, , of an ordinary annuity to reach a specified

goal, , is                , where is the annual interest rate (in decimal form), is the number of periods

per year, and is the number of years.

With this formula, it is possible to plan the amount to be saved.

  EXAMPLE 6.61

Saving for a Car
Yaroslava wants to save in order to buy a car, in 3 years, without taking out a loan. She determines that she'll need
$35,500 for the purchase. If she deposits money into an ordinary annuity that yields 4.25% interest compounded
monthly, how much will she need to deposit each month?

     Solution
Yaroslava has a goal and needs to know the payments to make to reach the goal. Her goal is = $35,500, with an
interest rate = 0.0425, compounded per month so = 12, and for 3 years, making = 3. Substituting into the formula,
Yaroslava finds the necessary payment.

To reach her goal, Yaroslava would need to deposit $926.33 in her account each month.
      This has been rounded up, so that the deposits don't fall short of the goal. However, some round off using the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.6 · Methods of Savings 609

      standard rounding rules: if the last digit is 1, 2, 3, or 4, the number is rounded down; if the last digit is 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9
      the number is rounded up.

        YOUR TURN 6.61
  1. Chione decides to put new siding on her house. She finds that it will cost about $27,800. She decides to begin

      saving for the purchase so that she doesn't take on debt to side the house. How much would Chione need to
      deposit each quarter in an ordinary annuity that yields 5.16% compounded quarterly for 5 years?

          TECH CHECK
  Google Sheets offers a function to calculate the payment necessary to reach a goal using ordinary annuities. To get
  Google Sheets to calculate the payment, you use the following:
  =pmt(rate,number_of_periods, present_value, future_value, end_or_beginning).
  To explain, the rate is per compounding period. From our formula, that is . Also, the number of periods must be
  entered. From our formula, that is . The present value is the amount of money that the account begins with. If we
  begin with no money and rely only on the payments to be made, then this number is 0. However, if some money is
  available to put in the account before the payments start, that amount, an initial deposit, would be the value of .
  Next, enter the future value, . Finally, for an ordinary annuity, enter 0 for end or beginning. Using the values for
  Yaroslava, = 0.0425, = 12, = 3, and that there is no initial deposit, = 0, the Google Sheets formula is
  =pmt(0.0425/12,12*3,0,35500,0).
  Figure 6.11 shows the formula in Google Sheets.

                                                             Figure 6.11 Google Sheets formula
  Hitting the enter key shows the payment value (Figure 6.12).

                                                                  Figure 6.12 Payment value
  Notice that the payment is negative, since it is a payment leaving an account. Additionally, the payment is $926.32.
  We rounded that up, but Google Sheets rounded off.

Check Your Understanding

32. What is a savings account?
33. How does a CD differ from a savings account?
34. Which is more flexible, a CD or a money market account? Why?
35. If $7,500 is deposited in a 4-year CD earning 3.28% interest compounded monthly, how much is in the account

      after 4 years?
610 6 · Money Management

       36. If the initial deposit in an account is $10,000 and the account is worth $12,560 after 7 years, what is the return on
             investment?

       37. Find the future value of an account if $450.00 per quarter is invested in a savings account bearing 3.5% interest
             compounded quarterly for 10 years.

       38. How much must be deposited per quarter in an account bearing 2.98% interest compounded quarterly if the
             account is to be worth $300,000 after 25 years?

             SECTION 6.6 EXERCISES

        1. Which account has the greatest flexibility, savings, certificate of deposit, or money market?

        2. Why are interest rates on savings accounts, CDs, and money market accounts low?

        3. Which of savings accounts, certificates of deposit, and money market accounts, allow for transactions?

        4. How does number of years impact the return on investment?

       In the following exercises, find the future value of the account based on the information given.
            5. The amount of $3,000 deposited in a CD bearing 2.6% compounded semi-annually for 3 years.
            6. The amount of $1,500 deposited in a money market account bearing 3.11% interest compounded monthly for
                 10 years.
            7. The amount of $8,450 deposited in a savings account bearing 1.75% interest compounded monthly for 2 years.
            8. The amount of $10,500 deposited in a savings account bearing 1.35% interest compounded quarterly for 20
                 years.
            9. The amount of $24,800 deposited in a money market account bearing 2.53% interest compounded semi-
                 annually for 13 years.
           10. The amount of $16,400 deposited in a CD bearing 2.55% interest compounded quarterly for 18 years.

       In the following exercises, find the return on investment based on the specified exercise. Round to two decimal places.
           11. Account from Exercise 5.
           12. Account from Exercise 6.
           13. Account from Exercise 7.
           14. Account from Exercise 8.

       In the following exercises, find the future value of the ordinary annuities based on the payment, interest rate,
       compounding periods and length of time given.

           15. The amount of $150 deposited monthly in an account bearing 4.22% interest compounded monthly for 20
                 years.

           16. The amount of $500 deposited semi-annually in an account bearing 3.62% interest compounded semi-annually
                 for 30 years.

           17. The amount of $250 deposited quarterly in an account bearing 3.61% interest compounded quarterly for 25
                 years.

           18. The amount of $250 deposited monthly in an account bearing 3.09% interest compounded monthly for 40
                 years.

           19. The amount of $1,500 deposited annually in an account bearing 3.34% interest compounded annually for 10
                 years.

           20. The amount of $1400 deposited semi-annually in an account bearing 2.78% interest compounded semi-
                 annually for 30 years.

       In the following exercises, find the payment per period necessary to reach a specified future value based on the given
       interest rate, compounding periods per year, and number of years. Recall, the number of payments per year and the
       number of compounding periods per year are the same.

           21. Future value of $1,000,000 from an account bearing 3.94% interest compounded monthly for 40 years.
           22. Future value of $500,000 from an account bearing 2.11% interest compounded quarterly for 30 years.
           23. Future value of $750,000 from an account bearing 3.27% interest compounded monthly for 25 years.
           24. Future value of $300,000 from an account bearing 3.59% interest compounded semiannually for 35 years.
           25. Future value of $1,000,000 from an account bearing 3.62% interest compounded annually for 25 years.
           26. Future value of $600,000 from an account bearing 4.02% interest compounded quarterly for 30 years.

       27. Dina deposits $3,000 in a 5-year CD that bears 3.25% interest compounded quarterly. What is the CD worth after
             those 5 years?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.6 · Methods of Savings 611

28. Timothy deposits $1,200 in a savings account that bears 1.85% interest compounded monthly. If Timothy does not
      deposit or withdraw money from the account how much is in Timothy's account after 3 years?

29. Leslie deposits $13,000 in a money market account that bears 2.55% interest compounded semi-annually. If Leslie
      does not withdraw or deposit money into the account, how much is in Leslie's account after 6 years?

30. Jennifer deposits $8,500 in a 3-year CD bearing 2.71% interest compounded annually. How much is Jennifer's CD
      worth after those 3 years?

31. Yasmin has analyzed her budget and decides to deposit $425 per month in an account bearing 3.99% interest
      compounded monthly. How much will be in the account after 20 years? After 30 years? After 40 years?

32. Brad applied the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to his income and decides that he can afford $380 per month for
      savings. He finds an account bearing 3.47% interest compounded monthly. How much will he have in the account
      after 25 years? 30 years? 35 years?

33. Ashliegh wants to save for an early retirement. She thinks she needs $1,250,000 to retire at the age of 55, which is
      30 years from now. How much must she deposit per month in an account bearing 3.48% interest compounded
      monthly to reach her goal?

34. Colin plans out the next 38 years of his life. In order to retire in 38 years (age 65) with $1,450,000, how much
      should he deposit quarterly in an account bearing 4.21% interest compounded quarterly to reach his goal?

In the following exercises, different savings strategies will be compared.
    35. Sam is 23 years old and has just landed her first post-college job. She creates a budget, and using the 50-30-20
          budget philosophy, she sees she should save or pay down debt with $650. She decides to apply $300 per month
          to long-term savings. She finds an account bearing 3.75% interest compounded monthly. Sam begins investing
          $300 per month in that account on her 24th birthday. How much will be in the account at age 65 (41 years)?
    36. Sam decides instead to delay investing in the account until her 35th birthday. How much will be in the account
          at age 65 (30 years)?
    37. Sam decides to deposit the $300 per month until she turns 35 years old (11 years). She will then stop investing
          the $300 monthly, and just allow the money to earn interest until her 65th birthday (30 more years). How much
          will be in her account on her 65th birthday? Hint: First, compute the FV of the deposits. Then use that FV as the
          principal for a single deposit into an account bearing 3.75% interest compounded monthly.
    38. Compare the results of the three investment strategies.

In the following exercises, different savings strategies will be compared.
    39. Dahlia is 22 years old and has just landed a banking job. She creates a budget, and using the 50-30-20 budget
          philosophy, she sees she should save or pay down debt with $400. She decides to apply $250 per month to
          long-term savings. She finds an account bearing 6.2% interest compounded monthly. Dahlia begins investing
          $250 per month in that account on her 23rd birthday. How much will be in the account on her 68th birthday (45
          years)?
    40. Dahlia decides instead to delay investing in the account until her 34th birthday. How much will be in the
          account on her 68th birthday (34 years)?
    41. Dahlia decides to deposit the $250 per month until her 34th birthday (11 years). She will then stop investing the
          $250 monthly, and just allow the money to earn interest until her 68th birthday (34 more years). How much will
          be in her account on her 65th birthday? Hint: First compute the of the deposits. Then use that as the
          principal for a single deposit into an account bearing 6.2% interest compounded monthly.
    42. Compare the results of the three investment strategies.
612 6 · Money Management

    6.7 Investments

       Figure 6.13 Stocks are bought and sold to improve investment values. (credit: modification of work "FT ringing the
       Closing Bell at the NYSE" by Financial Times/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

    Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Distinguish between basic forms of investments including stocks, bonds, and mutual funds.
        2. Understand what bonds are and how bond investments work.
        3. Understand how stocks are purchased and gain or lose value.
        4. Read and derive information from a stock table.
        5. Define a mutual fund and how to invest.
        6. Compute return on investment for basic forms of investments.
        7. Compute future value of investments.
        8. Compute payment to reach a financial goal.
        9. Identify and distinguish between retirement savings accounts.
       You can save your money in a safe or a vault (or worse, under the mattress!), but that money does not grow. It would be
       hard to save enough for retirement that way. What can be done to increase the value of the money you already have?
       The answer is to invest it. Use the money that you have to earn more money back. For instance, as we saw in Methods of
       Savings, you can save it in a bank. Or, to reach loftier goals, invest in something more likely to grow, such as stocks.
       A great example of this is Apple stock. Anyone who bought stock in Apple Inc. (formerly Apple Computer, Inc.) in 1997
       and held onto the shares earned a lot of money. To be more specific, $100 worth of Apple shares bought in 1980, when it
       was first sold to the public, was valued at $67,564 in 2019, or 676 times more! (https://openstax.org/r/much_aspx)
       Perhaps you have heard a story like that, of an investment opportunity taken that paid off, or the story of an investment
       opportunity missed. But such stories are the exceptions.
       In this section, we'll investigate bonds, stocks, and mutual funds and their comparative strengths and weaknesses. We
       close the section with a discussion of retirement savings accounts.

    Distinguish Between Basic Forms of Investments

       Bonds, stocks, and mutual funds tend to offer higher returns, but to varying degrees, come with higher risks. Stocks and
       mutual funds also vary in how much they earn. Their predicted rates of return on investment are not guaranteed, but
       educated guesses based on market trends and historical performance.
       We will use the methods and formulas we learned earlier to evaluate these forms of investment.

     Bonds

       Bonds are issued from big companies and from governments. Selling bonds is an alternative to an institution taking a
       loan from a bank. The funds from the selling of bonds are often used for large projects, like funding the building of a
       new highway or hospital.
       Bonds are considered a conservative investment. They are bought for what is known as the issue price. The interest is
       fixed (does not change) at the time of purchase and is based on the issue price of the bond. The interest rate is often
       referred to as the coupon rate; the interest paid is often called the coupon yield. The interest paid is often higher than
       savings accounts and the risk is exceptionally low. The bond is for a fixed length of time. The end of this time is the

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       6.7 · Investments 613

maturity date of the bond.
There are several types of bonds:

  · Treasury bonds are issued by the federal government.
  · Municipal bonds are issued by state and local governments.
  · Corporate bonds are issued by major corporations.
There are other types of bonds available, but they are beyond the scope of this section.

        WHO KNEW?

  Trading Bonds

  Bonds are often part of larger investment portfolios. These bonds may be traded. However, the interest paid is based
  on the price when the bond was bought (the issue price). These bonds can be bought and sold for more or less
  money than the issue price. If the bond is bought for more than the issue price, the interest is still paid on the issue
  price, not on the purchase price when the trade was made. This means the actual return on the bond decreases. If the
  bond is bought for less than the issue price, the return on the bond goes up.

VIDEO
Bonds (https://openstax.org/r/investing_basics_bonds)

EXAMPLE 6.62

Bond Investment
Muriel purchases a $3,000 bond with a maturity of 4 years at a fixed coupon rate of 5.5% paid annually. How much is
Muriel paid each year, and how much does she receive on the maturity date?

Solution

The coupon rate is 5.5%. 5.5% of her bond value is     . After year 1, Muriel receives $165. She

receives $165 after years 2 and 3 also. In year 4, when the bond matures, Muriel receives $3,165, or the interest and the

initial investment, or principal.

        YOUR TURN 6.62

  1. Maureen invests $5,000 in a bond with a maturity date in 5 years at a fixed coupon rate of 4.75%. How much is
      Maureen paid each year and how much does she receive on the maturity date?

Stocks

Stocks are part ownership in a company. They come in units called shares. The performance and earnings of stocks is
not guaranteed, which makes them riskier than any other investment discussed earlier. However, they can offer higher
return on investment than the other investments. Their value grows in two ways. They offer dividends, which is a
portion of the profit made by the company. And the price per share can increase based on how others see that value of
the company changing. If the value of the company drops, or the company folds, the money invested in the stock also
drops.

Most stock transactions are executed through a broker. Brokers' commissions can be a percentage of value of the trades
made or a flat fee. There are full-service brokers who charge higher commission rates, but they also offer financial advice
and perform the research that you may not have the time or the expertise to do on your own. A discount broker only
executes the stock transactions, buying or selling, so they charge lower rates than full-service brokers. There are also
brokers that offer commission-free trading.

An important thing to remember is that stocks might provide a very large return on investment, but the trade-off is the
risk associated with owning stocks.
614 6 · Money Management

               WHO KNEW?

         Chapter 11 Bankruptcy and Stocks
         In the fall of 2022, the parent company of Regal Theaters, named Cineworld, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
         According to news articles, the bankruptcy was necessitated due to its heavy debt load. Generally, a company can file
         for Chapter 11 bankruptcy to allow them time to reorganize and restructure debts. When this happens, the company,
         after the Chapter 11 process is over, offers new stock. This makes the previous stock worthless. However, the company
         may allow an exchange of old stock for a discounted amount of the new stock. This in effect reduces (maybe vastly)
         the wealth held by those who owned the original stock.

         EXAMPLE 6.63
       Buying Stock in Company ABC
       Haniah buys stock in the ABC company, investing a total of $13,000. She expects the stock to grow, through stock price
       increase and reinvestment of dividends, by 12.3% per year and compounded annually. If she leaves that money invested,
       how much will the stocks be worth in 20 years?

            Solution
       Calculating this is a compound interest calculation, if Haniah's assumption about the stock's performance is correct. If so,
       then the principal is $13,000, the rate is 0.123, the number of compounding periods per year is 1, and the time is 20
       years. Substituting into the compound interest formula from Methods of Savings, and computing, we have

                                                                                                                                       . After 20 years, her stock is
       now worth $132,293.49.

               YOUR TURN 6.63

         1. Rixie deposits $23,000 in the stock of DEF company. She assumes the stock value to grow though stock price
             increase and reinvestment of dividends by 13.8% compounded annually. How much will her stock be worth in 12
             years?

               WHO KNEW?

         Risk and Volkswagen
         The question of risk hovers over every investment. How risky can it get? Volkswagen seems to be a rather safe
         investment. But in 2015, Volkswagen's stock tumbled 30% over a few days when it was revealed that the company had
         installed software that altered the emission performance of some of their diesel engines. Volkswagen's hope was that
         lower emissions would bolster US sales of some of their diesel models. This was a drastic drop, and many investors
         lost a lot of money. However, the stock has come back since then. This was mild compared to the 65% drop in the
         Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia stocks.

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

         Warren Buffett
         Warren Buffett is an investment legend. He began his career as an investment salesman in the 1950s. He formed
         Buffett associates in 1956. In 1965, he was in control of Berkshire Hathaway, which began as a merger between two
         textile companies. In his role there, he began to invest in a variety of companies. It is now a conglomerate holding
         company, and fully owns GEICO, Duracell, Diary Queen, and other large companies.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6.7 · Investments 615

His investment philosophy involves finding stocks and bonds from companies that have high intrinsic worth
compared to their stock or bond prices. This means he focuses not on the supply and demand side of stock investing,
but instead on the company's worth in total. Using this philosophy, he has become one of the world's most successful
investors.

Reading Stock Tables

Information about particular stocks is contained in stock tables. This information includes how much the stock is selling
for, and its high and low values form the past year (52 weeks). In a newspaper, the stock table may look like this:

52-Week High            Stock                    SYM Div Yld P/E Vol High Low Close Net
       Low                                              %                 100s                                Chg

41.66         18.90 McDonald's MCD .72 2.9 12 7588 25.73 23.87 25.42 +0.31

22.60         13.20 Monsanto MON .52 2.4 55 15474 21.86 21.48 21.64 -0.29

17.05         8.30 Motorola MOT .16 1.7 dd 16149 10.57 8.88 10.43 +0.14

31.75         22.99 Mueller                      MLI -  -  16 1564 29.32 27.03 27.11 -0.02

Table 6.2 excerpt from a stock table, 2008

The symbols and abbreviations are defined here:

52-week       52-week                       The highest and lowest price of the stock over the past 52 weeks
  High           Low

Stock         SYM                                The name of the company and the symbol used for trading

         Annual DIV                                     The current annual dividend per share

              Yld %                                     Percent yield is

High             P/E    Price to earnings ratio, share price divided by earnings per share over past year (dd
                                                                         indicates loss)
              Vol 100s
                 Low                             The number of shares traded yesterday in 100s
                Close                 The highest and lowest prices at which stocks traded yesterday
                                The price at which the stock traded at the close of the market yesterday
              Net Chg      Net change; change in price from market close 2 days ago to yesterday's close

The formulas for yield and price to earnings is a good way to measure how much the stock returns per share. Their
values are calculated in the stock table, but deserve attention here.

  FORMULA

The price to earnings ratio of a stock, P/E, is         . The percent yield for a stock, Yld%, is
                                            .
616 6 · Money Management

       It should be noted that the price of a stock increases and decreases every moment, and so these value change as the
       share price changes.

         EXAMPLE 6.64
       Computing Percent Yield
        1. Find the percent yield for a stock with a price of $30.69 and an annual dividend of $1.48.
        2. Find the percent yield for a stock with a price of $62.25 and an annual dividend of $1.76.

            Solution
        1. Substituting the values for price, $30.69, and annual dividend, $1.48, we find the percent yield for the stock to be
        2. Substituting the values for price, $62.25, and annual dividend, $1.76, we find the percent yield for the stock to be

               YOUR TURN 6.64
             1. Find the percent yield for a stock with a price of $37.40 and an annual dividend of $1.60.
             2. Find the percent yield for a stock with a price of $73.22 and an annual dividend of $2.41.
       The stock table information is now, and has been, available online, from websites such as cnn.com/markets,
       markets.businessinsider.com/stocks, and marketwatch.com. The same information is available from these sites as from
       the newspaper listings, but are often accessed one stock at a time. Figure 6.14 shows the stock table for Lowe's on
       September 7, 2022.

                                    Figure 6.14 Key data for Lowe's stock 9/7/2022 (data source: marketwatch.com)
       Other key data is further down on the website, and is shown in Figure 6.15, below.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.7 · Investments 617

                             Figure 6.15 Key data for Lowe's stock 9/7/2022 (data source: marketwatch.com)
Notice that the 52-week high and low are now shown as the 52-week range. However, you get additional information,
including the stock performance over the past 5 days, past month, past 3 months, the year to date (YTD), and over the
past year. You can also read the number of shares outstanding, the expected date for the dividend (EX-DIVIDEND DATE),
and importantly for the P/E ratio, the earning per share (EPS).

  EXAMPLE 6.65
Reading an Online Stock Table
Consider the stock table (Figure 6.16), and answer the questions based on the table.
618 6 · Money Management

                                 Figure 6.16 Key data for McDonald's stock 9/7/2022 (data source: marketwatch.com)
        1. What is the current price for McDonald's Corp on this date?
        2. What is the 52-wk high? 52-wk low?
        3. When is the dividend expected?
        4. What is its yield?
        5. What is the earnings per share?

            Solution
        1. Looking at the table, the current price of a share is $258.87.
        2. The high was $271.15, and the low was $217.68.
        3. August 31, 2022
        4. 2.13%
        5. The EPS value is $8.12.

               YOUR TURN 6.65
         Consider the stock table below, and answer the questions based on the table.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  6.7 · Investments 619

                                Key data for Intel stock 9/7/2022 (data source: marketwatch.com)

1. What is the current price for Intel Corp on this date?
2. What is the 52-wk high? 52-wk low?
3. When is the dividend expected?
4. What is its yield?
5. What is the earnings per share?

As mentioned, stocks earn money in two ways, through dividends and increase in share price.

EXAMPLE 6.66

Dividends Paid
Darma owns 150 shares of stock in the GDW company. This quarter, GDW is paying $0.87 per share in dividends. How
much will Darma earn in dividends this quarter?

Solution

Each share pays $0.87, so Darma earns  .
620 6 · Money Management

      YOUR TURN 6.66

1. Yulia owns 300 shares of stock in YYZ company. It pays $1.12 per share this quarter. How much did Yulia earn this
    quarter on stock in YYZ?

EXAMPLE 6.67

Stock Price Increases
Vincent buys 100 stocks in the REM company for $21.87 per share. One year later, he sells those 100 shares for $29.15
per share.

1. How much money did Vincent make?
2. What was his return on investment for that one year?

Solution

1. Vincent spent $21.87 per share to buy the stock. The total he spent on the stock was             .

When he sold the stock, the price was $29.15, so he received                             . He made

                                 .

2. His return on investment was                               .

        YOUR TURN 6.67

  Ginny buys 200 shares of stock in UUK company for $9.76 per share. At the end of the year, she sells those stocks for
  $10.02 per share.

      1. How much money did Ginny make?
      2. What was her return on investment for that one year?

       VIDEO

      Reading Stock Summary Online (https://openstax.org/r/Reading_Stock)

Mutual Funds

A mutual fund is a collection of investments that are all bundled together. When you buy shares of a mutual fund, your
money is pooled with the assets of other investors. This pooled money is invested in stocks, bonds, money market
instruments, and other assets. Mutual funds are typically operated by professional money managers who allocate the
fund's assets and attempt to produce capital gains or income for the fund's investors.

A key benefit of mutual funds is that they allow small or individual investors to invest in professionally managed
portfolios of equities, bonds, and other securities. This means each shareholder participates proportionally in the gains
or losses of the fund. The performance of a mutual fund is usually stated as how much the mutual fund's total value has
increased or decreased. Since there are many different investments inside the mutual fund, the risk is reduced
significantly, compared to direct ownership of stocks. Even so, mutual funds historically perform well and can earn more
than 10% annually.

The investments that make up a mutual fund are structured and maintained to match stated investment objectives,
which are specified in its prospectus. A prospectus is a pamphlet or brochure that provides information about the
mutual fund. Before buying shares of a mutual fund, consult its prospectus, consider its goals and strategies to see if
they match your goals and values and also research any associated fees.

       VIDEO

      Mutual Funds (https://openstax.org/r/investing_basics_mutual_funds)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.7 · Investments 621

  EXAMPLE 6.68
Investing in a Mutual Fund
Kaitlyn has analyzed her $12,862.50 quarterly budget using the 50-30-20 budget philosophy, and sees she should be
saving or paying down debt with $2,572.50 per quarter. She decides to invest $1,300 quarterly a mutual fund that reports
an average return of 11.62% over the 18-year life of the mutual fund. Assuming that this interest rate continues, and is
compounded quarterly, how much will her mutual fund account be worth after 5 years?

     Solution
Kaitlyn's plan is an ordinary annuity, and so the future value of her account can be found using the formula

                                        , with a payment of $1,300, a rate of 0.1162, number of compounding periods 4, after 5
years. Substituting these values into the formula and calculating, we find

Kaitlyn's mutual fund will be worth $34,595.88 after 5 years.

        YOUR TURN 6.68
  1. Aidan decides to invest $3,200 annually in a mutual fund. He expects the fund to have a 10.8% interest rate

      compounded annually. How much will Aidan's mutual fund account have after 15 years?

  EXAMPLE 6.69
Investing in a Mutual Fund to Reach a Goal
Kaitlyn wants to retire with $1,500,000 in her mutual fund account. She will invest for 35 years. The mutual fund reports
an average return of 11.62% over the 18-year-long life of the mutual fund. Assuming that this interest rate continues,
and is compounded quarterly, how much will she need to pay annually into her mutual fund to reach her goal?

     Solution
Kaitlyn's plan is an ordinary annuity, and so the payment to reach her goal can be found using the formula

                               , with a , or goal, of $1,500,000, a rate of 0.1162, for 35 years. Substituting these values into the
formula and calculating, we find

Kaitlyn needs to invest $6,689.49 per year (or $557.46 per month) into the mutual fund to reach $1,500,000 in 35 years.

        YOUR TURN 6.69
  1. How much does Aidan need to invest annually in his mutual fund to reach a goal of $1,000,000 in 40 years. He

      expects the fund to have a 10.8% interest rate compounded annually.
622 6 · Money Management

Return on Investment

As in Methods of Savings, the formula for return on investment is  . As indicated before, this formula does

not take into account how long the investment took to reach its current value. It depends only on the initial value, , and
the value at the end of the investment, .

EXAMPLE 6.70

Return on Investment for a Bond
Recall Example 6.62, in which Muriel purchased a $3,000 bond with a maturity of 4 years at a fixed coupon rate of 5.5%
paid annually. What was Muriel's return on investment?

Solution

Each year, Muriel received $165. She received this money four times, so earned a total of $660. This represents - ,

or just the earnings. Using that we find that the ROI is           , or 22%.

        YOUR TURN 6.70

  1. Maureen invests $5,000 in a bond with a maturity date in 5 years at a fixed coupon rate of 4.75%. What is
      Maureen's return on investment?

As mentioned, the ROI does not address the length of time of the investment. A good way to do that is to equate the ROI
to an account bearing interest that is compounded annually.
The annual return is the average annual rate, or the annual percentage yield (APY) that would result in the same amount
were the interest paid once a year.

  FORMULA

The formula for annual return is                          , where = the number of years, = new value, and
   = starting principal.

We apply this to the previous example.

EXAMPLE 6.71

Annual Return on Investment for a Bond
Recall Example 6.70, in which Muriel purchased a $3,000 bond with a maturity of 4 years at a fixed coupon rate of 5.5%
paid annually. What was Muriel's annual return on investment? Interpret this as compound interest.

     Solution
Muriel earned a total of $660. This represents - , or just the earnings. The starting principal was $3,000. The value
at the end of 4 years was $3,000 + $660 = $3,660. The time of the investment was 4 years. Using that we find that the

annual return is                                                              , or 5.10%.
The 5.5% bond earned the equivalent of 5.10% compounded annually.

        YOUR TURN 6.71
  1. Maureen invests $5,000 in a bond with a maturity date in 5 years at a fixed coupon rate of 4.75%. What is

      Maureen's annual return on investment?
In Example 6.71 and Your Turn, the annual return was lower than the interest rate of the investment. This is because the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     6.7 · Investments 623

interest from a bond is simple interest, but annual yield equates to compounded annually.

EXAMPLE 6.72

Return on Investment for Stock in Company ABC
Haniah buys stock in the ABC company, investing a total of $13,000. After 20 years, the stock is worth $132,293.49,
including reinvestment of dividends.

1. What is Haniah's return on investment?
2. What is Haniah's annual return?

    Solution                                                                                   in the formula
1. To calculate Hanniah's return on investment, substitute $13,000 for and $132,293.49 for

                          and calculate. Doing so we find Haniah's return on investment to be

                                           , or 917.64%

2. To calculate Haniah's annual return, substitute $13,000 for and $132,293.49 for in the formula

                   and calculate. Doing so we find her annual return to be

                                                                    , or 12.3%

      YOUR TURN 6.72

Rixie deposits $23,000 in the stock of DEF company. After 12 years, her stock is worth $108,501.30.
    1. What is Rixie's return on investment?
    2. What is Rixie's annual return?

You should see that the annual return is equal to the annual compounded interest that was assumed for the stocks.

Compute Payment to Reach a Financial Goal

As in Methods of Savings, determining the payment necessary to reach a financial goal uses the payment formula for an

ordinary annuity,  . If dealing with mutual funds or stocks, an assumed annual interest rate,

compounded, will be used. This value is often determined through research and informed speculation.

EXAMPLE 6.73

Richard is saving for new siding for his home. He and his partner believe they will need $37,500 in 10 years to pay for the
siding. How much should they invest yearly in a mutual fund they believe will have an annual interest rate of 12%,
compounded annually, in order to reach their goal?

     Solution                                                       with = 37,500, = 0.12, and = 1.
The necessary annual payment is found using the function

Substituting and calculating, we find the annual payment should be
624 6 · Money Management

               YOUR TURN 6.73

         1. Pete and Erin want to save for their child's college. They think they will need $90,000 in 14 years. How much
              should they invest annually in a mutual fund they believe will yield 9.5% compounded annually?

     Retirement Savings Plans

       We close this section by investigating the three main forms of retirement savings accounts: traditional individual
       retirement accounts (IRAs), Roth IRAs, and 401(k) accounts. Each has distinct characteristics that are suited to different
       investors' needs.

      Individual Retirement Accounts

       A traditional IRA lets you contribute up to an amount set by the government, which may change from year to year. For
       example, the maximum contribution for 2022 is $6,000; $7,000 over age 50. Anyone is eligible to contribute to a
       traditional IRA, regardless of your income level. Your money grows tax-deferred, but withdrawals after age 59½ are taxed
       at current rates. Traditional IRAs also allow you to use the contribution itself as a deduction on a current year tax return.
       Roth IRAs allow contributions at the same levels as traditional IRAs, with a maximum $6,000 for 2022; $7,000 over age
       50. However, to be eligible to make contributions, your earned income must be below a certain level. A Roth IRA allows
       after-tax contributions. In other words, the contribution itself is not tax-deductible, as it is with the traditional IRA.
       However, your money grows tax-free. If you make no withdrawals until you are age 59½, there are no penalties. IRAs pay
       a modest interest rate.
       In either case, IRA deposits have to be from earned income, which in effect means if your earned income is over $6,000
       ($7,000) then you can deposit the maximum.

         EXAMPLE 6.74

       Comparing Roth IRAs to Traditional IRAs
       Which type of IRA, Roth or traditional, has an income limit for its use?

            Solution
       Roth IRAs require income to be below a certain limit.

               YOUR TURN 6.74

         1. Which type of IRA, Roth or traditional, allow deposits before tax, but have earnings that are taxed after the age of
              59 ½?

                WHO KNEW?

         In 2022, the maximum that can be added to a Roth IRA was $6,000 for those under 50 years of age. For those over 50
         years of age, the maximum that can be added to a Roth IRA is $7,000. However, to qualify for a Roth IRA in fall of
         2022, a single person's modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) must be below $129,000. Then, if a single person's
         income is between $129,000 and $144,000, the maximum contribution is reduced from the limit for incomes below
         $129,000. For a married couples filing a joint tax return those values are $204,000 to $214,000.

      401(k) Accounts

       Your employer may offer a retirement account to you. These are often in the form of a 401(k) account. There are
       traditional and Roth 401(k) accounts, which differ in how they are taxed, much as with other IRAs. In the traditional
       401(k) plans, the money is deposited before tax is assessed, which means you do not pay taxes on this money. However,
       that means when money is withdrawn, it is taxed. These accounts are similar to mutual funds, in that the money is
       invested in a wide range of assets, spreading the risk.
       One of the perks some employers offer is to match some amount of your contributions to the 401(k) plan. For instance,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             6.7 · Investments 625

they may match your deposits up to 5% of your income. This is an instant 100% return on the money that was matched.
       VIDEO
      401(k) Accounts (https://openstax.org/r/401(k)s)

EXAMPLE 6.75

Matching 401(k) Deposit
Alice signs up for her employer-based 401(k). The employer matches any 401(k) contribution up to 6% of the employee
salary. Alice's annual salary is $51,600.

1. What is the most money that Alice can deposit that will be fully matched by the company?
2. How much total will be deposited into Alice's account if she deposits the full 6%?
3. How much return does Alice earn if she deposits exactly 6% in her 401(k)?

Solution

1. The employer will match up to 6% of any employee's salary. 6% of Alice's salary is        . So Alice

can deposit up to $3,096 and receive that amount in matching funds in her account.

2. Alice's contribution plus the company's contribution is                             , which is the total that is deposited

into Alice's account.

3. She earns a 100% return on the day she deposits her $3,096.

      YOUR TURN 6.75

Jameis signs up for his employer-based 401(k). The employer matches any 401(k) contribution up to 7.5% of the
employee salary. Jameis' annual salary is $72,800.

    1. What is the most money that Jamie can deposit that will be fully matched by the company?
    2. How much total will be deposited into Jameis' account if he deposits the full 7.5%?
    3. How much return does Jameis earn if he deposits exactly 7.5% in her 401(k)?

401(k) plans with matching funds provide great value, as their rates of return are high compared to savings accounts,
and are less risky that stocks since such funds invest across many investment vehicles. The next example demonstrates
the power of constant deposits into a 401(k) plan that has some employer match.

EXAMPLE 6.76

Constant Deposits into a 401(k) Plan
DeJean begins depositing $300 per month from his paycheck each month in his employer-based 401(k) account. The
employer matches this deposit as it falls below their matching threshold. DeJean expects the return to average 10% per
year, compounded annually.

1. How much will DeJean's account be worth if he keeps making those payments for 30 years?
2. What will his account be worth without the matching funds?

Solution

1. This is a form of an ordinary annuity, so the formula                               will be used. The company

matches DeJean's full deposit, so each month $600 will be deposited. He is assuming the money will compound
annually, so the amount deposited each year is needed as the value of pmt. For the year, he will deposit

                            . The rate is 0.1, the number of compounding periods is 1, and the number of years is 30.
Substituting and calculating, the value of DeJean's account after 30 years will be
626 6 · Money Management

2. This is a form of an ordinary annuity, so the formula                       will be used but the deposit is now

only $300 per month without the matching funds. For the year, he will deposit  . The rate is 0.1,

the number of compounding periods is 1, and the number of years is 30. Substituting and calculating, the value of

DeJean's account after 30 years will be

        YOUR TURN 6.76

  Crystal begins depositing $450 per month from her paycheck each month in her employer-based 401(k) account.
  The employer matches $350 of each deposit. Crystal expects the return to average 9% per year, compounded
  annually.

      1. How much will Crystal's account be worth if she keeps making those payments for 25 years?
      2. What will her account be worth without the matching funds?

Check Your Understanding

39. Which investment has the highest risk?
40. What is different about who can use a Roth IRA versus a traditional IRA??
41. How do mutual funds reduce risk?
42. How much in earnings does a 10-year bond with issue price $5,000 that pays 4% interest annually is generated?
43. If an individual makes $115,000 annually, is the person eligible for a Roth IRA?
44. An employer 401(k) matches up to 4% of income by employees. Merisol's annual salary is $87,500. If Merisol wants

      to deposit $4,400 annually in the 401(k), how much will be matched?
45. A person owns 300 shares of stock. It pays $.38 per share this quarter. How much does the share owner earn from

      the stock that quarter?
46. David purchased stocks for $3,500. The stocks paid dividends by reinvesting them in the stock. After 3 years, he

      sold the socks for $4,650. What was David's annual return on that investment?
47. How much must be deposited annually in a mutual fund that is expected to bear 12.5% interest compounded

      annually if the account is to be worth $750,000 after 25 years?

        SECTION 6.7 EXERCISES

 1. What is the maturity date for a bond?
 2. What is the issue price for a bond?
 3. Stock investments increase in value in what two ways?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.7 · Investments 627

 4. Which is the least risky of stocks, bonds, mutual funds, CDs?

 5. Which type of individual retirement account allows pre-tax deposits?

 6. What are the limits on contributions to individual retirement accounts in 2022?

 7. Of bonds, stocks, mutual funds, CDs, and money market accounts, which do not allow for withdrawal until a
      certain time period has passed?

 8. Which type of IRA allows the account to grow tax free, provided no withdrawals are made until after the age of
            ?

 9. Which of bonds, mutual funds, and CDs are professionally managed?

10. Why do mutual funds and IRAs have relatively low risk?

For the bonds with the given properties, find a. the amount paid each year and b. the total amount earned with the
bond.

    11. Issue price of $10,000 pays 3.5% annually, matures in 5 years.
    12. Issue price of $3,400 pays 2.75% annually, matures in 10 years.
    13. Issue price of $1,000 pays 2.8% annually, matures in 5 years.
    14. Issue price of $5,000 pays 3.75% annually, matures in 15 years.

In the following exercises, find: a. the return on investment and b. the annual return for the bond described. Round to
two decimal places.

    15. Issue price of $10,000 pays 3.5% annually, matures in 5 years.
    16. Issue price of $3,400 pays 2.75% annually, matures in 10 years.
    17. Issue price of $1,000 pays 2.8% annually, matures in 5 years.
    18. Issue price of $5,000 pays 3.75% annually, matures in 15 years.

19. 40 shares of stock are owned. The dividend per share is $0.38 for a quarter. How much was earned in dividends on
      this stock this quarter?

20. 150 shares of stock are owned. The dividend per share is $0.78 for a quarter. How much was earned in dividends
      on this stock this quarter?

21. 100 shares of stock are owned. The dividend per share is $0.18 for a quarter. How much was earned in dividends
      on this stock this quarter?

22. 250 shares of stock are owned. The dividend per share is $0.41 for a quarter. How much was earned in dividends
      on this stock this quarter?

For the following exercises, 70 shares of stock were purchased for $31.50 per share 5 years ago. Over the 5 years, the
total of all dividends earned from this stock was $6.34 per share. The stock is sold for $34.83.

    23. How much was earned with dividends and share price increase combined?
    24. What was the return on investment for these stocks?
    25. What was the annual return for these stocks?

For the following exercises, 10 shares of stock were purchased for $18.91 per share 3 years ago. Over the 3 years, the
total of all dividends earned from this stock was $3.18 per share. The stock is sold for $22.01.

    26. How much was earned with dividends and share price increase combined?
    27. What was the return on investment for these stocks?
    28. What was the annual return for these stocks?

For the following exercises, use the given stock table to answer the following:
 a. What was the 52-week low?
b. What was the dividend?
 c. What is its year-to-date performance?
d. What is its yield?
628 6 · Money Management

           29.
                                                                     Stock table (data source: marketwatch.com)

           30.
                                                                     Stock table (data source: marketwatch.com)

       In the following exercises, find the future value of the mutual fund or IRA with the given annual deposit, the duration of
       the investment, and the assumed annual, compounded, percentage rate.

           31. IRA, annual deposit = $6,000, 25 years, assumed percentage rate of 11.3%
           32. IRA, annual deposit = $4,800, 15 years, assumed percentage rate of 9.7%

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.7 · Investments 629

    33. Mutual fund, annual deposit = $7,500, 35 years, assumed percentage rate of 10%
    34. Mutual find, annual deposit = $12,000, 40 years, assumed percentage rate of 9%

In the following exercises, find the annual deposit necessary, into an IRA or mutual fund, to reach the stated financial
goal, given the assumed annual, compounded, interest rate, and the duration of the deposits. Convert that annual
deposit to a monthly amount.

    35. Mutual fund, goal = $1,000,000, 25 years, assumed percentage rate of 11.3%
    36. Mutual fund, goal = $100,000, 15 years, assumed percentage rate of 9.7%
    37. IRA, goal = $750,000, 35 years, assumed percentage rate of 10%
    38. IRA, goal = $1,750,000, 40 years, assumed percentage rate of 9%

39. Francis's employer matches 401(k) contributions up to 7% of annual salary. She makes $98,500. What is the
      maximum amount that the company will match for Francis?

40. Miles' employer matches 401(k) contributions up to 4% of annual salary. He makes $38,500. What is the maximum
      amount that the company will match for Miles?

41. Ila's employer matches 401(k) contributions, up to 4% of salary. She makes $49,000. She wants to deposit $3,000 of
      her own earnings per year ($250 per month). How much, including her employer's matching funds, will be
      deposited into Ila's account each year?

42. Georgia works at a company that matches 401(k) contributions up to 5.5% of salary. Georgia wants to deposit
      $6,000 of her own earnings per year ($500 per month) in her 401(k). If she makes $65,000 annually, how much,
      including employer contributions, will be deposited in Georgia's account annually?

In the following exercises, Cheryl's company offers a 401(k) account to all employees. The company will match
employee contributions up to 6% of the employee's salary. She earns $81,000 per year. Cheryl decides to deposit, or
contribute, $10,000 annually in the 401(k). She expects a return of 9.5% per year.

    43. How much will the company match?
    44. What is her total contribution per year?
    45. If she deposits into the account for 25 years, how much will her 401(k) be worth?

In the following exercises, Lavanya's company offers a 401(k) account to all employees. Her annual salary is $58,000.
The company will match employee contributions up to 7% of the employee's salary. Lavanya decides to deposit $3,200
annually in the 401(k). She expects a return of 8.5% per year.

    46. How much will the company match?
    47. What is her total contribution per year?
    48. If she deposits into the account for 20 years, how much will her 401(k) be worth?

In the following exercises, Ruslana wants to use her 401(k) to save $1,400,000 when she retires in 36 years. She
assumes the plan will yield 11% compounded annually. Her company will match contributions up to 5% of annual
salary. Her salary is $48,000.

    49. How much total will need to be added to her account each year to reach her goal?
    50. What is 5% of Ruslana's salary?
    51. The company will match up to 5% of Ruslana's salary, which means half the payment (up to 5% of salary) will be

          contributed by the company. How much is half the necessary payment?
    52. Does the answer to Exercise 51 exceed the result from Exercise 50?
    53. If the answer to Exercise 52 is no, then the company contributes half the deposit in the 401(k). How much will

          the company contribute annually to the 401(k) if this is the case?
    54. If the answer to Exercise 52 is yes, then the company contributes only the 5% match of Ruslana's salary. In this

          case, how much does the company contribute?
    55. How much will Ruslana need to contribute per year, after the employer contribution?
    56. Divide the answer to Exercise 55 by 12 to find the monthly contribution Ruslana will make.

In the following exercises, Remy wants to use his 401(k) to save $1,750,000 when he retires in 30 years. He assumes the
plan will yield 10.4% compounded annually. His company will match contributions up to 6% of annual salary. His salary
is $78,000.

    57. How much total will need to be added to his account each year to reach his goal?
    58. What is 6% of Remy's salary?
    59. The company will match up to 6% of Remy's salary, which means half the payment (up to 6% of salary) will be

          contributed by the company. How much is half the necessary payment?
    60. Does the answer to Exercise 59 exceed the result from Exercise 58?
    61. If the answer to Exercise 60 is no, then the company contributes half the deposit in the 401(k). How much will
630 6 · Money Management

                  the company contribute annually to the 401(k) if this is the case?
           62. If the answer to Exercise 60 is yes, then the company contributes only the 6% of Remy's salary. In this case, how

                  much does the company contribute?
           63. How much will Remy need to contribute per year, after the employer contribution?
           64. Divide the answer to Exercise 63 by 12 to find the monthly contribution Remy will make.

    6.8 The Basics of Loans

       Figure 6.17 Loans are contracts that allow people to buy now but require them to pay more. (credit: "Closing" by Tim
       Pierce/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Describe various reasons for loans.
        2. Describe the terminology associated with loans.
        3. Understand how credit scoring works.
        4. Calculate the payment necessary to pay off a loan.
        5. Read an amortization table.
        6. Determine the cost to finance for a loan.
       New car envy is real. Some people look at a new car and feel that they too should have a new car. The search begins.
       They find the model they want, in the color they want, with the features they want, and then they look at the price. That's
       often the point where the new car fever breaks and the reality of borrowing money to purchase the car enters the
       picture. This borrowing takes the form of a loan.
       In this section, we look at the basics of loans, including terminology, credit scores, payments, and the cost of borrowing
       money.

     Reasons for Loans

       Even if you want a new car because you need one, or if you need a new computer since your current one no longer runs
       as fast or smoothly as you would like, or you need a new chimney because the one on your house is crumbling, it's likely
       you do not have that cost in cash. Those are very large purchases. How do you buy that if you don 't have the cash?
       You borrow the money.
       And for helping you with your purchase, the company or bank charges you interest.
       Loans are taken out to pay for goods or services when a person does not have the cash to pay for the goods or services.
       We are most familiar with loans for the big purchases in our lives, such as cars, homes, and a college education. Loans
       are also taken out to pay for repairs, smaller purchases, and home goods like furniture and computers.
       Loans can come from a bank, or from the company selling the goods or providing the service. The borrower agrees to

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 631

pay back more than the amount borrowed. So there is a cost to borrowing that should be considered when deciding on a
purchase bought with credit or a borrowed money.
Even using a credit card is a form of a loan.

Essentially, a loan can be obtained for just about any purchase, large or small, that has a cost beyond a person's cash on
hand.

The Terminology of Loans

There are many words and acronyms that get used in relation to loans. A few are below.

APR is the annual percentage rate. It is the annual interest paid on the money that was borrowed. The principal is the
total amount of the loan, or that has been financed. A fixed interest rate loan has an interest rate that does not change
during the life of the loan. A variable interest rate loan has an interest rate that may change during the life of the loan.
The term of the loan is how long the borrower has to pay the loan back. An installment loan is a loan with a fixed
period, and the borrower pays a fixed amount per period until the loan is paid off. The periods are almost uniformly
monthly. Loan amortization is the process used to calculate how much of each payment will be applied to principal and
how much is applied to interest. Revolving credit, also known as open-end credit, is how most credit cards work but is
also a kind of loan account. (We will learn about credit cards in Credit Cards) You can use up to some specified value,
called the limit, any way you want, and as long as you pay the issuer of the credit according to their terms, you can keep
borrowing from this account.

These and other terminologies can be researched further at Forbes (https://openstax.org/r/terminologies).

        WHO KNEW?

  Credit Scores

  Not everyone pays the same interest for the same loan. One person might get an APR of 2.9% while another pays
  6.9%. These rates are based on your credit score.

  Data about you and your credit is collected by three credit bureaus--Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion. They
  calculate your score using one of two main models: FICO and Vantage Score. The score they develop is based on the
  following categories:

    · Payment History: Making your payments on time and not missing payments is by far the most important factor.
        All three credit types--revolving, installment, and open--contribute to this factor.

    · Credit Utilization or Amount Owed: How much do you owe on your credit card accounts? This category is
        concerned with the ratio of how much you owe on revolving credit accounts relative to your available credit, also
        known as your credit utilization ratio.
        This is the only category that depends solely on your revolving credit accounts.

    · Length of Credit History: This is the average age of your credit history, including the age of the oldest and
        newest accounts. All three types of credit accounts play a role in this category.

    · Credit Mix: This number represents the different types of credit accounts you have, such as credit cards, car
        loan, mortgages, and whether you are successful managing both revolving and installment accounts.

    · New Credit: Have you recently opened a new account or applied for new credit? Lenders want to know how
        much new credit you are taking on. So, if you are planning to buy a car and make another large purchase with a
        credit card, you may want to space these purchases out.

  If you have done well in these categories, your credit score will be high, and you will qualify for lower interest rates
  because you are not perceived as being a risky investment. However, if you do poorly in these categories, your score
  will be low and you will pay higher interest rates since you present a greater risk.

  Check out this nerdwallet article on credit scores (https://openstax.org/r/how_to_improve) to learn more!

       VIDEO

      Credit Scores Explained (https://openstax.org/r/credit_scores_explained)
632 6 · Money Management

      WHO KNEW?

Where Do Interest Rates Come From?

There are many factors that impact your interest rate beyond your credit score. Banks have the authority to set their
own rates, so competition between banks impacts interest rates. Bank A doesn't want to charge interest rates that are
too high, since borrowers will find banks with better rates. Banks also don't want to charge too little interest.

The too little interest is more involved than the too high. The bank needs to make a profit on its loans. Deposits at the
bank are used by the bank to generate loans. The bank has to pay those depositors interest. The bank must charge
more for loans they give than they pay to people with deposits in the bank.

Banks also borrow money from each other. These loans have an interest rate, and once more, the bank making a loan
must make a profit. More directly, they must charge more for loans they give than they pay for loans they take. In the
United States, banks may also borrow from the Federal Reserve, which also charges an interest rate, which is also
called the discount rate.

This is where a bank's prime rate comes from. A bank's prime rate is the interest rate it will give to its very best
customers, which means most customers will pay more than the bank's prime rate. To confuse the issue, there is also
the Wall Street Journal's prime rate. It is the average of the prime rates charged by individual banks. The Wall Street
Journal surveys several banks to generate this value.

Banks also increase the interest rate charged to customers based on both the credit risk presented by the customer,
and the risk associate with what the loan will be used for.

Calculating Loan Payments

Loan payments are made up of two components. One component is the interest that accrued during the payment
period. The other component is part of the principal. This should remind you of partial payments from Simple Interest.

Over the course of the loan, the amount of principal remaining to be paid decreases. The interest you pay in a month is
based on the remaining principal, just as in the partial payments of Simple Interest.

FORMULA

The amount of interest, , to be paid for one period of a loan with remaining principal is     , where is the

interest rate in decimal form and is he number of payments in a year (most often = 12). Since the interest is for the

one period, the time is 1 and does not impact the calculation. Note, interest paid to lenders is always rounded up to

the next penny.

EXAMPLE 6.77

Interest for a Monthly Payment of a Loan
Find the interest to be paid for the period on loans with the following remaining principal and given annual interest rate.
Each period is a month.

1. Remaining principal is $13,450, interest rate is 6.75%
2. Remaining principal is $8,460, interest rate is 5.99%

Solution

1. Substituting $13,450 for the remaining principal , 0.0675 for , and = 12 since the period is a month into the

formula, we find that the interest to be paid this period is                                  .

2. Substituting $8,460 for the remaining principal , 0.0599 for , and = 12 since the period is a month into the

formula, we find that the interest to be paid this period is                               .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 633

      YOUR TURN 6.77

Find the interest to be paid for the period on loans with the following remaining principal and given annual interest
rate. Each period is a month.

    1. Remaining principal is $56,945, interest rate is 7.5%
    2. Remaining principal is $25,850, interest rate is 2.9%

The payment of the loan has to be such that the principal of the loan is paid off with the last payment. In any period, the
amount of interest is defined by the formula above, but changes from period to period since the principal is decreasing
with each payment. The trick is knowing how much principal should be paid each payment so that the loan is paid off at
the stated time. Fortunately, that is found using the following formula.

  FORMULA

The payment, , per period to pay down a loan with beginning principal is                  , where

is the annual interest rate in decimal form, is the number of years of the loan, and is the number of payments per
year (typically, loans are paid monthly making = 12).

Note, payment to lenders is always rounded up to the next penny.

Often, the formula takes the form                          , where is the interest rate per period (annual rate
divided by the number of periods per year), and  is the total number of payments to be made.

EXAMPLE 6.78

Calculating the Payment for a Loan
In the following, calculate the payment necessary to pay off the loan with the given details. The payments are monthly.

1. A car loan taken out for $28,500 at an annual interest rate of 3.99% for 5 years.
2. A home loan taken out for $136,700 and an annual interest rate of 5.75% for 15 years.

    Solution                                                               = 0.0399. The term of the loan is 5 years, so
1. The loan is for $28,500, which is the principal. The rate is 3.99%, so  , , , and into the formula

     =5. Monthly payments means = 12. Substituting these values for

              and calculating, we find the payment for the loan.

     The monthly payment needed is $524.75.
2. The loan is for $136,000, which is the principal . The rate is 5.75% so = 0.0575. The term of the loan is 15 years, so

        = 15. Monthly payments mean =12. Substituting these values for , , , and into the formula

                                                and calculating, we find the payment for the loan.
634 6 · Money Management

             The monthly payment needed is $1,135.18.

               YOUR TURN 6.78
         In the following, calculate the payment necessary to pay off the loan with the given details. The payments are
         monthly.

             1. A home improvement loan taken out for $17,950 at an annual interest rate of 7.5% for 10 years.
             2. A solar panel installation loan taken out for $33,760 and an annual interest rate of 4.3% for 20 years.

                  TECH CHECK
         Using Google Sheets to Calculate Loan Payments
         Google Sheets has a formula to calculate the monthly payment necessary to pay off a loan with a specified interest
         rate and term. The formula is the PMT formula. It uses the principal , interest rate , and years. Follow these steps
         Open a Google worksheet and click on any cell.
         Type =-PMT(r/12,12*t,P).
         Hit the enter key.
         The cell displays the payment.
         Please note the negative sign. Since Google Sheets is a spreadsheet program, is sees the payment as funds leaving
         the account, and so they are, by default, negative. The negative sign in front of the formula makes the result positive.
         For example, for a $50,000 loan at 10.9% interest for 7 years, you would type =-PMT(0.109/12,12*7,50000). The
         formula and the result are shown in Figure 6.18.

                                                                    Figure 6.18 Google Sheets formula
         Alternatively, you can also use an online calculator to find monthly payments for a loan, such as the one at
         Caluculator.net (https://openstax.org/r/payment_calculator)

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 635

Reading Amortization Tables

An amortization table or amortization schedule is a table that provides the details of the periodic payments for a loan
where the payments are applied to both the principal and the interest. The principal of the loan is paid down over the life
of the loan. Typically, the payments each period are equal. Importantly, one of the columns will show how much of each
payment is used for interest, another column shows how much is applied to the outstanding principal, and another
column shows the remaining principal or balance Figure 6.19.

                                                                Figure 6.19 Amortization table
  EXAMPLE 6.79
Reading from an Amortization Table
Using the partial amortization table (Figure 6.23), answer the following questions.
636 6 · Money Management

                                                                       Figure 6.20 Amortization table
        1. What is the loan amount (principal), the interest rate, and the term of the loan?
        2. How much is the monthly payment?
        3. How much remaining balance is there after the payment in month 15?
        4. How much was the interest in payment 10?
        5. What is the total of the interest paid after payment 18?
        6. What happens to the amount paid in interest each month?

            Solution
        1. Reading the values at the top of the table, we see the principal is $10,000, the interest rate is 4.75%, and has a term

             of 20 years.
        2. The monthly payment is listed below the term of the loan, and is $64.62.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      6.8 · The Basics of Loans 637

3. $9,613.83
4. $38.68
5. $697.01
6. The amount paid to interest decreases each month.

       YOUR TURN 6.79

Using the partial amortization table below, answer the following questions.

                                                                 Amortization table

1. What is the loan amount (principal), the interest rate, and the term of the loan?
2. How much is the monthly payment?
638 6 · Money Management

             3. How much remaining balance is there after the payment in month 20?
             4. How much was the interest in payment 5?
             5. What is the total of the interest paid after payment 24?
             6. What happens to the amount paid to the principal each month?

              VIDEO
             Reading an Amortization Table (https://openstax.org/r/Amortization_Table)

     Cost of Finance

       There are often costs associated with a loan beyond the interest being paid. The cost of finance of a loan is the sum of
       all costs, fees, interest, and other charges paid over the life of the loan.

         EXAMPLE 6.80
       Cost of Financing a Personal Loan
       Irena signed for a loan of $15,000 at 6.33% for 5 years. When she took out the loan, Irena paid a $750 origination fee.
       Over the course of the loan, she pays $2,537.96 in interest. What was her cost to finance the loan?

            Solution
       The cost of finance is the sum is all interest and any fees paid for the loan. The fees paid were $750.00 and the interest
       was $2,537.96. Her cost of finance for this loan was $3,287.96.

               YOUR TURN 6.80
         1. Samantha takes out a $28,000 loan for 6 years at 5.5% interest. When she took out the loan, she paid $4,937.18

              in interest, an origination fee of $1,400 and an application fee of $100. What was her cost of finance for this loan?

     Check Your Understanding

       48. Give three reasons for taking out a loan.
       49. What is an installment loan?
       50. In an installment loan what happens to the amount of the payment that is applied to interest in later payments

             compared to earlier payments?
       51. An installment loan is paid monthly. The remaining principal is $5,498. If the interest rate is 12.9%, how much

             interest is paid that month?
       52. A business loan is taken out for $250,000 for 15 years at 6.9% interest. What are the payments for the loan?
       53. Consider the amortization table below. What is the balance after the eleventh payment?
       54. The total interest paid on a loan is $38,519.50. The origination fee was $300 while the processing fee was $250. An

             additional fee was charged to the borrowers, amounting to another $475. How much was the cost of financing for
             this loan?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 639

        SECTION 6.8 EXERCISES

 1. How do fixed interest rates and variable interest rates differ?
 2. What is revolving credit?
 3. What is loan amortization?
 4. What are the two components of a loan payment?
 5. Name three details that are presented on an amortization schedule.
For the following exercises, calculate the interest due for the monthly installment payment given the remaining
principal and interest rate.

     6. Remaining principal = $21,872.99, interest rate = 13.9%
640 6 · Money Management

             7. Remaining principal = $2,845.43, interest rate = 4.99%
             8. Remaining principal = $78,913.76, interest rate = 2.9%
             9. Remaining principal = $6,445.22, interest rate = 5.65%
       In the following exercises, calculate the monthly payment for the loan.
           10. Principal = $8,600, annual interest rate = 6.75%, term is 5 years
           11. Principal = $19,400, annual interest rate = 2.25%, term is 6 years
           12. Principal = $11,870, annual interest rate = 3.59%, term is 3 years
           13. Principal = $41,900, annual interest rate = 8.99%, term is 15 years
           14. Principal = $26,150, annual interest rate = 11.1%, term is 7 years
           15. Principal = $46,350, annual interest rate = 2.9%, term is 6 years
           16. Principal = $175,800, annual interest rate = 4.73%, term is 25 years
           17. Principal = $225,000, annual interest rate = 5.06%, term is 30 years
       In the following exercises, use the amortization table below to answer the questions.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 641

    18. What was the loan amount, or starting principal?
    19. What was the interest rate?
    20. What is the term of the loan?
    21. What are the monthly payments?
    22. What is the remaining principal after payment 17?
    23. How much of payment 27 was for interest?
    24. How much of payment 19 was for principal?
    25. How much total interest was paid after payment 22?
In the following exercises, use the amortization table for payments 131-152 of a mortgage below to answer the
questions.
642 6 · Money Management

           26. What was the loan amount, or starting principal?
           27. What was the interest rate?
           28. What is the term of the loan?
           29. What are the monthly payments?
           30. What is the remaining principal after payment 140?
           31. How much of the principal has been paid off after payment 151?
           32. How much of payment 138 was for principal?
           33. How much total interest was paid after payment 135?
       In the following exercises find the cost to finance for the loan.
           34. Total interest paid is $94,598.36, origination fee was $450, processing fee was $300, commission fee was

                  $1,457.50.
           35. Total interest paid was $3,209.34, origination fee was $100, processing fee was $200.
           36. Total interest paid was $8,295.50, fees were $875.
           37. Total interest paid was $56,114.90, origination fee was $1,230, and filing fee was $250.
       38. Kylie takes out a $16,780 loan from her credit union for a new car. The loan's term is 4 years with an interest rate of

             6.77%. What are Kylie's monthly payments?
       39. Crissy and Jonesy take out a $13,200 loan for repairs to their roof. The loan is for 10 years at 7.15% interest. What

             are their payments for this loan?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6.8 · The Basics of Loans 643

Below are two amortization tables. They are for loans with the same principal and interest rate, but different terms, the
first a 20-year term and the second a 30-year term. The tables show the last payments of each loan. Use those two
tables for the following exercises.
644 6 · Money Management

           40. How much total interest was paid for the 20-year loan? The 30-year loan? Calculate the difference.
           41. What was the payment for the 20-year loan? The 30-year loan? Calculate the difference.
       42. Compare the two loans. Why would the 30-year be preferable over the 20-year loan? Why would the 20-year loan

             be preferable to the 30-year loan?
       In the following exercises, compare payments per month and interest rates.

           43. A loan for $20,000 is taken out for 5 years. Find the payment is the interest rate is:
                   a. 2.9%
                   b. 3.9%
                   c. 4.9%
                   d. 5.9%
                   e. Did the payments increase by the same amount for each 1% jump in interest rate? Describe the pattern.

           44. A loan for $50,000 is taken out for 7 years. Find the payment is the interest rate is:
                   a. 3.5%
                   b. 4.5%
                   c. 5.5%
                   d. 6.5%
                   e. Did the payments increase by the same amount for each 1% jump in interest rate?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                 6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 645

6.9 Understanding Student Loans

Figure 6.21 College is often paid for through loans. (credit: "Sidewalk Scene in front of Science Building" by IMCBerea
College Wikimedia Commons, CC- BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe how to obtain a student loan.
 2. Distinguish between federal and private student loans and state distinctions.
 3. Understand the limits on student loans.
 4. Summarize the standard prepayment plan.
 5. Understand student loan consolidation.
 6. Summarize and describe benefits or drawbacks of other repayment plans.
 7. Summarize possible courses of action if a student loan defaults.

Obtaining a Student Loan

All college students are eligible to apply for a loan regardless of their financial situation or credit rating. Federal student
loans do not require a co-signer or a credit check. Most students do not have a credit history when they begin college,
and the federal government is aware of this. However, private loans will generally require a co-signer as well as a credit
check. The co-signer will assume responsibility for paying off the loan if the student cannot make the payments.

The first step in applying for student loans is to fill out the FAFSA (Free Application for Student Aid). FAFSA determines
financial need and what type of loan the student is qualified to obtain. For students who are still dependents on their
parent's taxes, the parents also fill out the FAFSA, as their wealth and income impacts what the dependent student is
eligible for. Students who cannot demonstrate financial need will also be helped by applying with FAFSA, as it will help
guide them to the type of loan most appropriate. The FAFSA must be submitted each year.

      The FAFSA deadline is the spring of the student's next academic year. The deadline is often in March. Do not allow
      this deadline to pass.

As soon as an offer letter from the college is received, the student should start the application process. The college will
determine the loan amount needed. Also, there are limits on the amount a student can borrow. There are both yearly
limits and aggregate limits. See the table later in this section that outlines the loan limits per school year and in the
aggregate.

If the student receives a direct subsidized loan, there is a limit on the eligibility period. The time limit on eligibility
depends on the college program into which the student enrolls. The school publishes how long a program is expected to
take. The eligibility period is 150% of that published time. For example, if a student is enrolled in a 4-year program, such
as a bachelor's degree program, their eligibility period is 6 years, as 1.50(4) = 6. Therefore, the student may receive direct
646 6 · Money Management

       subsidized loans for a period of 6 years.

     Types and Features of Student Loans

       Once a tuition statement is received, and all the non-loan awards are analyzed that are applicable to the costs of college
       (such as scholarships and grants), there still may be quite of bit of an expense to attend college. This difference between
       what college will cost (including tuition, room and board, books, computers) and the non-loan awards received is the
       college funding gap.

         EXAMPLE 6.81

       College Funding Gap
       Ishraq receives her award and tuition letter from the college she wants to attend. Her tuition, fees, books, and room and
       board all come to $24,845 for the year. Her non-loan awards include an instant scholarship from the school for $7,500, a
       scholarship she earned for enrolling in a STEM program for $3,750, and a $1,000 scholarship from her church. What is
       Ishraq's college funding gap?

            Solution
       Her awards total to $12,250. Her cost to attend is $24,845. Her college funding gap is then

                                                 . She will need to find $12,595 in funding.

               YOUR TURN 6.81

         1. Yuan-Teng receives his award and tuition letter from the college he wants to attend. His tuition, fees, books, and
              room and board all come to $34,845 for the year. His non-loan awards include an instant scholarship from the
              school for $17,500, three scholarships he earned from sources he found online, which total $5,600, and a $2,000
              scholarship from his employer. What is Yuan-Teng's college funding gap?

       There are several loan types, which basically break down into four broad categories: subsidized loans, unsubsidized
       loans, PLUS loans, and private loans. These loans are meant to fill the college funding gap.
       Federal subsidized loans are backed by the U.S. Department of Education. These loans are intended for undergraduate
       students who can demonstrate financial need. Subsidized federal loans, including Stafford loans, defer payments until
       the student has graduated. During the deferment, the government pays the interest while the student is enrolled at
       least half-time. These loans are generally made directly to students. However, there are restrictions on how the money
       can be used. It can only be used for tuition, room and board, computers, books, fees, and college-related expenses.
       Interest rates are not based on the financial markets but determined by Congress. Federal loans are backed by the
       Department of Education.
       Federal unsubsidized loans, including unsubsidized Stafford loans, are available for undergraduate and graduate
       students who cannot demonstrate financial need. If the student meets the program requirements, they are
       automatically approved. The student is not required to pay these loans during their time in college (enrolled at least half-
       time). However, the interest rate is generally higher and there is no deferment period, as with subsidized loans. Interest
       begins accruing as soon as the money is disbursed.

             The immediate accrual of interest means the balance of the loan grows as the student attends school. A loan that
             was for $10,000 can grow past $13,000 over five years of college. Some advisors tell students to pay the interest
             portion of the loan while it is deferred to prevent this growth of debt.

       Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students (PLUS) are federal loans made directly to parents. They are available even if
       parents are not deemed financially needy. A credit check is performed and approval is not automatic. The limit to what
       parents can borrow from a PLUS loan each year is still the college funding gap, but the aggregate of the PLUS loans does
       not have a limit. This means the PLUS loan can cover whatever is left in the funding gap once all other aid and loans are
       applied. Payments do not begin until the student is out of school, but interest begins to accrue the moment funds are
       disbursed. Because the parents take out the loan, the parents are responsible for paying back the loan.
       Private student loans are backed by a bank or credit institution and require a credit check, and interest rates are
       variable. As private loans are not subsidized by the government, no one pays the interest but the borrower. The student

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                         6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 647

does not have to start repaying the loan until after graduation, but interest starts to accrue immediately. This loan has
fewer repayment options, more fees and penalties, and the loan cannot be discharged through bankruptcy. Many
students need a co-signer to acquire a private loan. Like PLUS loans, private student loans can cover whatever is left in
the funding gap once all other aid and loans are applied

Student loans, in general, have a term of 10 years, that is, the loans are paid back over 10 years. This can vary, but 10
years is the standard.

        WHO KNEW?

  School-Channel Loans and Direct-to-Consumer Loans

  Private loans can fall into one of two categories: school-channel loans and direct to consumer loans. School-channel
  loans are disbursed directly to the school. The school verifies the loan does not exceed the cost to attend school.
  Direct-to-consumer loans do not have the verification process. Those proceeds are sent directly to the borrower.
  They are processed more quickly, but often have higher interest rates.

       VIDEO

      Types of Student Loans (https://openstax.org/r/Student_Loans)

Limits on Student Loans

As mentioned earlier, there are limits to how much a student can borrow, per year and in total. The following table shows
a general breakdown of the amounts the federal government and private lenders will lend. Amounts are based on level
of need and whether the student is a dependent or an independent student. Independent students include those who
are at least 24 years old, married, a professional, a graduate student, a veteran, a member of the armed forces, an
emancipated minor, or an orphan. The amounts shown are as of this writing in 2022.

Year            Dependent Students       Independent Students Maximum Amounts
                Maximum Amounts

    First-Year  $5,500 but no more than  $9,500 but no more than $3,500 may be in subsidized loans
Undergraduate        $3,500 may be in
                     subsidized loans

  Second-Year   $6,500 but no more than  $10,500 but no more than $4,500 in subsidized loans
Undergraduate          $4,500 may be
                     subsidized loans

Third Year and  $7,500 but no more than  $12,500 but no more than $5,500 may be in subsidized loans
   Additional        $5,500 may be in
      Years          subsidized loans

Graduate and    Not applicable           $20,500 in unsubsidized loans
 Professional

Limits          $31,000 but no more      $57,500 for undergraduates but no more than $23,000 in subsidized.
                   than $23,000 in       $138,500 for graduate or professional but no more than $65,500 may
                   subsidized loans
                                                                           be subsidized loans.

Check out this Edvisors page on the limits of student borrowing (https://openstax.org/r/loan_limits) to learn more!
648 6 · Money Management

EXAMPLE 6.82

Loan for Year 5 of College
Efraim is a dependent undergraduate student enrolled in a biology program. He's about to attend for the fifth year. In
year 1 he took out $5,000 in federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans, in year 2 he took out $6,400 in federal subsidized
and unsubsidized loans, in years 3 and 4, he took out the maximum federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans amounts.
He needs federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans for his fifth year of school. How much can he obtain in federal
subsidized and unsubsidized student loans?

Solution

The sum of his previous loans is  . The limit for federal subsidized and

unsubsidized loans is $31,000, so in year 5 he can get student loans in the amount of        .

      YOUR TURN 6.82

1. Tiana in an independent college student entering the sixth and final year of her engineering program. In the
    previous years, she took out student loans of $5,500, $8,470, $10,000, $7,890, and $11,900. She needs a loan to
    finish her final year. How much in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans can she obtain?

Putting this all together, we have a way to determine the student loans needed for a student to attend college.

  · First, determine the funding gap. If the student or family can cover the gap, then no loans are necessary.
  · Second, determine how much in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans can be taken out. If the total

      federal loans available is more than the funding gap, no other loans are needed.
  · Third, if the federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans do not cover the gap, PLUS and private student loans can be

      taken out to cover the remainder of the gap.

At each step, if the student and family can cover some or all of the gap, they can do so without taking out a loan.

EXAMPLE 6.83

College Funding Gap and PLUS and Private Student Loans
Olivia receives her award and tuition letter from the college she wants to attend. Her tuition, fees, books, and room and
board all come to $44,845 for her second year. Her non-loan awards include an instant scholarship from the school for
$13,500, a scholarship she earned for enrolling in an engineering program for $5,750, and a $2,000 scholarship from her
parent's workplace. For her first year, what is Olivia's college funding gap? How much can Olivia borrow in federal
subsidized and unsubsidized student loans? Once Olivia takes out her maximum subsidized and unsubsidized federal
student loans, how much will have to be paid for using PLUS and private student loans?

Solution

Her awards total to $21,250. Her cost to attend is $44,845. Her college funding gap is then

                                 . The maximum in federal student loans that Olivia can borrow is $6,500 in year 2. The

remaining funding gap is          . Private student loans, PLUS loans, or other sources must be used

to cover this gap.

      YOUR TURN 6.83

1. Makenzy receives her award and tuition letter from the college she wants to attend. Her tuition, fees, books, and
    room and board all come to $39,200 for her third year. Her non-loan awards include an instant scholarship from
    the school for $19,500, three scholarships she earned from sources she found online which total $3,850, and a
    $5,000 scholarship from her employer. What is Makenzy's college funding gap? How much can Makenzy borrow
    in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans? Once she takes out her maximum subsidized and
    unsubsidized federal student loans, how much will Makenzy and her family have to pay using PLUS and private
    student loans?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 649

Student Loan Interest Rates

Student loans are first and foremost loans. Students will pay them back and will pay interest. In the fall of 2022, the
federal student loan interest rate was 4.99%. Private student loans rates ranged between 3.22% and 13.95%. Finding the
lowest interest rate you can helps with the payments, and especially helps if the loan is not federally subsidized.
Remember, if the loan is not federally subsidized, the student is on the hook for the interest that is accumulating with the
loan.

Interest Accrual

The interest on student loans begins as soon as the loan is disbursed (paid to the borrower). When the loan is federally

subsidized, the government pays that interest for the student. This means the loan for a subsidized loan of $3,000 is still

a loan for $3,000 when the student graduates. However, if the loan is not federally subsidized, the student is responsible

for the interest that accrues on the loan. The $3,000 loan from year 1 of college is now a loan for more due to that added

interest. The interest on that loan grew while the student was in college. The formula for growth of the loan's balance is

the same as compound interest formula from Compound Interest,  .

  EXAMPLE 6.84

Denise takes out unsubsidized student loan, in August, in her first year of college for $2,000. She manages an interest
rate of 8%. She graduates after her fifth year of college, in May. She does not pay the interest on the loan during her
time in college. What is the balance of her first year loan in May of her graduation year?

     Solution
The principal of the loan is $2,000. Her interest rate is 8%. Since student loans are typically paid monthly, there are 12
periods per year. Since the time she has had the loan is not in years, we will use the number of months for the value of
in the formula. She has had the loan for 4 years and 9 months, meaning 57 period have passed. Substituting those
values into the formula and calculating, we find her balance in May of her graduating year is

                                                                                                    .

        YOUR TURN 6.84

  1. Priya takes out unsubsidized student loan, in August, in her first year of college for $2,000. She manages an
      interest rate of 7%. She graduates after her sixth year of college, in May. She does not pay the interest on the
      loan during her time in college. What is the balance of her first year loan in May of her graduation year?

The Standard Repayment Plan

There are various repayment plans available. The one most likely to apply to a student loan is the standard repayment
plan, which is available to everyone. Borrowers pay a fixed amount monthly so the loan is paid in full within 10 years.
Consolidated loans, discussed later in this section, also qualify for the standard repayment plan, and may allow the
payoff period to range from 10 to 30 years. Direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans, PLUS loans, and federal Stafford
loans are eligible.
Since these are loans, they are paid back with interest. As with most installment loans, their payments are due monthly.
The formula for paying back these loans is the same as the formula used for paying loans in The Basics of Loans:

                                                                                                           .

Using that formula, we can calculate how much the payment is for a student loan. Remember that all loan payments are
rounded up to the next penny.

  EXAMPLE 6.85

Standard Repayment Plan
Find the payment for the following student loans using the standard repayment plan:
650 6 · Money Management

1. Loan is $3,500, interest is 4.99%
2. Loan is for $6,200, interest is 6.75%

    Solution              = $3,500 and the rate is = 0.0499. Since this is the standard repayment plan, there are = 12
1. The principal is

payments per year for 10 years. Substituting those values into                       and calculating gives a

monthly payment of

2. The principal is = $6,200 and the rate is = 0.0675. Since this is the standard repayment plan, there are = 12

payments per year for 10 years. Substituting those values into                       and calculating gives a

monthly payment of

      YOUR TURN 6.85

Find the payment for the following student loans using the standard repayment plan:
    1. Loan is $7,800, interest is 4.99%
    2. Loan is for $11,450, interest is 7.75%

EXAMPLE 6.86

Standard Repayment Plan for an Unsubsidized Loan
Erson has a balance of $8,132.55 when he starts paying off the 8.6% unsubsidized student loan he took out in his third
year. How much are his payments if the term for his loan is the standard 10 years?

     Solution                             , with = $8,132.55, = 0.086, = 10 and = 12, we calculate
Using the payment formula,

that his monthly payment will be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 651

      YOUR TURN 6.86

1. Kathleen has an unsubsidized student loan from graduate school. She begins to pay it back in the September
    after she earned her doctorate. The balance at that point was $22,666.21. The interest rate on the loan is 6.7%.
    How much are her payments if she pays it off in the standard of 10 years?

Student Loan Consolidation

When a student graduates, they may have multiple different student loans. Keeping track of them and paying them off
separately can be a burden. Instead, these loans can be consolidated into a single loan. If they are federal loans the
combination is called federal consolidation. Combining private loans is often referred to as refinancing. Refinancing,
or private consolidation, can be used to combine both private and federal student loans. Be aware that consolidated
federal loans may still be subject to the rules and protections that govern subsidized loans. Refinancing loans, private or
federal, are no longer subject to those rules and guidelines. Check out this Experian article about consolidation and
refinancing (https://openstax.org/r/my_student_loans) for more deatil.

In consolidation of federal direct student loans, the interest rate is the weighted average of the interest rates on the
subsidized loans. This means the interest rate remains the same. However, if the term is extended, then the student will
pay back more over time than if they did not extend the loan term.

In refinancing, it is possible to obtain a lower interest rate on the student loans, which may lower how much is paid per
month and lower the total paid back over time. These monthly payments are calculated using the same formula as for

any other loan payment,                   . The term of the refinanced loan may also be changed, which

would also impact the payment per month.

In either case, consolidating or refinancing, the monthly financial burden on the student can decrease. However, if the
term is extended, the total amount repaid may increase.

EXAMPLE 6.87

Federal Loan Consolidation and Interest Rates
Ernest has four federal student loans that he wants to consolidate. He combines them into one loan. What is the
maximum Ernest can reduce the interest rate by?

     Solution
Consolidating subsidized loans has no impact on the interest rate of the loans, so the maximum that the interest rate
can be reduced is 0%.

      YOUR TURN 6.87

1. Ryann has five federal student loans that he wishes to consolidate. He wants to extend the term to 15 years. How
    does this impact Ryann's interest rate? The total Ryann pays back?
652 6 · Money Management

EXAMPLE 6.88

Payments for Consolidated Student Loans
Brianna consolidates her student loans, some federal and some private, into a single refinanced student loan with a
principal of $27,800. The interest rate that Brianna received was 8.375%. If Brianna's new term is 15 years, how much are
her payments per month?

     Solution     = $27,800 and the rate is = 0.08375. Since the payments are monthly, =12. The loan term is for 15
The principal is

years, so = 15. years. Substituting those values into  and calculating gives a monthly

payment of

        YOUR TURN 6.88

  1. Brian consolidates his federal student loans into one loan at 4.99%. The consolidated balance is $20,340, and he
      extends the term to 12 years. What are Brian's monthly payments for the consolidated loan?

Other Repayment Plans

There are various other repayment plans available to students. Plans other than the standard repayment plan typically
require the student to meet certain criteria. The following plans are independent of student income, but may make early
payments easier.

  · Graduated repayment plans are plans where the amount of payments gradually increases so that the loan is paid
      off in 10 years, or within 10 to 30 years for consolidated loans. Payments start off small and increase approximately
      every 2 years. Almost all loan types are eligible, including direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans, Stafford loans,
      PLUS loans, and consolidated loans.

  · Extended repayment plans are available to the direct loan borrower if the outstanding direct loans are over
      $30,000. The payments, fixed or graduated, are designed so that the loans are satisfied within 25 years. Eligible
      loans include both direct subsidized or unsubsidized loans, Stafford loans, PLUS loans, and consolidated loans.

If student earnings are such that the standard, graduated, or extended repayment plans are unaffordable, then one can
make payments that are based on their discretionary income. Discretionary income is federally defined to be the
difference between (adjusted) gross income and 150% of the poverty guideline for location and family size. This
discretionary income then depends on where one lives (contiguous United States or Hawaii or Alaska) and how many
dependents one has. If married, a spouse's income will be included in the adjusted gross income. Understanding
discretionary income is necessary to understand how income driven payments plans work.

  EXAMPLE 6.89

Discretionary Income
 1. The poverty guideline for a single person living in Arkansas, is $12,000. If Harriet is a single person in Arkansas with

      a (adjusted) gross income of $23,500, what is her discretionary income?
 2. For California, the poverty guideline for a person with four people in the household is $27,750. If such a person has

      a (adjusted) gross income of $48,600, what is their discretionary income?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 653

Solution

1. The poverty guideline for a single person in Arkansas is $12,000. 150% of that guideline value is

                         . The gross income that Harriet makes over that $18,000 is her discretionary income. That

gross income is $23,500, so her discretionary income is                          .

2. The poverty guideline for a household of four in California is $27,750. 150% of that guideline value is

                         . The gross income that Harriet makes over that $41,625 is her discretionary income. That

gross income is $48,600, so her discretionary income is                          .

      YOUR TURN 6.89

1. The poverty guideline for two-person household in Hawaii is $21,060. If Jamie lives in a two-person household
    and has a gross income of $36,900, what is his discretionary income?

The following plans all depend on discretionary income.

  · Pay As You Earn (PAYE) repayment plans have monthly payments that are 10% of discretionary income based on a
      student's updated income and family size. If a borrower files a joint tax return, their spouse's income and debt may
      also be considered. Eligible loans include direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans, PLUS loans made to students,
      and some consolidated loans. These loans are forgiven (student does not pay the remaining balance) after 20 years
      of monthly payments if they were direct federal student loans.

  · Revised Pay As You Earn (REPAYE) repayment plans have payment amounts that are based on income and family
      size and calculated as 10% of discretionary income. Eligible loans include direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans,
      direct PLUS loans, and some consolidated loans. These loans are forgiven, that is, the student does not pay more,
      after 20 or 25 years, provided they were direct federal student loans.

  · Income-Based Repayment (IBR) plans sound like a few of the others and there are similarities in all of them. The
      payments are either 10% or 15% of discretionary income, but this plan is meant for those with a relatively high debt.
      Every year, income and family size must be updated, and payments are calculated based on those figures. Eligible
      loans include direct subsidized and unsubsidized loans, Stafford loans, and PLUS loans made to students, but not
      PLUS loans made to parents.

  · Income-Contingent Repayment (ICR) plans have payments that are either 20% of discretionary income or
      whatever would be paid if a student were on a fixed payment plan for more than 12 years, whichever is less. Eligible
      loans include direct subsidized and unsubsidized, PLUS loans to students, and consolidated loans.

There are many similarities among these repayment plans, and it is easy to misunderstand the nuances of each.
Therefore, be careful entering into any type of repayment contract until you fully understand all the details and
repercussions of the plan you choose. For more detail, see this nerdwallet article "Income-Driven Repayment: Is It Right
for You?" to learn more (https://openstax.org/r/driven_repayment_right)!

EXAMPLE 6.90

Payments for a REPAYE Program
Warren qualifies for a REPAYE payment plan. His gross income is $32,700. He is single and live in Montana, so the federal
poverty guideline for Warren is $12,000.

1. What is Warren's discretionary income?
2. Under the REPAYE plan, he pays 10% of his discretionary income, but monthly. How much are Warren's REPAYE

     payments?

Solution

1. The poverty guideline for Warren is $12,000. 150% of that guideline value is                             . The gross

income that Warren makes over that $18,000 is his discretionary income. That gross income is $32,700, so his

discretionary income is                      .

2. 10% of Warren's discretionary income is               . He pays monthly, so his monthly payments are

$1,470 divided by 12, or $122.50 per month.
654 6 · Money Management

               YOUR TURN 6.90

         Lauren, a Missouri resident, qualifies for a REPAYE payment plan. Her gross income is $39,200. She has one child, so
         there are two people in her household. The federal poverty guideline for Lauren is $18,310.

             1. What is Lauren's discretionary income?
             2. Under the REPAYE plan, she pays 10% of her discretionary income, but monthly. How much are Lauren's

                  REPAYE payments?

       Using income to determine payments initially seems excellent. However, if there is no forgiveness at the end of the loan,
       then the income driven payment plans can cause problems. For one, your payment may not be sufficient to cover the
       interest rate of your loans. In that case, your loan balance actually increases as you make your payments. Eventually, you
       are paying for not only your original loan balance, but interest that has been growing and compounding over time. Also,
       if the loan term is extended, you may pay more, perhaps a lot more, money over time. You may find yourself in the
       position of paying these loans for decades.
       With those possible drawbacks, great care must be taken to avoid large problems down the line.

              VIDEO
             Repayment Plans (https://openstax.org/r/student_loan_repayment_plans)

     Student Loan Default and Consequences

       The first day a payment is late, the account becomes delinquent. After 90 days, this delinquency is reported to the credit
       bureaus, and goes into default. This is serious, as now a credit score is affected, meaning that it will be harder to buy a
       car, a home, get a credit card, or a cell phone. Even renting an apartment may be a task not easily overcome. The default
       rate for students who do not complete their degree is three times higher than for students who do.
       Further, defaulting on a student loan may mean that the borrower loses eligibility for repayment plans, as the balance
       and any unpaid interest may become due immediately, and any tax refunds may be withheld and applied to the loan,
       and wages may be garnished. One should immediately contact your loan servicer and try to make other arrangements
       for repayment if this situation becomes apparent, as different repayment plans are available, if actions are taken quickly.
       There are several options that may be open to avoid defaulting. One is called rehabilitation, or is the process in which a
       borrower may bring a student loan out of default by adhering to specified repayment requirements, and the other is
       consolidation. Certain criteria must be met to enter these programs.
       Both of these options are detailed, including the criteria required for eligibility, on the studentaid.gov loan management
       page (https://openstax.org/r/default_get_out).
       Professionals advise hiring an attorney if one of these paths is chosen.

     Check Your Understanding

       55. When is the FAFSA typically due?
       56. If the college has a program that it advertises will take 6 years, how long is the eligibility period?
       57. What is a student's funding gap?
       58. What is a main difference between subsidized federal loans and unsubsidized loans?
       59. What is the limit on the total in federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans that can be borrowed for an

             undergraduate degree?
       60. If a student takes out a private student loan for $9,800 at 5.99% interest but does not begin paying it back for 66

             months, how much is then owed on the loan?
       61. How long is the standard repayment plan for student loans?
       62. How much of a student's discretionary income is paid for student loans under the REPAYE payment plan?

             SECTION 6.9 EXERCISES

        1. What form must be filled out before applying for a student loan?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            6.9 · Understanding Student Loans 655

 2. What two issues limit the amount of a federal subsidized or unsubsidized student loan a student can take out?

 3. What is the limit to the number of years a student can take out a student loan?

 4. What types of student loans have deferred payments and do not accrue interest?

 5. Which type of student loan is made directly to parents?

 6. Which types of student loans require a credit check?

 7. What is the limit on the total amount borrowed in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans for an
      independent undergraduate student?

 8. What is the limit on subsidized student loans in the third year of an undergraduate program if the student is a
      dependent student?

 9. What is the maximum allowed to be borrowed on a PLUS loan?

10. What is the maximum allowed to be borrowed on a private student loan?

11. What is the current interest rate on federal subsidized loans?

12. What feature does a graduated payment plan have?

13. If a student is struggling with paying back their student loans, what can the student do?

14. When a student consolidates federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans, does the interest rate change? Does the
      term of the loan change?

15. If a person with federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans enters a pay as you earn program (PAYE), how long will
      the person pay on their student loans?

16. How long is it between the time a person is delinquent on a student loan and being in default on the student loan?

17. What is discretionary income?

18. What are the two remedies if a borrower default on their student loans?

19. Toni's total cost to attend college including all fees, books, and room and board is $18,450. If Toni receives $5,500
      in an instant scholarship from the college and has $2,175 in scholarships, what is Toni's funding gap?

20. Arthur's total cost to attend college including all fees, books, and room and board is $31,500. If Arthur receives
      $13,500 in an instant scholarship from the college and has $3,475 in private scholarships, what is Arthur's funding
      gap?

21. Amelia is an independent student in her fourth year of an urban studies undergraduate degree. What is the
      maximum she can borrow in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans that year?

22. Yaroslav is a dependent student in his second year of an undergraduate psychology program. What is the
      maximum that he can borrow in federal subsidized and unsubsidized student loans that year?

23. Toni's total cost to attend her third year of undergraduate school, including all fees, books, and room and board, is
      $18,450. Toni receives $5,500 in an instant scholarship from the college and has $2,175 in scholarships. She is a
      dependent student. After receiving the maximum federal student loans (subsidized and unsubsidized), and
      without her parents taking out a PLUS loan, how much will she need to borrow in private student loans to cover
      the funding gap?

24. Arthur's total cost to attend his second year of his undergraduate program in data science, including all fees,
      books, and room and board, is $31,500. Arthur receives $13,500 in an instant scholarship from the college and has
      $3,475 in private scholarships. He is a dependent student. After receiving the maximum federal student loans
      (subsidized and unsubsidized), and without his parents taking out a PLUS loan, how much will he need to borrow
      in private student loans to cover the funding gap?

25. Nantumbwe takes out a private student loan for $7,950 in her second year of her undergraduate health
      administration program. She begins paying her loan after 39 months. If her interest rate was 8.75%, how much is
      her balance when she begins to pay off her loan?

26. Cameron takes out a private student loan for $11,385 in their third year of their undergraduate communications
      program. They begin paying their loan after 27 months. If Cameron's interest rate was 9.125%, how much is their
      balance when they begin to pay off the loan?
656 6 · Money Management

       27. Farzana refinances her loans for a reduced interest rate before she begins to pay them off. The total of her
             refinanced loan is $39,447.50. The new interest rate is 6.99%. How much are Farzana's payments if she has a
             10-year term on this loan?

       28. Carly refinances her loans for a reduced interest rate before she begins to pay them off. The total of her refinanced
             loan is $61,332.00. The new interest rate is 7.45%. How much are Carly's payments if she has a 10-year term on this
             loan?

       29. Andrew consolidates his federal student loans to make paying them easier. They total $27,582.00. The consolidated
             loan is at 4.99% interest. How much are Andrew's payments if his new term is 15 years?

       30. Manuel consolidates his federal student loans to make paying them easier. They total $19,470.00. The consolidated
             loan is at 4.99% interest. How much are Manuel's payments if his term is 10 years?

       31. Steven has four members in his Georgia household and makes $53,400 annually. The federal poverty guideline for
             him is $27,750. What is Steven's discretionary income?

       32. Akash has three members in his New Jersey household and makes $38,120 annually. The federal poverty guideline
             for him is $23,030. What is Akash's discretionary income?

       33. Kateryna has two members in her Iowa household and earns $42,500 annually. The federal poverty guideline for
             her is $18,310. She qualifies for a REPAYE repayment plan. What is the maximum monthly payment Kateryna would
             pay?

       34. Keirstin lives by herself in her New Mexico home and earns $28,530 annually. The federal poverty guideline for her
             is $13,590. She qualifies for a REPAYE repayment plan. What is the maximum monthly payment Keirstin would pay?

    6.10 Credit Cards

        Figure 6.22 Credit cards are both a convenience and a danger. (credit: "Credit Cards" by Sean MacEntee/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Apply for a credit card armed with basic knowledge.
        2. Distinguish between three basic types of credit cards.
        3. Compare and contrast the benefits and drawbacks of credit cards.
        4. Read and understand the basic parts of a credit card statement.
        5. Compute interest, balance due, and minimum payment due for a credit card.
       It can be difficult to get along these days without at least one credit card. Most hotels and rental car agencies require
       that a credit card is used. There are even a number of retailers and restaurants that no longer accept cash. They make
       online purchasing easier. And nothing contributes more to a good credit rating than a solid history of making credit card
       payments on time.
       Being granted a credits card is a privilege. Used unwisely that privilege can become a curse and the privilege may be
       withdrawn. In this section, we will talk about the different types of credit cards and their advantages and disadvantages.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    6.10 · Credit Cards 657

The more knowledge a cardholder has about the credit card industry, the better able credit accounts can be managed,
and that knowledge may cause major adjustments to a cardholder's lifestyle.

All credit cards are not equal, but they all represent consumers borrowing money, usually from a bank, to pay for needs
and "wants." As such, they are a type of loan, and your repayment may include interest. (You might want to review
Section 6.8, which discusses loans and repayment plans.)

There are many institutions and credit cards to choose from. Use caution as you shop around for a credit card that suits
you. Your top concern is likely the interest rates on purchases and cash advances. But be careful to also read the small
print regarding charges for late payments, and other fees such as an annual fee, where the credit card charges you (the
cardholder) a fee each year for the privilege of using the cards. Many cards charge no such fee, but there are many that
charge modest to heavy fees. Make sure to understand rules for reward programs, where the credit card issuer grants
benefits based on one's spending. Finally, once one applies for and is granted a credit card, pay attention to the credit
limit the bank offers. Once a company is owed that much money, use of the card for purchases should be curtailed until
some of the debt is paid off.

      The interest rate will not matter if the balance is paid every month. When the balance is paid every month, there is
      NO INTEREST charged.

Types of Credit Cards

There are basically three types of credit cards: bank-issued credit cards, store-issued credit cards, and travel/
entertainment credit cards. We will look at all three and explain the good and the bad qualities of each.

Bank-Issued Credit Cards

Perhaps the most widely used credit card type is the bank-issued credit card, like Visa or MasterCard (and even
American Express and Discover cards). These types of cards are an example of revolving credit, meaning that additional
credit is extended before the previous balance is paid--but only up to the assigned credit limit. Bank-issued cards are
considered the most convenient, as they can be used to purchase anything, including apparel, furniture, groceries, fuel
for automobiles, meals, hotel bills, and so on, just as if paying with cash. The interest rates on bank-issued credit cards
are usually lower than those for other credit cards we'll discuss, and the credit limits are generally higher. Currently,
bank-issued cards have an average 20.09% APR.

Store-Issued Credit Cards

Store-issued credit cards are issued by retailers. One can hardly walk into a store these days without being offered a
discount on purchases if one applies for the store credit card. These cards can only be used in that store or family of
stores that issues the card. However, if a store credit card is associated with Visa, MasterCard, or American Express, then
the card might be used the same way that the bank-issued cards are used. This is called cobranding. The logo of the
bank-issued card will be present on the store card. Many stores offer both types. Like other credit cards, they may come
with an annual fee.

Store credit cards usually charge higher interest rates than bank-issued cards. Currently, store credit cards have an APR
(annual percentage rate) of 24.15%. Any rewards offered by store credit cards are usually limited to purchases made in
their own store, and it typically takes longer to accumulate enough rewards or points to redeem them, whereas
cobranded credit cards offer opportunities to earn rewards on all purchases, regardless of whether purchases are made
in the issuing store or not.

Store credit cards usually offer lower credit limits, at least in the beginning. After being proved to be a responsible credit
card owner, credit limits can be raised. Nevertheless, store credit cards are a good choice for those new to the credit card
industry. If on-time payments are consistently made, it is an excellent way to get started building a credit history.

Travel/Entertainment Cards, or Charge Cards

This is the third type of credit card. The travel and entertainment cards, also known as charge cards, first and
foremost offer very high limits or unlimited credit, but they must be paid in full every month. They generally charge high
annual fees and impose expensive penalties should a payment be late. On the other hand, they typically have longer
grace periods and offer many and various kinds of rewards.

Check out this nerdwallet article about the differences between a charge card and a credit card (https://openstax.org/r/
cards_charge_cards).

      An interest rate will greatly depend on credit score. Responsible use of credit cards will increase a credit score. See
658 6 · Money Management

             the WHO KNEW? from The Basics of Loans.

              VIDEO
             Choosing a Credit Card (https://openstax.org/r/Credit_Card)

               WHO KNEW?

         Top Travel and Entertainment Cards
         At one time, Diner's Club was the premier entertainment card. To be accepted into the Diner's Club and be rewarded
         with a charge card meant one was special. Today, an American Express card is held with the same reverence as
         Diner's Club was in the past. It was a privilege to own one of these cards. There is a lot of competition going on to
         supplant Diner's Club, as shown by the Chase Sapphire Preferred Card's (https://openstax.org/r/Chase_Sapphire)
         travel rewards and benefits.
         Another thing worth mentioning here and something that appears to be an unusual offering is part of the American
         Express Gold and higher-level cards. Cardholders can actually open a savings account, buy a CD, or apply for a
         personal or business loan from American Express. The company boasts a higher interest rate than what is paid on
         traditional savings accounts and CDs.

         EXAMPLE 6.91

       Comparing Credit Cards
        1. Which type of credit card is paid off every month so has no interest to be paid, but comes with high fees?
        2. Which type of credit cards are the most widely accepted?
        3. Which type of credit cards are the most limited?

            Solution
        1. Charge cards are to be paid off completely each month.
        2. Bank-issued credit cards are the most flexible to use, because they are not limited to which retailers or service

             providers accept them.
        3. Store issues credit cards are the most limited, since they only work in that family of stores.

               YOUR TURN 6.91

             1. Which type of credit card typically have the highest interest rates?
             2. What should be considered other than interest rate when selecting a card?
             3. Which type of cards typically have high annual fees?

     Credit Card Statements

       Cardholders usually receive monthly statements and have 21 days to pay the minimum amount due. The statements
       itemize and summarize activity on the credit card for that statement's billing period. The billing period for a credit card
       is generally a month long, but typically does not start and end on the first and last days of the month. The statement will
       include the current balance, interest rate, the minimum payment due, and the due date. Be aware, different companies
       produce statements that are laid out differently. The information will be clearly labeled though.
       The due date is a top concern. Missing a due date is one of the worst things a cardholder can do financially, and this is by
       far the biggest downfall of owning a credit card. Not only is the cardholder subject to late fees, but when a payment is
       late more than once there is a high probability that the cardholder will be negatively reported to the credit bureaus,
       which can quickly erode a credit score. Figure 6.23 shows an excerpt from an actual statement from a Chase Bank Visa
       card, based on the current $668.25 balance.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    6.10 · Credit Cards 659

                                                             Figure 6.23 Credit card statement
Specifically pay attention to the late payment penalty and minimum payment warning statements. stating that if no
other purchases are made and you continue making only the minimum payment, it will take 19 months to pay off the
balance and you will pay $754.00. You can't say you were not warned.
It is critical that you examine your statement every month because it is always a possibility that your account may have
been compromised. If you should notice fraudulent charges on your statement, notifying the credit card company is
often enough to have those charges researched by the company and removed. The card with the fraudulent charges will
be canceled and a new card with a new account number will be sent to you.

  EXAMPLE 6.92
Reading a Credit Card Statement
On the credit card statement Figure 6.24, identify
 1. The balance due
 2. The minimum required payment
 3. The length of time it takes to pay off the balance by paying the minimum payments and without charging more to

      the card
 4. The interest rate for purchases
660 6 · Money Management

                                                               Figure 6.24 Credit card account statement
            Solution
        1. The balance due is under the payment information heading and is $3,663.23.
        2. The minimum payment due is also under the payment information heading, and is $36.63.
        3. The time to pay off the balance using only minimum payments is below the payment information, and says it takes
             2 years and 4 months to pay off the balance.
        4. The interest rate for purchases is toward the bottom of the statement. It is 19.99%.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             6.10 · Credit Cards 661

      YOUR TURN 6.92

Referring to the statement above, answer the following:
    1. What is the statement period?
    2. What is the credit limit?
    3. How much in fees were charged?

       VIDEO

      Reading Credit Card Statements (https://openstax.org/r/Reading_Credit)

Compute Interest, Balance Due, and Minimum Payment Due for a Credit Card

Computing all of these values depends on understanding and computing the average daily balance on a credit card.
Once that is known, the interest, balance due, and minimum payment can be found.

Above all else, if you pay off the entire balance each month, interest is not charged.

Average Daily Balance

Most credit card companies compute interest using the average daily balance method.

To find the average daily balance on your credit card, determine the balance on the card each day of the billing period
(often that month), and take the average. One process to find that average daily balance follows these steps:

 1. Start with a list of transactions with their dates and amounts.
 2. For each day that had transactions, find the total of the transactions for the day. Expenditures are treated as positive

      values, payments are treated as negative values.
 3. Create a table containing each day with a different balance. The balance is the previous balance plus the day's total

      transactions.
 4. Add a column for the number of days those balances until the balance changed.
 5. Add a column that contains the balances multiplied by the number of days until the balance changed.
 6. Find the sum of that last column.
 7. Divide the sum by the number of days in the billing period (often the number of days in the month). This is the

      average daily balance.

  EXAMPLE 6.93

Computing Average Daily Balance
The billing cycle goes from May 1 to May 31. The balance at the start of the billing cycle is $450.21. The list of
transactions on the card is below.

Date    Activity                                         Amount

1-May Billing Date Balance $450.21

10-May  Payment                                          $120.00

15-May  Groceries                                        $83.43

26-May  Auto Parts                                       $45.12

26-May  Restaurant                                       $85.34

30-May  Shoes                                            $98.23

Find the average daily balance for the credit card during the month of May.
662 6 · Money Management

     Solution
To find the average daily balance, we use the following steps.
 1. Start with a list of transactions with their dates and amounts.

      This list is provided.
 2. For each day that had transactions, find the total of the transactions for the day.

      The only day with more than one transaction was May 26. The sum of those transactions is $130.46. Treating the
      payment as a negative value, the daily transaction amounts are

                                                                             Date Amount

                                                                            1-May $450.21

                                                                           10-May -$120.00

                                                                           15-May $83.43

                                                                           26-May $130.46

                                                                           30-May $98.23

3. Create a table containing each day with a different balance.
     The new table with dates that had different balances is below.
                                                                            Date Balance
                                                                           1-May $450.21
                                                                          10-May $330.21
                                                                          15-May $413.64
                                                                          26-May $544.10
                                                                          30-May $642.33

4. Now, add a column for the number of days those balances until the balance changed. The days until the balance
     changes is found by finding the difference in the dates. For instance, from May 15 to May 26 was 11. Adding that
     column to the table we have

                                                     Date Balance Days Until Balance Changes

                                 1-May $450.21                                            9

                                 10-May $330.21                                           5

                                 15-May $413.64                                           11

                                 26-May $544.10                                           4

                                 30-May $642.33                                           2

     The last entry was 2 since there are 31 days in May.
5. Add a column that contains the balances multiplied by the number of days until the balance changed. We create the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                6.10 · Credit Cards 663

column and multiply the values.             Days Until Balance Changes      Balance Times Days
                              Date Balance

                1-May $450.21                         9                     $4,051.89

                10-May $330.21                        5                     $1,651.05

                15-May $413.64                        11                    $4,550.04

                26-May $544.10                        4                     $2,176.40

                30-May $642.33                        2                     $1,284.66

6. Find the sum of that last column. Adding that last column we have a sum of $13,714.04.
7. There are 31 days in May, so divide the sum by 31, which gives an average of $442.39, which is the average daily

     balance.

YOUR TURN 6.93

1. The billing cycle goes from June 1 to June 30. The previous month's balance is $563.80. The transactions are in
    the table below.

                                                               Date Activity Amount

                                            1-Jun Balance $563.80

                                            2-Jun Gasoline $47.50

                                            2-Jun Groceries $63.42

                                            15-Jun    Movie         $38.75

                                            15-Jun Payment $250.00

                                            27-Jun Pharmacy $31.21

                                            28-Jun Auto fuel $48.00

Find the average daily balance for this credit card.

Calculating the Interest for a Credit Card

The interest charged for a credit card is based on the daily interest rate of the card, the number of days in the billing
cycle, and the average daily balance on the card.

  FORMULA

The interest charge, , for a credit card during a billing cycle is          , where ADB is the average daily

balance, is the annual percentage rate, and is the number of days in the billing cycle. As before, interest is
664 6 · Money Management

         rounded up to the next penny.

         EXAMPLE 6.94
       Calculating Interest for a Credit Card Billing Cycle
       Compute the interest charged for the credit card based on the given average daily balance (ABD), annual interest rate,
       and number of days in the billing cycle.
        1. ADB = $2,765.00, annual interest rate 13.99%, billing cycle of 30 days
        2. ADB = $789.30, annual interest rate 17.99%, billing cycle of 31 days
        3. ADB = $1,037.85, annual interest rate 11.99%, billing cycle of 28 days

            Solution
        1. Substituting $2,765.00 for ADB, 0.1399 for and 30 for and calculating, we find the interest charge to be

                                                                                      .
        2. Substituting $789.30 for ADB, 0.1799 for and 31 for and calculating, we find the interest charge to be

                                                                                    .
        3. Substituting $1,037.85 for ADB, 0.1199 for and 28 for and calculating, we find the interest charge to be

                                                                                    .

               YOUR TURN 6.94

         Compute the interest charged for the credit card based on the given average daily balance (ABD), annual interest
         rate, and number of days in the billing cycle.

             1. ADB = $2,135.00, annual interest rate 12.9%, billing cycle of 30 days
             2. ADB = $1,589.63, annual interest rate 9.99%, billing cycle of 31 days
             3. ADB = $6,803.41, annual interest rate 14.9%, billing cycle of 28 days

                WHO KNEW?

         Credit Cards Charge Stores Fees
         The interest you pay is not the only way a credit card company generates revenue. It also charges fees to the retailers,
         online stores, and service providers that allow the consumer, you, to use your credit card to pay them. These are
         called processing fees. Currently they typically range from 2.87% to 4.35% of each transaction. That means if you use
         your credit card at a store and spend $100.00, the store will have to pay the credit card company somewhere between
         $2.87 and $4.35.
         One type of processing fee is the interchange fee. Mastercard charges the vendor 1.35% of the sale, plus an
         additional percentage up to 3.25%, and a fixed $001 fee for each transaction.
         Added to that is an assessment fee. This fee is 0.14% for Visa cards.

     Calculating the Balance of a Credit Card

       The balance, or sometimes balance due, on a credit card is the previous balance, plus all expenses, minus all payments
       and credits, plus the interest on the card. As stated before, if the card was paid off, there is no interest to be paid.

         EXAMPLE 6.95
       Calculating the Balance of a Credit Card
       Find the balance on the credit card with the given interest charge and balance before interest was charged. The cards

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     6.10 · Credit Cards 665

were not paid off previously.

 1. Balance before interest is $708.50, interest charge is $8.15
 2. Balance before interest is $1,395.10, interest charge is $21.32

     Solution
 1. Adding the balance before interest to the interest charge, we find the balance to be $716.65.
 2. Adding the balance before interest to the interest charge, we find the balance to be $1,416.42.

      YOUR TURN 6.95

Find the balance on the credit card with the given interest charge and balance before interest was charged. The
cards were not paid off previously.

    1. Balance before interest is $560.00, interest charge is $6.44
    2. Balance before interest is $3,218.00, interest charge is $49.17

The next example puts all those steps together.

  EXAMPLE 6.96

Find Balance Due from Transactions and Interest Rate
Kaylen's credit card charges 16.9% annual interest. His current billing period is from November 1 to November 30. The
balance on November 1 was $1,845.23. Use Kaylen's following transactions to determine his balance due at the end of
the billing cycle.

Date    Activity    Amount

1-Nov   Billing Date Balance $1,845.23

3-Nov   Groceries   $78.50

4-Nov   Tablet      $159.00

4-Nov Online Game Purchase $39.99

4-Nov   Restaurant  $47.10

10-Nov  Payment     $300.00

13-Nov  Gasoline    $58.75

13-Nov  Clothing    $135.00

18-Nov  Gift        $30.00

18-Nov  Restaurant  $21.75

28-Nov  Gasoline    $43.79

     Solution
The first step is to find Kaylen's average daily balance. To find the average daily balance, we use the following steps.

 1. Start with a list of transactions with their dates and amounts.
666 6 · Money Management

     This list is provided.
2. For each day that had transactions, find the total of the transactions for the day. The days with more than one

     transaction were Nov. 4, Nov. 13, and Nov. 18. Treating the payment on November 10 as a negative value, the daily
     transaction amounts are

                                 Date Amount

                                 1-Nov $1,845.23

                                 3-Nov            $78.50

                                 4-Nov $246.09

                                 10-Nov -$300.00

                                 13-Nov $193.75

                                 18-Nov $51.75

                                 28-Nov $43.79

3. Create a table containing each day with a different balance. The new table with dates that had different balances is
     below.
                                                                           Date Balance
                                                                          1-Nov $1,845.23
                                                                          3-Nov $1,923.73
                                                                          4-Nov $2,169.82
                                                                         10-Nov $1,869.82
                                                                         13-Nov $2,063.57
                                                                         18-Nov $2,115.32
                                                                         28-Nov $2,159.11

4. Now, add a column for the number of days those balances until the balance changed. The days until the balance
     changes is found by finding the difference in the dates. For instance, from May 15 to May 26 was 11. Adding that
     column to the table we have
     The last entry was 3 since there are 30 days in November (the 28th, 29th, and 30th).

                                                    Date Balance Days Until Balance Changes

                                 1-Nov $1,845.23          2

                                 3-Nov $1,923.73          1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   6.10 · Credit Cards 667

Date Balance Days Until Balance Changes

4-Nov $2,169.82                                    6

10-Nov $1,869.82                                   3

13-Nov $2,063.57                                   5

18-Nov $2,115.32                                   10

28-Nov $2,159.11                                   3

5. Add a column that contains the balances multiplied by the number of days until the balance changed. We create the
     column and multiply the values.

Date Balance Days Until Balance Changes Balance Times Days

1-Nov $1,845.23                                2       $3,690.46

3-Nov $1,923.73                                1       $1,923.73

4-Nov $2,169.82                                6       $13,018.92

10-Nov $1,869.82                               3       $5,609.46

13-Nov $2,063.57                               5       $10,317.85

18-Nov $2,115.32                               10      $21,153.20

28-Nov $2,159.11                               3       $6,477.33

6. Find the sum of that last column. Adding that last column we have a sum of $62,190.95.
7. There are 30 days in November, so divide the sum by 30, which gives an average of $2,073.03, which is the average

     daily balance.

With the average daily balance, we can determine the interest that is charged for November. Substituting ADB =

$2,073.03, = 0.169, and = 30 into the formula      and calculating, we find the interest to be

                                                                       .
This interest is added to the final balance from the table in step 3, $2,159.11, which yields a balance due of $2,101.83.

      YOUR TURN 6.96

1. Angel's credit card charges 16.9% annual interest. His current billing period is from August 1 to August 31. The
    balance on August 1 was $982.45. Use Angel's following transactions to determine his balance due at the end of
    the billing cycle.
668 6 · Money Management

                                 Date    Activity       Amount

                                 1-Aug Billing Date Balance $982.45

                                 5-Aug   Food           $125.31

                                 13-Aug  Payment        $500.00

                                 14-Aug  Gasoline       $51.65

                                 14-Aug  Pizza          $36.99

                                 14-Aug  Shoes          $89.45

                                 19-Aug  Electric bill  $178.34

                                 21-Aug  Internet       $36.99

                                 21-Aug  Food           $93.45

                                 30-Aug  Gasoline       $43.18

Minimum Payment Due

The minimum payment due is the smallest required amount to be paid on a credit card to avoid late fees and penalties,
such as an increased interest rate. The calculations for this may differ from card to card. They also depend in the balance
of the credit card. General guidelines for minimum payment due are:

  · For larger balances (usually over $1,000), the minimum payment will be some percentage of the balance due.
  · For moderate balances (between $25 and $1,000), the minimum would be a specified dollar amount. $25 seems to

      be a common value.
  · If the balance is small (under $25 for instance), then the minimum payment is the balance.

Those are just guidelines. Individual cards may vary in these values.

Minimum payments should only be paid if money is short in a given month. The length of time to pay off a credit card
using minimum payments is quite long, and results in paying a lot of interest. It is strongly discouraged.

  EXAMPLE 6.97

Calculate the Minimum Payment Due
The FYA credit card company has the following minimum payment policy. For balances over $1,000, the minimum
payment is 2.5% of the balance due plus fees, but not interest. For balances between $500.00 and $999.99, the minimum
payment is $50.00. For balances $499.99 and under, the minimum payment is $25.00 or the balance due, whichever is
smaller.

In the following, calculate the minimum payment due given the credit card minimum payment policy, the balance due
and fees charged.

 1. Balance due is $1,309.00, no fees
 2. Balance due is $265.50, $35 in fees
 3. Balance due is $784.90, no fees

     Solution
 1. The balance is over $1,000, so the minimum payment is 2.5% of the balance due plus fees. 2.5% of the balance due

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.10 · Credit Cards 669

is  . Since there are no fees, the minimum payment due is $32.73.

2. The balance is under $499.99, so the minimum payment due is $25.00.

3. The balance is between $500.00 and $999.00, so the minimum payment due is $50.00.

      YOUR TURN 6.97

The CLH credit card company has the following minimum payment policy. For balances over $1,000, the minimum
payment is 1% of the balance due plus interest and fees. For balances between $25.00 and $999.99, the minimum
payment is $25.00 plus any fees. For balances under $25.00, the minimum payment is the balance due plus any fees.
In the following, calculate the minimum payment due given the credit card minimum payment policy, the balance
due and fees charged.

    1. Balance due is $2,308.00, billing cycle interest is $24.39, no fees
    2. Balance due is $265.50, $59.00 in fees
    3. Balance due is $19.90, no fees

Check out this nerdwallet article about minimum payments (https://openstax.org/r/minimum_payment) for more!

Check Your Understanding

63. What are the three main types of credit cards?

64. Which type of credit card typically has the highest interest rate?

65. Name three important pieces of information that are included in a credit card statement.

66. A credit card has an average daily balance of $1,428.50 during a 31-day billing cycle. Find the interest if the interest
      rate is 15.9%.

67. The billing cycle goes from June 15 to July 14, or 30 days. The balance at the start of the billing cycle is $3,825.50.
      The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance.

    Date                                            Activity            Amount

    15-Jun Billing Date Balance $3,825.50

    20-Jun                                          Food                $125.31

    20-Jun                                          Clothing            $345.00

    29-Jun                                          Payment             $750.00

    1-Jul                                           Restaurant          $94.80

    6-Jul                                           Gasoline            $49.75

    6-Jul Home Repair Supplies $683.94

    6-Jul                                           Internet            $49.99

    10-Jul                                          Cell Phone          $85.00

    10-Jul                                          Food                $175.24

68. Find the balance due on a credit card statement if ADB = $487.65, the annual interest rate is 16.8%, the billing cycle
      was 30 days, and the balance at the end of the billing cycle, before interest is added, was $689.47.
670 6 · Money Management

             SECTION 6.10 EXERCISES

        1. Name three main criteria to choose a credit card by.
        2. Which type of credit card is most convenient to use?
        3. Which type of credit card comes with no preset spending limit?
        4. How much interest does a credit card holder pay if they pay off the balance every month?
        5. Which type of credit card comes with the highest annual fees?
       Use the following credit card statement for the following exercises.

             6. What is the minimum payment due?
             7. How long will it take to pay the balance if the minimum only is paid and no new purchases are made?
             8. How much interest was charged in this billing cycle?
             9. What is the balance on the credit card?
           10. What is the credit limit on this card?
           11. What is the late payment fee for this card?
           12. When is the payment due?
       13. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from April 1 to April 30. The balance at the start of the billing cycle is
             $1,598.00. The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance for the billing cycle.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                      6.10 · Credit Cards 671

Date    Activity        Amount

1-Apr Billing Date Balance $1,598.00

9-Apr   Gasoline        $51.24

9-Apr   Food            $105.56

9-Apr   Payment         $675.00

13-Apr  Camping Trip    $229.75

21-Apr  Gasoline        $38.45

22-Apr  Gifts           $148.88

22-Apr  Food            $49.75

30-Apr  Gym Payment     $74.99

14. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from September 1 to September 30. The balance at the start of the billing
      cycle is $384.25. The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance for the billing cycle.

Date    Activity        Amount

1-Sep Billing Date Balance $384.25

2-Sep   Food            $94.54

5-Sep   Gasoline        $25.65

5-Sep   Internet        $39.99

6-Sep   Payment         $380.00

9-Sep   Insurance       $174.52

16-Sep  Food            $83.54

16-Sep  Day Care        $350.00

20-Sep  Tires           $2,337.56

21-Sep  Child Clothing  $27.65

21-Sep  Gasoline        $31.00

28-Sep  Television      $299.95

15. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from October 10 to November 9. The balance at the start of the billing cycle
      is $930.50. The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance for the billing cycle.
672 6 · Money Management

                                 Date    Activity     Amount

                                 10-Oct Billing Date Balance $930.50

                                 11-Oct  Clothing     $350.00

                                 14-Oct  Computer     $865.84

                                 17-Oct  Food         $106.51

                                 21-Oct  Payment      $700.00

                                 21-Oct  Restaurant   $134.52

                                 21-Oct  Hotel        $387.56

                                 30-Oct  Hockey Game  $76.47

                                 5-Nov   Memorabilia  $150.00

                                 5-Nov   Restaurant   $94.45

                                 6-Nov   Gasoline     $49.19

16. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from February 15 to March 16 during a non-leap year. The balance at the
      start of the billing cycle is $292.82. The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance for
      the billing cycle.

                                 Date    Activity     Amount

                                 15-Feb Billing Date Balance $292.82

                                 21-Feb  Food         $64.57

                                 22-Feb  Gasoline     $31.50

                                 22-Feb  Food         $71.94

                                 28-Feb  Insurance    $133.25

                                 28-Feb  Payment      $100.00

                                 3-Mar   Gasoline     $26.61

                                 12-Mar  School Trip  $300.00

In the following exercises, compute the interest charged for the credit card based on the given average daily balance
(ABD), annual interest rate, and number of days in the billing cycle.

    17. ADB = $350.00, annual interest rate 14.9%, billing cycle of 30 days.
    18. ADB = $4,312.00, annual interest rate 9.99%, billing cycle of 31 days.
    19. ADB = $563.38, annual interest rate 17.9%, billing cycle of 30 days.
    20. ADB = $1,043.53, annual interest rate 11.9%, billing cycle of 31 days.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      6.10 · Credit Cards 673

In the following exercises, find the balance on the credit card with the given interest charge and balance before interest
was charged. The cards were not paid off previously.

    21. Balance before interest is $1630.00, interest charge is $16.48.
    22. Balance before interest is $621.00, interest charge is $7.81.
    23. Balance before interest is $1,380.00, interest charge is $15.35
    24. Balance before interest is $2,774.00, interest charge is $44.05.

25. Alsaggr's credit card charges 11.9% annual interest. His current billing period is from April 1 to April 30. The
      balance on April 1 was $1,598.00. Use Alsaggr's following transactions to determine his balance due at the end of
      the billing cycle.

Date    Activity        Amount

1-Apr Billing Date Balance $1,598.00

9-Apr   Gasoline        $51.24

9-Apr   Food            $105.56

9-Apr   Payment         $675.00

13-Apr  Camping Trip    $229.75

21-Apr  Gasoline        $38.45

22-Apr  Gifts           $148.88

22-Apr  Food            $49.75

30-Apr  Gym Payment     $74.99

26. Marisa's credit card charges 8.9% annual interest. Her current billing period is from September 1 to September 30.
      The balance on September 1 was $384.25. Use Marisa's following transactions to determine her balance due at the
      end of the billing cycle.

Date    Activity        Amount

1-Sep Billing Date Balance $384.25

2-Sep   Food            $94.54

5-Sep   Gasoline        $25.65

5-Sep   Internet        $39.99

9-Sep   Insurance       $174.52

16-Sep  Food            $83.54

16-Sep  Day Care        $350.00

20-Sep  Tires           $2,337.56

21-Sep  Child Clothing  $27.65
674 6 · Money Management

                                  Date    Activity    Amount
                                 21-Sep  Gasoline      $31.00
                                 28-Sep  Television   $299.95

27. Haley's credit card charges 18.9% annual interest. Her current billing period is from October 10 to November 9.
      The balance on October 10 was $930.50. Use Haley's following transactions to determine her balance due at the
      end of the billing cycle.

                                 Date    Activity     Amount

                                 10-Oct Billing Date Balance $930.50

                                 11-Oct  Clothing     $350.00

                                 14-Oct  Computer     $865.84

                                 17-Oct  Food         $106.51

                                 21-Oct  Payment      $700.00

                                 21-Oct  Restaurant   $134.52

                                 21-Oct  Hotel        $387.56

                                 30-Oct  Hockey Game  $76.47

                                 5-Nov   Memorabilia  $150.00

                                 5-Nov   Restaurant   $94.45

                                 6-Nov   Gasoline     $49.19

28. Pavly's credit card charges 10.9% annual interest. His current billing period is from February 15 to March 16 in a
      non-leap year. The balance on February 15 was $292.82. Use Pavly's following transactions to determine his
      balance due at the end of the billing cycle.

                                 Date    Activity     Amount

                                 15-Feb Billing Date Balance $292.82

                                 21-Feb  Food         $64.57

                                 22-Feb  Gasoline     $31.50

                                 22-Feb  Food         $71.94

                                 28-Feb  Insurance    $133.25

                                 28-Feb  Payment      $100.00

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 675

 Date                           Activity   Amount
3-Mar                          Gasoline     $26.61
12-Mar                        School Trip  $300.00

6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car

Figure 6.25 The choice to lease or buy is based on cost and other concerns. (credit: "Car Insurance" by Pictures of Money/
Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Evaluate basics of car purchasing.
 2. Compute purchase payments and identify the related interest cost.
 3. Evaluate the basics of leasing a car.
 4. Identify and contrast the pros and cons of purchasing versus leasing a car.
 5. Investigate the types of car insurance.
 6. Solve application problems involving owning and maintaining a car.

There are people who don't need a car and won't purchase one. But for many people, whether or not to have a car is not
a question. Having a car is a basic necessity for these people.

Obtaining a car can be daunting. The models, the features, the additional costs, and finding funding are all steps that
need to be taken. One of the big decisions is whether to buy the car or to lease the car. This section will address some of
the issues associated with each option.

The Basics of Car Purchasing

The biggest questions you will answer before purchasing a car are, what do you want and what do you need?

Does it have to be new? Does it have to be a make and model you are familiar with? Does it have to have assisted
driving? What other details are important to you? For a new vehicle, every feature beyond standard features comes with
additional cost, which leads to the question that constrains all of your decisions about a car. How much can you afford to
spend on a car?

What you can afford must include insurance costs (discussed later in this section) and maintenance and upkeep. Once
you have this in mind, you can search for a car that matches, as closely as possible, what you want and can afford. Most,
if not all, dealers have websites that you can search through to identify the car you want. If new cars are not affordable,
used cars cost less but come with the wear and tear of use.
676 6 · Money Management

The sticker price of the car, called the manufacturer's suggested retail price (MSRP), or the negotiated price you arrive at,
isn't the end of the cost to buying a car. There are many fees that accompany the purchase of the car, and perhaps even
sales tax. These include but aren't necessarily limited to the following:

  · the title and registration fee, which includes registering your car with the state, getting the license plate, and
      assigning the title of the car to the lender. This cannot be avoided.

  · a destination fee, which covers the cost of delivering the vehicle to the dealer
  · a documentation fee, sometimes referred to a processing fee of handling fee, is the cost of all the paperwork the

      dealer did to get you the car
  · a dealer preparation fee, which is for washing the car and other preparation of that sort. You should try to

      negotiate that out of the cost of the dealer tries to charge for that
  · extended warranties and maintenance plans, which help cover some of the costs of caring for the car.
  · Sales tax.

You could pay for these immediately, but they are often added to the financing of the car, meaning they become part of
the principal of your loan.

EXAMPLE 6.98

Total Cost to Purchase a Car
Nichole negotiates with her car dealership so that the price is $21,800. She needs to pay the 6.75% sales tax on the car.
Other fees are $31.00 for title and registration, $1,000 in destination fees, and a documentation fee of $175. What is the
total cost of Nichole's car?

Solution

We add the car's sales cost, sales tax and all other fees to arrive at this value. The sales tax is 6.75% on the price she

negotiated, so is                . Adding these up, we have a total cost of

                                 .

      YOUR TURN 6.98

1. Luther negotiates for the price of his car, reaching agreement at $28,975. He needs to pay 8% in sales tax, 2.1%
    in ownership tax, a $950 destination fee, processing fees totaling $370, and registration fee of $617. What is the
    total cost for Luther's purchase?

One way to bring down payments on a car is to provide a down payment or a trade in. This is money applied to the
purchase price before financing happens. Be warned, the sales tax applies to the full purchase price! If you reduce the
amount financed, the payments respond by going down. This often becomes part of the negotiating process.

EXAMPLE 6.99

Total Cost to Purchase a Car with Down Payment
Sophia negotiates a $19,800 price for her new car. The sales tax is 9.5% in her area, and the dealership charges her $300
in documentation fees. Her title, plates, and registration come to $321.50. The dealership adds to this a destination fee
of $1,100. If she places a down payment of $5,000 on the car, what is the total she will finance for the car?

Solution

The price was $19,800. The sales tax of 9.5% is based on this number. The sales tax comes to                                .

Adding all the fees to the price and the sales tax brings the total cost of the car to

                                 . Her down payment is applied to this number, so the $5,000

is subtracted from $23,402.50. The subtraction yields the amount to be financed, which is $18,402.50.

      YOUR TURN 6.99
1. Carlos buys a car with a negotiated price of $36,250. The sales tax in his region is 6.5%. The dealer charges a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 677

$1,200 destination fee and a $450 documentation fee. He must pay for title, registration, and license plates,
which come to $21.50. If he has a $7,500 down payment, how much will he have to finance?

When purchasing a car, the total cost to obtain the car is not the only factor in your monthly price. You will also pay an
interest rate for the loan you obtain. The interest rate you will get is dependent on your credit score (see The Basics of
Loans). But you can choose from different lenders. The dealership will likely offer to finance your car loan. Frequently,
dealerships offer special financing with very low rates. This is to help move inventory, and may indicate their desire to
make sales. This might make negotiating easier. Even if the dealership offers financing, check with your bank or credit
union to determine the interest rates they are offering. To reduce your payments, choose the lowest rate you can find.

Purchase Payments and Interest

Whether or not you buy a new car or a used car, if you finance the purchase, you are taking out a loan. The interest rates
available for used cards are frequently higher than those for new cars. These loan payments work exactly the same way
as other loans do as far as payments are concerned. The payment function comes from The Basics of Loans. The
difference between financing a new car or a used car is that financing a new car typically comes with a lower interest rate
and a longer term that financing a used car.

  FORMULA

The payment, , per period to pay off a loan with beginning principal is                                , where is

the annual interest rate in decimal form, is the term in years, and is the number of payments per year (typically,
loans are paid monthly making = 12).

Note, payment to lenders is always rounded up to the next penny.

Often, the formula takes the form                          , where is the interest rate per period (annual rate
divided by the number of periods per year), and  is the total number of payments to be made.

EXAMPLE 6.100

New Car Payments
In the following, calculate the monthly payment using the given total to be financed, the interest rate, and the term of
the car loan.

1. Total to be financed is $31,885, interest rate is 2.9%, for 5 years.
2. Total to be financed is $22,778, interest rate is 4.5%, for 6 years.

    Solution                                                                                           = 5 years. These
1. The amount to be financed is the principal, , which is $31,885. The rate is 0.029, and the term is

     are monthly payments, so = 12. Substituting and calculating, we find the monthly payment to be

2. The amount to be financed is the principal, , which is $22,778. The rate is 0.045, and the term is = 6 years. These
     are monthly payments, so = 12. Substituting and calculating, we find the monthly payment to be
678 6 · Money Management

      YOUR TURN 6.100

In the following, calculate the monthly payment using the given total to be financed, the interest rate, and the term
of the car loan.

    1. Total to be financed is $18,325, interest rate is 6.75%, for 4 years.
    2. Total to be financed is $41,633, interest rate is 3.9%, for 6 years.

EXAMPLE 6.101

Used Car Payments
Calculate the monthly payment for the used car if the total to be financed is $16,990, the interest rate is 7.5%, and the
loan term is 3 years.

     Solution                                                                                       = 3 years. These are
The amount to be financed is the principal, , which is $16,990. The rate is 0.075, and the term is
monthly payments, so = 12. Substituting and calculating, we find the monthly payment to be

        YOUR TURN 6.101

  1. Calculate the monthly payment for a car loan that has $21,845 being financed at an interest rate of 6.3% for 4
      years.

The Basics of Leasing a Car

Leasing a car is an alternative to purchasing a car. It is still a loan, and acts like one in many respects. They typically last
either 24 months or 36 months, though other terms are available. Leases also come with mileage limits, frequently
10,000, 12,000, or 15,000 miles per year. When the lease is over, the car is returned to the dealer. At that time there may
be fees that have to be paid, such as for damage to the car or for extra miles driven over the limit.
There are two components to lease costs. One is the monthly payment for the lease. The other is the fees for leasing,
These often are paid before the lease is complete. These include:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 679

  · a down payment, which is your initial payment that is applied to the price of the car. It reduces the amount you
      finance, much the same as when you purchase a car. It is recommended that this be negotiated away.

  · the acquisition fee, sometimes called the bank fee. This is the money charge for the company to set up the lease. It
      is essentially a paperwork fee. It is not likely that this can be negotiated.

  · a security deposit, which might be required. It is about the same as 1 month's payment for the lease. The deposit is
      returned to you if the car is in good shape at the end. This can be negotiated away.

  · disposition fees, which cover the cost the company will incur when they take your car back and are typically
      between $200 and $450.

  · the title, registration, and license fees, just as with the purchase of a car.
  · sales tax, which will likely be applied. The sales tax only covers the depreciated portion of the car (more on

      depreciation later) in many states. Since this depends on the state in which the car is leased, you should determine
      the sales tax rules for where you lease the car.
As you can imagine, this can come to a fairly high dollar amount.

  EXAMPLE 6.102

Cost to Obtain a Lease
Donna wants to lease a Subaru Outback in Eden, New York. Find the total cost of obtaining her lease if there is no down
payment, $175.00 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $300.00, $350.00 in disposition fees, $102.50 in title and
registration fees, and sales tax of $3,536.05.

     Solution
Adding these values together we find the total cost is $4,463.55.

        YOUR TURN 6.102

  1. RJ wants to lease a Tahoe in Salt Lake City, Utah. Find the total cost of obtaining his lease if he has a $5,000.00
      down payment, $225 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $750.00, $500.00 in disposition fees, and sales tax
      of $4,092.

                 PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

  Zollie Frank

  Zollie Frank and Armund Shoen founded one of the original leasing companies, Four Wheels, in 1939. Their company
  leased automobiles to corporations. They began by leasing 5 cars to the Petrolager pharmaceutical company in year
  one. This saved Petrolager money and provided a steady cash flow to the Four Wheels business. In year two, the
  number of cars leased to Petrolager was 75. Their new idea was to lease cars directly to companies for one year.
  Previously, such companies might pay for mileage, gas, and a partial down payment. Sadly, the salesmen who were
  being so helped often left the company before the car was paid for, and so the company lost the down payment
  money.
  The lease was for $45 per month per car for one year.

You have some obligations when you lease a car. You must keep the car in good condition, cleaned, maintained, and free
of anything more than minor damage. If the car is in poor condition when the car is returned, you will be responsible for
the cost to bring the car to an acceptable condition. You are also expected to keep the mileage under its limit. If you go
over, you will pay 10 to 25 cents per mile over.

Lease Payments

Lease payments are similar to regular loan payments, but have some other details. Calculating a lease payment involves
knowing the following values:

  · The price of the car. This is the cost you would pay for the car after applying all discounts, incentives, and
680 6 · Money Management

    negotiations.
· Residual Value. This is the manufacturer's estimate of the car's value after a set period of time. The residual value is

    expressed as a percentage of the manufacturer's suggested retail price (MSRP).
· Months. This is the length of the lease. Most leases are either 24- or 36-month leases, but other terms are available.
· Monthly Depreciation. The monthly depreciation is the difference between the price of the car and the residual

    value, divided by the number of months of the lease, and represents the monthly loss of value of the car while it's
    being used.
· Money Factor (MF). This is the interest rate, but expressed in a different way for a lease. Converting from the
    money factor to the annual percentage rate (APR) is done by multiplying the MF by 2400. Naturally, converting an
    APR to a MF is done by dividing the APR by 2400.

FORMULA

The monthly depreciation for a car, MD, is  , is the price paid for the car, is the residual value of the car,
and is the number of months of the lease.           , where MF is the money factor of the lease. The MF for a

The annual percentage rate for a lease is

lease is                         .

EXAMPLE 6.103

Monthly Depreciation of a Car
 1. The purchase price of a car is $25,000. Its residual price is $14,500. What is its monthly depreciation for a 36-month

      lease?
 2. The purchase price of a car is $30,000. Its residual price is $18,600. What is its monthly depreciation for a 24-month

      lease?

    Solution                                , Substituting $25,000 for , $14,500 for , and 36 for , we find
1. The monthly depreciation formula is                           .

     MD to be                                , Substituting $30,000 for , $18,600 for , and 24 for , we find
2. The monthly depreciation formula is                           .

     MD to be

      YOUR TURN 6.103

1. The purchase price of a car is $27,500. Its residual price is $17,875.00. What is its monthly depreciation for a
    24-month lease?

  EXAMPLE 6.104                                                                    . Expressed as a
                                                                           .
Converting Between APR and MF
 1. Find the annual percentage rate if the money factor is 0.00001875.
 2. Find the money factor if the APR is 6.25%.

     Solution
 1. The APR is the money factor times 2400, so

      percentage, the APR is 4.5%.
 2. The MF is the APR divided by 2400, so

YOUR TURN 6.104

1. Find the annual percentage rate if the money factor is               .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 681

2. Find the money factor if the APR is 7.9%.

Once the values above are found, the payment for the lease can be calculated.
  FORMULA

The payment,   , for a lease is               , where is the price paid for the car,                        is the

residual value of the car, is the number of months of the lease, and MF is the money factor for the lease.

EXAMPLE 6.105

Calculating Car Lease Payments
Calculate the lease payments for car with the following price, residual price, length of lease, and money factor or APR.

1. Price is $28,344, residual price is $18,140.16, 24-month lease, money factor is 0.000025.
2. Price is $22,500, residual price is $13,050, 36-month lease, APR is 7.5%.

    Solution                               = $18,140.16, = 24 and MF = 0.000025 into the formula and calculating, the
1. Substituting the values = $28,344,

     monthly lease payment is

2. Given the APR, we find the MF which is                                      . Substituting the values =

$28,344, = $18,140.16, = 24 and the MF into the formula and calculating, the monthly lease payment is

        YOUR TURN 6.105

  Calculate the lease payments for car with the following price, residual price, length of lease, and money factor or
  APR.

      1. Price is $38,750, residual price is $18,140.16, 36-month lease, money factor is 0.000035.
      2. Price is $45,600, residual price is $21,312.50, 24-month lease, APR is 11.7%.

Comparing Purchasing and Leasing

When deciding to buy or lease a car, the differences between the two options should be carefully evaluated. The
following is a list of points of comparison between the two.

  · The payments for a lease are likely less than the payment for purchasing.
  · When leasing, you get a new car after the lease term is over, typically 24 or 36 months. Buying the car means the

      same car is driven until it is re-sold and a new one bought. Essentially, leasing a car is equivalent to renting a car.
  · The leased car is new, so all warrantees are in force and you drive the car during its best years. When the car is

      purchased, it may be kept past its warrantees and may be driven until it is quite old.
  · Each time you lease a new car, all the fees and taxes must be paid again. When buying a car, these fees are only paid

      once.
  · Leasing contracts carry restrictions on the mileage you can drive per year, and going over incurs more cost at the
682 6 · Money Management

             end of the lease. Buying the car means no such mileage limits.
         · When leasing, you are obligated to keep the vehicle in good condition and maintained according to the dealer's

             schedule. Some dealerships will even pay for oil changes over the life of the lease. When the car is purchased, the
             upkeep schedule is the choice of the owner.
         · When a car is purchased and kept for long enough, the warranty expires and the owner is responsible for all
             maintenance items and repairs. The warrantee for a car won't expire during the lease term.
         · When a new car is purchased and the loan is paid off the car is still owned by the buyer and may be traded in when
             a new car is to be purchased. When leasing, the car is returned to the dealer when the lease term is over.

       When deciding between the two, you are choosing between these features. If you aren't willing to drive an older car or
       deal with the upkeep that accompanies an older car, you may want to lease. This means you will need to pay those
       beginning costs each time the lease is up. If you want to own the car after the payments are over, then you may want to
       buy a car. This means you are paying for all the upkeep after the warrantees expire, but you have no limits on mileage
       and own the car at the end. It really depends on your preferences.

         EXAMPLE 6.106

       Lease or Buy
       In the following, determine if a lease or purchase of a car is better.

        1. Joyce is concerned with large repairs and does not want to deal with them.
        2. Maurice prefers to drive newer cars.

            Solution
        1. Since Joyce does not want to deal with repairs, so leasing would be a better choice. This way, the warranty covers

             most of the big repairs that could need to be done.
        2. Since Maurice likes to drive new cars, leasing is a better option, since he will lease a new car every 2 to 3 years.

               YOUR TURN 6.106

             1. Christopher does a lot of driving, averaging over 20,000 miles per year.
             2. John eventually wants to not make car payments.

     Car Insurance

       Car insurance is meant to cover costs associated with accidents involving cars. Most states (all except New Hampshire
       and Virginia) require some insurance. Without insurance, the state may not let you get a license for your car or register
       your car. Your state's requirements can be hard to follow. Fortunately, insurance companies and brokers will make sure
       your insurance is sufficient for your state and will warn you if you try to not meet the requirements. Of course, they may
       offer more than what is sufficient, so it is your responsibility to determine how much coverage you want, as long as the
       minimum insurance requirements are met. The cost of insurance should be accounted for when evaluating the
       affordability of buying or leasing a car.

       Whether your car is leased or owned, you do need insurance. This contributes to the cost of having the vehicle. Leasing
       or owning makes no difference to the insurance company you choose, because they are insuring you based on what you
       are driving, your driving record, and other information about you including where you live and your age. These
       insurance policies have many components that address different costs that can come from auto accidents. This may
       make details confusing, and you may not realize what you are paying for until you must use it. Here is a brief outline of
       the different components of auto insurance, many of which are required by the state that issues your driver's license.

         · Liability insurance is mandatory coverage in most states. Liability insurance covers property damage and injuries
             to others should you be found legally responsible for an accident. You are required to have the minimum amount of
             coverage, as determined by your state, in both areas.

         · Collision insurance is insurance covering the damage caused to your car if involved in an accident with another
             vehicle.

         · Comprehensive insurance is an extra level of coverage if involved in an accident with another vehicle and covers
             other things like theft, vandalism, fire, or weather events as outlined in your policy. There is a deductible assigned to
             each type of insurance, an amount that you pay out of pocket before your comprehensive coverage takes effect.
             Comprehensive insurance is often required if you lease or finance the purchase of a vehicle.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 683

  · Uninsured or underinsured motorist insurance: If you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist, this
      insurance will help pay medical bills and damage to your car.

  · Medical payments insurance is mandatory in some states and helps pay for medical costs associated with an
      accident, regardless of who is at fault.

  · Personal injury protection insurance is coverage for certain medical bills and other expenses due to a car
      accident. Other covered expenses may include loss of income or childcare, depending on your policy.

  · Gap insurance is designed to cover the gap between what is owed on the car and what the car is worth in the event
      your car is a total loss.

  · Rental reimbursement insurance is coverage for a rental car while your car is under repair resulting from an
      accident.

You can also purchase other special insurance policies, such as classic car insurance, new car replacement insurance, and
sound system replacement insurance, to name a few. It is important that you determine exactly what you need, as
insurance policies can be expensive and vary according to your age, driving history, and where you live.

  EXAMPLE 6.107

Types of Insurance
 1. Which component of insurance pays if you are in an accident with a motorist without insurance?
 2. Which component of insurance pays for the remaining principal owed on your car in the case of a total loss?

     Solution
 1. Uninsured motorist insurance covers accidents with those who have no insurance.
 2. Gap insurance will cover the gap between what is owed on the car and what it is worth if an accident results in a

      total loss.

  YOUR TURN 6.107

1. Which component of insurance covers medical bills in the event of an accident?
2. Which component of insurance pays for costs to others if you have an accident and are found legally

    responsible for those damages?

EXAMPLE 6.108

Monthly Cost of Owning a Car
If your car payment is $287.50 per month and your car insurance is $930 every 6 months, what is the cost of the car per
month when accounting for the insurance?

Solution

The cost of the car including insurance is the monthly payment, $287.50, plus the monthly cost of the insurance. The

insurance cost per month is  since the insurance cost is for every 6 months. Adding those the cost with

insurance is $442.50.

        YOUR TURN 6.108

  1. If your car payment is $410.86 per month and your car insurance is $2,190 per year, what is the cost of the car
      per month when accounting for the insurance?

Maintaining a Car

Cars are not a buy it and forget it item. They require upkeep, which adds to the cost of owning the car. Tires, brakes, and
wipers need replacing. Oli changes, inspections, so many things other than gasoline. Below is a list of some maintenance
requirements for cars, along with cost and roughly how often they should happen.
684 6 · Money Management

                                 Maintenance  Frequency              Cost Range

                                 New Tires    Every 5 years          $25-$300 per tire

                                 Oil Change Every 3,000-6,000 miles  $35-$75

                                 Wipers       Every 6-12 months      $20-$40

                                 Inspection   Annual                 $10-$50

                                 Brake pads   10,000-20,000 miles    $200-$300

                                 Air Filter   15,000-30,000 miles    $35-$80

When designing a budget, these expected costs should be accounted for. Extra money per month should be saved in
addition to this budget category, to handle unanticipated, and perhaps very costly, repairs.

  EXAMPLE 6.109

Estella needs to budget for her car maintenance. She expects to buy new tires each 4 years, which will cost her $480 to
replace them all. Oil changes near her cost $49.99, and she believes she will get one every 4 months. Her inspection
costs $15 per year. Wipers for her car cost $95 for all three and she anticipates changing them every year. She drives less
than 30,000 miles per year, so she plans to replace the air filter once per year. The air filter for her car costs $57.50. How
much should she budget per month to cover these costs?

     Solution
Her yearly costs are the wipers, inspection, and tires, which total $167.50. Tires will be bought every 5 years, so per year
she should budget $96. Her oil changes, which will happen three times per year, cost $49.99 each, so she'll spend
$149.97 for the year on oil changes. Adding these up, her yearly budget should include $413.47 for maintenance.
Dividing by 12 gives the monthly budget for maintenance, which is $34.46 (rounded up to the next penny).

        YOUR TURN 6.109

  1. Natalie needs to budget for her car maintenance. She expects to buy new tires each 5 years, which will cost her
      $390 to replace them all. Oil changes near her cost $59.99, and she believes she will get one every 3 months. Her
      inspection costs $25 per year. Wipers for her car cost $115 for all three and she anticipates changing them every
      year. She drives less than 30,000 miles per year, so she plans to replace the air filter once per year. The air filter
      for her car costs $46.25. How much should she budget per month to cover these costs?

Check Your Understanding

69. What is destination fee?
70. What is a title and registration fee?
71. Calculate the monthly payment if the total to be financed is $34,570, the interest rate is 3.5%, for 5 years.
72. What might be different for a used car loan and a new car loan?
73. What fees are similar between leasing a car and buying a car?
74. If the cost of a car is $30,000, and the residual value of the car after 3 years is $18,000, what is the monthly

      depreciation for the car?
75. If the money factor for a lease is 0.000015625, what is the annual interest rate?
76. For people who do not mind driving an older car or maintaining a car, which is preferable, a lease or purchasing?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    6.11 · Buying or Leasing a Car 685

77. What does collision insurance cover?

        SECTION 6.11 EXERCISES

 1. What are the two main questions to answer before buying a car?

 2. What is a documentation fee?

 3. What is a dealer preparation fee?

 4. What is a down payment?

 5. How long do leases typically last?

 6. Can you drive a leased car any mileage?

 7. What are three fees associated with leasing a car?

 8. What is the monthly depreciation for a leased car?

 9. How are the money factor and the annual percentage rate related?

10. Name two advantages to leasing over buying a car.

11. Name two advantages to buying a car over leasing a car.

12. What does liability insurance cover?

13. What does collision insurance cover?

14. Many expenses associated with a car can be anticipated. Name three maintenance expenses that can be
      anticipated.

In the following exercises, find the total cost to purchase the car.
    15. Alexia negotiates a purchase price of $17,850 for her new car. The sales tax in her area is 6.5%. Her license,
          plates, and registration come to $285.00. The dealership charges her a $600 destination fee and a $150
          processing fee. How much will she finance in total for the car?
    16. Stephanie negotiates a purchase price of $25,670 for her new car. The sales tax in her area is 8.0%. Her license,
          plates, and registration come to $389.00. The dealership charges her a $700 destination fee and a $345
          processing fee. How much will she finance in total for the car?
    17. Matthew negotiates a purchase price of $35,100 for her new car. The sales tax in his area is 7.25%. His license,
          plates, and registration come to $325.00. The dealership charges him a $900 destination fee and a $125
          processing fee. How much will he finance in total for the car?
    18. Madisyn negotiates a purchase price of $45,800 for her new car. The sales tax in her area is 7.25%. Her license,
          plates, and registration come to $199.00. The dealership charges her a $1,000 destination fee and a $275
          processing fee. How much will she finance in total for the car?

In the following exercises, calculate the car payment based on the total financed and the interest rate.
    19. Total to be financed is $36,775, interest rate is 2.75%, for 6 years.
    20. Total to be financed is $29,350, interest rate is 3.9%, for 5 years.
    21. Total to be financed is $27,180, interest rate is 1.99%, for 7 years.
    22. Total to be financed is $15,489, interest rate is 6.75%, for 4 years.

In the following exercises, find the total cost to obtain the lease.
    23. A $2,000.00 down payment, $120 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $350.00, $200.00 in disposition fees,
          and sales tax of $2,860.
    24. No down payment, $260 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $450.00, $400.00 in disposition fees, and sales
          tax of $3,155.00.
    25. A $4,000 down payment, $360 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $900.00, $1,000.00 in disposition fees,
          and sales tax of $4,275.
    26. A $7,000.00 down payment, $225 in acquisition fees, a security deposit of $800.00, $675.00 in disposition fees,
          and sales tax of $3,673.

In the following exercises, find the monthly depreciation of the car.
    27. The purchase price of a car is $34,000. Its residual price is $23,500. What is its monthly depreciation for a
          24-month lease?
686 6 · Money Management

           28. The purchase price of a car is $23,500. Its residual price is $11,750. What is its monthly depreciation for a
                  36-month lease?

       In the following exercises find the APR based on the MF.
           29. MF = 0.00004125
           30. MF =

       In the following exercises find the MF based on the APR.
           31. 8.75%
           32. 6.25%

       In the following exercises, find the lease payment based on the given information.
           33. Price is $41,700, residual price is $27,105, 24-month lease, money factor is 0.000025.
           34. Price is $22,165, residual price is $12,855.70, 24-month lease, money factor is 0.0000275.
           35. Price is $30,650, residual price is $16,857.50, 36-month lease, APR is 8.25%.
           36. Price is $24,800, residual price is $14,384, 36-month lease, APR is 5.85%.

       37. Sara needs to budget for her car maintenance. She expects to buy new tires each 3 years, which will cost her $540
             to replace them all. Oil changes near her cost $39.99, and she believes she will get one every 4 months. Her
             inspection costs $20 per year. Wipers for her car cost $115 for all three and she anticipates changing them every
             year. She drives less than 30,000 miles per year, so she plans to replace the air filter once per year. The air filter for
             her car costs $36.25. She plans to get new brake pads every year, which cost her $267. How much should she
             budget per month to cover these costs?

       38. Mwibeleca needs to budget for his car maintenance. He expects to buy new tires each 3 years, which will cost her
             $560 to replace them all. Oil changes near his cost $69.99, and he believes he will get one every 4 months. His
             inspection costs $25 per year. Brake pads will cost $215 each year. Wipers for his car cost $143.50 for all three and
             he anticipates changing them every year. He drives less than 30,000 miles per year, so he plans to replace the air
             filter once per year. The air filter for his car costs $62.88. How much should Mwibeleca budget per month to cover
             these costs?

       39. John will either lease or buy a car. The total cost to purchase the car is $35,830, and he would finance the car for 5
             years at 2.99%. If he leases, he would pay $3,287.50 for the lease, and then his payments would be based on a
             price of $32,750, a residual price of $20,305, 36 months, with a money factor of 0.00001725. Compare the
             payments to purchase the car to the payments of the lease plus the lease cost divided by 36.

       40. Zachary will either lease or buy a car. The total cost to purchase the car is $22,945, and he would finance the car for
             6 years at 1.99%. If he leases, he would pay $2,387.75 for the lease, and then his payments would be based on a
             price of $21,350, a residual price of $12,390.30, 36 months, with a money factor of 0.000018375. Compare the
             payments to purchase the car to the payments of the lease plus the lease cost divided by 36.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                6.12 · Renting and Homeownership 687

6.12 Renting and Homeownership

Figure 6.26 Purchasing a home is a big investment, while renting is a lower cost alternative. (credit: "New construction,
new development house for sale" by jongorey/houseandhammer.com, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Evaluate advantages and disadvantages of renting.
 2. Evaluate advantages and disadvantages of homeownership.
 3. Calculate the monthly payment for a mortgage and related interest cost.
 4. Read and interpret an amortization schedule.
 5. Solve application problems involving affordability of a mortgage.

After renting an apartment for 10 years, you realize that it may be time to purchase a home. Your job is stable, and you
could use more space. It is time to investigate becoming a homeowner. What are the things that you must consider, and
what is the financial benefit of owning as opposed to renting? This section is about the advantages, disadvantages, and
costs of homeownership as opposed to renting.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Renting

When renting, you will likely sign a lease, which is a contract between a renter and a landlord. A landlord is the person
or company that owns property that is rented. The lease will detail your responsibilities, restrictions on activities,
deposits, fees, maintenance, repairs, and rent during the term of the lease. It also defines what your landlord can, and
cannot, do with the property while you occupy the property.

Like leasing a car, there are advantages to renting but also some disadvantages. Some advantages are:

  · Lower cost.
  · Short-term commitment.
  · Little to no maintenance cost. The landlord pays for or performs most maintenance.
  · You need not stay at end of lease. Once the lease term is over (the lease is up), you are not obligated to stay.
  · If renting in an apartment complex, there may be a pool, gym, or community room for renters to use.

Of course, there are disadvantage too:

  · No tax incentives.
  · Housing cost is not fixed. When the lease is up, the rent can change.
  · No equity. When you are done living in a rental, you have built no value.
  · Restrictions on occupants. There may be a limit on how many can live in the apartment.
  · Restrictions on decorating. The property is not yours, so any decorating or improvements need landlord permission.
  · Limits on pets. Permission for pets, and their number and type, will be set forth in the lease.
  · May not be able to remain when lease term is over. The landlord can, at the end of your lease, invite you to leave.
  · The building may be sold, and the new landlord may institute changes to the lease when the previous lease expires.

Renting has fees to be paid at the start of the lease. Typically, when you rent, you will pay first and last months' rent and
a security deposit. A security deposit is a sum of money that the landlord holds until the renter leaves the rental
property. The deposit will cover repairs for damage to the apartment during the renter's stay but may be returned if the
apartment is in good condition. If your landlord runs a credit check on you, the landlord may charge you for that.
688 6 · Money Management

     Advantages of Buying a Home

       The advantages to buying a home mirror the disadvantages of renting, and the disadvantages of home ownership
       mirror the advantages of renting.

       Some advantages to buying a home are:

         · There are tax incentives. The interest you pay for your mortgage (more on that later) is deductible on your federal
             income tax.

         · There are no restrictions on pets or occupants, unless laws in your area specify limits for homes.
         · You can redecorate any way you wish, limited only by the laws in your area.
         · Once your mortgage is set with a fixed-interest rate, your housing cost is fixed.
         · Your home grows equity, that is, the difference between what you owe and what the house is worth grows. You can

             use the equity to secure loans, and you recover the equity (and more if you're fortunate) when you sell the house.
         · As long as you pay your mortgage and maintain the home to the standards of your community, you can stay as long

             as you wish.

       Some disadvantages to home ownership are:

         · The cost is higher than renting. Mortgages and associated costs are typically higher than rent for a similar living
             space.

         · The owner is responsible for upkeep, maintenance, and repairs. These can be extremely costly.
         · The owner cannot walk away from the property. It can be sold, but simply leaving the property, especially if not paid

             off yet, has serious consequences.

       The big question of affordability looms large over the decision to rent or buy. Renting, strictly from an affordability
       viewpoint, comes with much less initial outlay and smaller commitment. If you do not have sufficient income to regularly
       save for possibly expensive repairs, or your credit isn't quite as good as it needs to be, then renting may be the best
       choice. Of course, even if you can afford to buy a home, you may choose to rent based on the comparative advantages.

              VIDEO

             Rent or Buy (https://openstax.org/r/Rent_or_Buy)

       Buying a home really involves two buyers. You and the mortgage company. The mortgage company has interest in the
       home, as they are providing the funds for the home. They want to protect their investment, and many fees are about the
       bank as much as the buyer. They fund a mortgage based on the value they assign the property. Not you. This means they
       will want some certainty that the home is sound, and you are a good investment.

               WHO KNEW?

         Closing Costs

         When a home is bought, there are many costs that need to be paid at the time of purchase, which are lumped under
         the term closing costs. At the start of 2022, the average closing costs for a single-family home exceeded $6,800. These
         costs include:

           · The appraisal fee, which is what is paid to someone to establish the home's worth. The value of the home to the
               bank may differ from what the home is listed for, or what an app tells you the home is worth. It may run
               approximately $350.

           · The home inspection fee. The inspection should reveal any problems with the house that will need to be fixed
               either before or after you obtain the home.

           · The title search. The is a records search to insure there are no issues with who actually owns the property. It can
               cost about 0.5% to 1% of the amount you are financing.

           · Prepaid taxes. You will need to pay about 6 months of taxes at the time of purchase.
           · The credit report fee. This is a fee for checking your credit. You might pay $25 or more for this.
           · The origination fee. This is the price the mortgage company charges you to cover the costs of creating the

               mortgage. This could be 0.5% to 1% (or more) of the amount you are borrowing.
           · The application fee. This is just a processing fee and could come to several hundred dollars.
           · The underwriting fee. This covers the cost of verifying your financial qualifications. It could be a flat fee, or some

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       6.12 · Renting and Homeownership 689

      small percentage of the amount financed. Such as 0.5% or 1%.
  · Attorney fees. If you use an attorney, you will have to pay the attorney.
  · State of local fees. This may include a filing fee charged by the county or municipality in which you reside.

That's a long list, and it is not even complete. When buying, be prepared to see these costs. It can be surprising. But in
the end, you will have equity in the home, which means when you sell your home, you will get some of your money
back.

       VIDEO
      Closing Costs (https://openstax.org/r/closing_costs)

In the end, you must weigh your options and carefully consider your priorities in choosing to rent or buy a home.

Mortgages

Some people will purchase a home or condo with cash, but the majority of people will apply for a mortgage. A mortgage
is a long-term loan and the property itself is the security. The bank decides the minimum down payment (with your
input), the payment schedule, the duration of the loan, whether the loan can be assumed by another party, and the
penalty for late payments. The title of the home belongs to the bank.
Since a mortgage is a loan, everything about loans from The Basics of Loans holds true, including the formula for the
payments.

Monthly Mortgage Payments

The formula to calculate your monthly payments of principal and interest uses APR as the annual interest rate.

  FORMULA

  The payment, , per month to pay down a mortgage with beginning principal is
                                                , where is the annual interest rate in decimal form and is the number of years of

  the payment.
  Note, payment to lenders is always rounded up to the next penny.

To find the total amount of your payments over the life of the loan, multiply your monthly payments by the number of
payments.

EXAMPLE 6.110

30-Year Mortgage at 4.8% Interest
Evan buys a house. His 30-year mortgage comes to $132,650 with 4.8% interest. Find Evan's monthly payments.

     Solution                 = $132,650, = 0.048 and = 30. Substituting those values into the formula
Using the information above,

                              and calculating, we find the payment is
690 6 · Money Management

His mortgage payment is $695.97.

      YOUR TURN 6.110

1. Paulo buys a house. His 20-year mortgage comes to $153,899 with 4.21% interest. Find Evan's monthly
    payments.

To find the total amount of your payments over the life of the loan, multiply your monthly payments by the number of
payments. This can be useful information, but not too many people reach the end of their mortgage. They tend to move
before the mortgage is paid off.

FORMULA

The total paid, , on an year mortgage with monthly payments is             .

EXAMPLE 6.111

30-Year Mortgage at 5.35% Interest
Cassandra buys a house. Her 30-year mortgage comes to $99,596 with 5.35% interest. If Cassandra pays off the
mortgage over those 30 years, how much will she have paid in total?

     Solution                                                                       . To calculate this, the payment
To find the total paid over the life of the mortgage, use the formula  = 30. Substituting those values into the
must be found. Using the information above, = $99,596, = 0.0535 and

formula                           and calculating, we find the payment is

Using the mortgage payment of $556.16 and = 30 years in the formula        , the total that Cassandra will
pay for the mortgage is $200,217.60.

      YOUR TURN 6.111

1. Arthur buys a house. Their 15-year mortgage comes to $225,879 with 4.91% interest. If Arthur pays off the
    mortgage over those 15 years, how much will they have paid in total?

With the principal of the mortgage and how much total is paid over the life of the mortgage, the cost of financing can be
found by subtracting the principal of the mortgage from the total paid over the life of the mortgage.

FORMULA

The cost of financing a mortgage, CoF, is  where is the mortgage's starting principal and is the total

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        6.12 · Renting and Homeownership 691

paid over the life of the mortgage.

EXAMPLE 6.112

30-Year Mortgage at 5.35% Interest
Cassandra buys a house. Her 30-year mortgage comes to $99,596 with 5.35% interest. What was Cassandra's cost of
financing?

Solution

In Example 6.111, we found that the total Cassandra will pay for the $99,569 mortgage is $200,217.60. Subtracting those

we find the cost of financing        .

        YOUR TURN 6.112

  1. Arthur buys a house. Their 15-year mortgage comes to $225,879 with 4.91% interest. What was Arthur's cost of
      financing?

        WHO KNEW?

  Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI)
  When you purchase a home, you will have to pay a down payment. This means you have money tied to the property,
  which lenders believe makes you less likely to walk away from a property. The amount of the down payment will be
  decided between you and the mortgage company. However, if your down payment is less than 20% of the property
  value, you will be required to pay private mortgage insurance (PMI). This is insurance you pay for so that the
  mortgage company is protected if you default on the loan. It often comes to between 0.5% and 2.25% of the original
  loan amount. It increases your monthly payment. Once you reach 20% of the loan value, you can request that the PMI
  be dropped. Even if you do not request cancelling the PMI, it will eventually and automatically be dropped.
  For more, see this article on ways to get rid of PMI (https://openstax.org/r/mortgage_insurance).

Reading and Interpreting Amortization Tables

Amortization tables were addressed in The Basics of Loans. They are most frequently encountered when analyzing
mortgages.
The amortization table for a 30-year mortgage is quite long, containing 360 rows. A full table will not be reproduced
here. We can, though, read information from a portion of an amortization table.

  EXAMPLE 6.113

Amortization Table for a 30-Year, $165,900 Mortgage
Figure 6.27 shows a portion of an amortization table for a 30-year, $165,900 mortgage. Use that table to answer the
following questions.
 1. What is the interest rate?
 2. How much are the payments?
 3. How much of payment 175 goes to principal?
 4. How much of payment 180 goes to interest?
 5. What's the remaining balance on the mortgage after payment 170?
692 6 · Money Management

                                                                       Figure 6.27 Amortization table
            Solution
        1. Reading at the top of the table, we see the interest rate is 5.61%.
        2. Reading from the top of the table or from the column labeled Payment, we see the payments are $953.44 per
             month.
        3. In the row for payment 175, we see that the amount that goes to principal is $400.44.
        4. In the row for payment 180, we see that the amount that goes to interest is $543.56.
        5. In the row for payment 170, we see the remaining balance is $119,873.35.

               YOUR TURN 6.113
         Below is a portion of an amortization table for a 30-year, $228,320 mortgage. Use that table to answer the following
         questions.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           6.12 · Renting and Homeownership 693

                                                                 Amortization table

1. What is the interest rate?
2. How much are the payments?
3. How much of payment 235 goes to principal?
4. How much of payment 215 goes to interest?
5. What's the remaining balance on the mortgage after payment 227?
6. At what payment does the amount that is applied to mortgage finally exceed the amount applied to interest?

Escrow Payments

The last few examples have looked at mortgage payments, which cover the principal and interest. However, when you
take out a mortgage, the payment is sometimes much higher than that. This is because your mortgage company also
has you pay into an escrow account, which is a savings account maintained by the mortgage company.

Your insurance payments will be set by your insurer and the mortgage company will pay them on time for you from your
escrow account. Your property taxes are set by where you live and are typically a percentage of your property's assessed
value. The assessed value is the estimation of the value of your home and does not necessary reflect the purchase or
resale value of the home. Your property taxes will also be paid on time by the mortgage company from your escrow
account.

For example, in Kalamazoo, Michigan, the effective tax rate for property is 1.69% of the assessed value of the home.
These escrow payments, which cover bills for the home, can increase the monthly payments for your home well beyond
the basic principal and interest payment.

EXAMPLE 6.114

Adding Escrow Payments to Mortgage Payments
Jenna decides to purchase a home, with mortgage of $108,450 at 6% interest for 30 years. The assessed value of her
home is $75,600. Her property taxes come to 5.7% of her assessed value. Jenna also has to pay her home insurance
every 6 months, which is $744 per six months. How much, including escrow, will Jenna pay per month?

Solution

Using the payment function to find her mortgage payments,  , with = $108,405, =
694 6 · Money Management

       0.06, and = 30, her payments are

Jenna also pays into escrow 1/12 of her property taxes per month. Her property taxes are 5.7% of the assessed value of

$75,600, which comes to                  . This is an annual tax, so she pays 1/12 of that each month, or

$359.10. Jenna's home insurance is $744 per 6 months, so each month she pays $124.00 for insurance. Adding these

together, her monthly payment is         . This is quite a bit more than the $649.95

for the principal and interest.

        YOUR TURN 6.114

  1. Destiny decides to purchase a home, with mortgage of $159,195.50 at 5.75% interest for 30 years. The assessed
      value of her home is $100,000. Her property taxes come to 5.42% of her assessed value. Destiny also has to pay
      her home insurance every 6 months, and that comes to $843 per 6 months. How much, including escrow, will
      Destiny pay per month?

Check Your Understanding

78. Does renting or buying have tax advantages?
79. Which has more restrictions, renting or buying?
80. Which has housing cost that does not change?
81. What is the name given to a loan for a home?
82. What are the monthly payments for a 30-year mortgage of $108,993 with 6.14% interest.
83. What is the cost of financing for a 30-year mortgage of $108,993 with 6.14% interest if the mortgage is paid off?
84. Consider the following amortization table. What is the amount of payment 141 that goes to principal?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            6.12 · Renting and Homeownership 695

85. What is the name of the account that the mortgage company holds your taxes and insurance in?

        SECTION 6.12 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, indicate if the advantage listed is for renting or buying a home.
     1. Short-term commitment.
     2. Tax advantage.
     3. Freedom to remodel.
     4. Builds equity.
     5. Cost is lower.
     6. You do not pay for repairs.
     7. No pet restrictions
     8. More flexibility to move.
     9. Housing cost is fixed.
    10. May have other amenities.

In the following exercises, find the mortgage payment for the given loan amount, interest rate, and term.
    11. Loan amount is $78,560, interest rate is 5.87%, 30-year mortgage.
    12. Loan amount is $125,800, interest rate is 6.5%, 30-year mortgage.
    13. Loan amount is $96,400, interest rate is 4.9%, 15-year mortgage.
    14. Loan amount is $267,450, interest rate is 5.25%, 20-year mortgage.

In the following exercises, find the total paid on the mortgage if it is fully paid through the term.
    15. Loan amount is $78,560, interest rate is 5.87%, 30-year mortgage.
    16. Loan amount is $125,800, interest rate is 6.5%, 30-year mortgage.
    17. Loan amount is $96,400, interest rate is 4.9%, 15-year mortgage.
    18. Loan amount is $267,450, interest rate is 5.25%, 20-year mortgage.

In the following exercises, find the cost of financing for the mortgages if they are fully paid.
    19. Loan amount is $78,560, interest rate is 5.87%, 30-year mortgage.
    20. Loan amount is $125,800, interest rate is 6.5%, 30-year mortgage.
    21. Loan amount is $96,400, interest rate is 4.9%, 15-year mortgage.
    22. Loan amount is $267,450, interest rate is 5.25%, 20-year mortgage.

In the following exercises, use the amortization table to answer the question.

    23. What is the term of the mortgage?
    24. How much of payment 165 applies to interest?
696 6 · Money Management

           25. What is the remaining balance after payment 155?
           26. How much total interest was paid after payment 149?
       In the following exercises, use the amortization schedule to answer the question.

           27. What is the interest rate for the mortgage?
           28. How much of payment 110 applies to principal?
           29. What is the remaining balance after payment 94?
           30. How much total interest was paid after payment 111?
       In the following exercises, find the total monthly payment including both the mortgage payment and the escrow
       payment.
           31. Mortgage of $87,690 at 6.2% interest for 30 years. Assessed value of the home is $75,600. Property taxes come

                  to 5.65% of assessed value. Home insurance of $815 paid every 6 months.
           32. Mortgage of $143,900 at 5.05% interest for 30 years. Assessed value of the home is $90,150. Property taxes

                  come to 5.88% of assessed value. Home insurance of $924 paid every 6 months.
           33. Mortgage of $65,175 at 6.48% interest for 30 years. Assessed value of the home is $62,800. Property taxes

                  come to 6.75% of assessed value. Home insurance of $558 paid every 6 months.
           34. Mortgage of $245,950 at 5.35% interest for 30 years. Assessed value of the home is $156,500. Property taxes

                  come to 6.41% of assessed value. Home insurance of $972 paid every 6 months.
       For the following exercises, read the following: Fifteen-year mortgage compared to 30-year mortgage. Mortgage
       interest rates are often higher for 30-year mortgages than 15-year mortgages. However, the payments for 15-year
       mortgages are considerably higher. The following exercises explore the difference between a 15- and 30-year mortgage
       for a mortgage of $100,000.

           35. The 15-year mortgage interest rate is 5.65%.
                   a. Find the payment.
                   b. Determine the total that would be paid if the mortgage was completed.
                   c. Find the cost of financing for this mortgage.

           36. The 30-year mortgage rate is 6.4%.
                   a. Find the payment.
                   b. Determine the total that would be paid if the mortgage was completed.
                   c. Find the cost of financing for this mortgage.

           37. How different are the payments, the total paid, and the cost to finance?
           38. Summarize the answer in the previous question.
       For the following exercises, read the following: Fifteen-year mortgage compared to 30-year mortgage. A 15-year

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.13 · Income Tax 697

mortgage comes with advantages, the biggest being the home is paid off much sooner, and equity is built much more
quickly. Mortgage interest rates are often higher for 30-year mortgages than 15-year mortgages. However, the
payments for 15-year mortgages are considerably higher. The following exercises explore the difference between a 15-
and 30-year mortgage for a mortgage of $200,000.

    39. The 15-year mortgage interest rate is 5.6%.
            a. Find the payment.
           b. Determine the total that would be paid if the mortgage was completed.
            c. Find the cost of financing for this mortgage.

    40. The 30-year mortgage rate is 6.25%.
            a. Find the payment.
           b. Determine the total that would be paid if the mortgage was completed.
            c. Find the cost of financing for this mortgage.

    41. How different are the payments, the total paid, and the cost to finance?
    42. Summarize the answer in the previous question.

6.13 Income Tax

Figure 6.28 Federal income tax is a concern for most US citizens. (credit: "1040 US tax form" by Marco Verch Professional
Photographer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Determine gross, adjusted gross, and taxable income.
 2. Apply exemptions, deductions, and credits to basic income tax calculations.
 3. Compute FICA tax.
 4. Solve tax application problems for working students.
Before the start of the American Civil War in 1861, most of the country's revenue came from tariffs on trade and excise
taxes. However, this fell far short of the high cost of the war. Because of this, the federal government enacted the nation's
first income tax with the Revenue Act of 1861, which created the Internal Revenue Service as we know it today.
No one likes paying income tax, but it is a reality of life. In this section, we will learn about Form 1040, the U.S. Individual
Income Tax Return, and ways to prepare for tax time.
The U.S. tax code may change from year to year. Because of this, this section includes examples of how taxes,
deductions, and exemptions might be computed. The types of income, deductions, and exemptions that are used in the
examples are used in the current tax code.
698 6 · Money Management

     Gross, Adjusted Gross, and Taxable Income

       Your income drives how much you pay in taxes. The more you earn, the more you are likely to pay. But your income
       alone is not the full story. When you add all the money you earned from your job, freelance work, interest from savings,
       and other sources, you have your gross income. If you are an employee, your income from your job will be reported on
       a W-2, which is sent to you by your employer. Income from freelance work will be reported on a 1099-MISC form, and is
       sent by the company that paid you. Income from interest is reported on a 1099-INT form and comes from the entity that
       paid the interest.
       Before you determine how much you owe in taxes, you will make certain adjustments to that gross income. You will
       deduct, or subtract, some of income from the gross income. That's your adjusted gross income, or AGI. That is still not
       what you are taxed on. Next, you need to apply exemptions to your income. These are pieces of income that the
       government does not tax. After that is done, you reach your taxable income. We will look at each of these parts of the
       taxable income.

                WHO KNEW?

         Gifts and Winning
         Money given as a gift my be taxed if the gift amount is high enough. If you win $50,000 in the lottery, that money is
         taxed as income. If you give a family member a large cash gift, that gift will be subject to a tax provided that the gift
         exceeds the federally set limits.

       You will notice that your paycheck already has taxes taken out of it. Your employer will withhold some of your income,
       sending it directly to the federal, state, and local governments. It is an estimate of how much you will owe in income tax.
       In the end, it reduces how much you will pay when your taxes are due. If they withhold too much income, you will receive
       the extra they withheld in the form of a refund.

         EXAMPLE 6.115

       Computing Gross Income
       Roger is preparing to do his taxes. He worked two jobs, with reported income of $27,500 and $13,200. His two CDs
       yielded $327 together. He also won a split club raffle for $2,000. What was Roger's gross earnings?

            Solution
       This is the sum of his wages, winnings and interest earned. Add these Roger's gross income was $43,027.

               YOUR TURN 6.115

         1. Chloe prepares for her taxes by collecting her W-2 and her 1099-MISC documents. The wages from her regular
              job were $41,780. She did some freelance work and earned $5,500 from that job. What is Chloe's gross income?

       Your adjusted gross income (AGI) is computed before your taxes are determined. It begins with the gross income, and
       then subtracts from that income any deduction. Deductions are expenditures on your part that the government won't
       tax. These deductions include money deposited into tax-deferred investments, and mortgage interest that you paid,
       charitable contributions if you made any, medical bills over a threshold, medical insurance under certain circumstances,
       and property taxes. If you add all these up, and they are all legal deductions, the sum is subtracted from your gross
       income, leaving the AGI.

         EXAMPLE 6.116

       Compute Adjusted Gross Income
       Chandra's gross income is $58,400. She deposited $3,000 into her tax-deferred retirement account for the year. Her
       mortgage interest paid was $1,250 for the year, and her property taxes came to $4,200. What is her AGI?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.13 · Income Tax 699

     Solution
To get Chandra 's AGI, total her deductions and subtract that total from her gross income. The total of her deductions is

                                                   . She subtracts that total from her gross income, making her AGI
                                        .

        YOUR TURN 6.116

  1. Isabelle's gross income is $93,450. She paid $7,840 in mortgage interest and $3,810 in property taxes. She also
      donated $1,500 to her favorite charity. What is Isabelle's AGI?

Remember that your AGI is not your taxable income. Exemptions need to be subtracted from the AGI to reach your
taxable income. Exemptions are income that the government does not tax. Some examples of exempt income are
disbursements from health savings accounts for qualified medical expenses, bond interest, some IRA distributions, and
gifts given that are under $16,000. Note that exemptions are different from deductions: exemptions are excused
incomes, whereas deductions are excused expenditures.

  EXAMPLE 6.117

Taxable Income
Yelizaveta's AGI is $75,490. However, she gave a $2,000 gift to her mother. What is her taxable income?

     Solution
Taxable income is AGI minus any exemptions. Gifts below $16,000 are exempted, so her taxable income is

                                        .

        YOUR TURN 6.117

  1. Ammie has an AGI of $43,100. However, $3,400 was a disbursement from her health savings account. What is her
      taxable income?

Tax Credits

Another piece of the tax puzzle is tax credits. This is money subtracted from the tax you owe.
Tax credits are very different from deductions or exemptions. Deductions and exemptions are taken away from your
gross income before the tax you owe is calculated. A tax credit, is subtracted, dollar for dollar, from your tax bill. Once
the tax you owe is calculated, subtract the any tax credits from that calculated tax.
Some of the tax credits are refundable. This means that if subtracting them from your tax results in a negative number,
you receive a tax refund. For more details, see this article about tax credits (https://openstax.org/r/taxcredit.asp).
The federal government has placed income limits and restrictions and on those eligible to receive tax credits because
their value is so high. Here is a partial list of tax credits that you might qualify for:

  · Earned income credit is a refundable tax credit for low- to moderate-income workers and ranges from $560 to
      $6,935 depending on dependents and income. This is refundable

  · American opportunity credit is a credit taken by parents who have children enrolled in college at least half time
      and pursuing a degree. This credit is worth $2,500 per student for the first 4 years of undergraduate school, subject
      to income limits. This is a refundable tax credit.

  · Lifetime learning credit is a credit is equivalent to 20% of educational expenses, up to $2,000 per year, subject to
      income limits. There is no cap to how many years you can apply for this credit.

  · Child tax credit is worth $2,000 per child under the age of 17 if that child lives at home at least half the year, subject
      to income limits. This is a refundable tax credit.

  · Child and dependent care tax credit was designed to help pay for child care while the parent works. The amount
      of the credit is dependent on your income. However, the maximum amount that can be received is, in 2022, $4,000
      for one eligible person, or $8,000 for two or more qualifying people. A dependent qualifies if they are a child under
700 6 · Money Management

    13 years old, a spouse who is unable to care for themselves, or some other qualifying person. This is a refundable
    tax credit.
· Premium tax credit was created by the Affordable Care Act, and it is one that is received by many people
    throughout the year. In essence it is a health insurance premium subsidy. The amount of the credit is based on your
    income and the price of health insurance in your area. This is a refundable tax credit.

EXAMPLE 6.118

Apply a Tax Credit
Kaitlyn has calculated the tax she owes to be $5,200. However, she receives an earned income tax credit of $1,715. How
much does Kaitlyn owe after applying the earned income tax credit?

Solution

The amount of taxes Katilyn owes is her calculated tax of $5,200 minus the credit she receives. The amount she owes in

taxes is                         .

      YOUR TURN 6.118

1. Antonio's taxes owed based on his income are $3,950. However, he qualifies for the earned income tax credit of
    $1,925 and a child tax credit of $2,000. How much does Antonio owe after applying the tax credits?

EXAMPLE 6.119

Tax Credits and a Refund
Chanajah calculated their tax owed, which came to $4,300. They have an earned income tax credit of $2,190, a child tax
credit of $2,000, and a child and dependent care tax credit of $4,000. How much tax does Chanajah owe, or how much
will they get in a refund?

Solution

Adding Chanajah's tax credits together, we find their total to be $8,190. That is more than the tax they owe, which was

$4,300. Each of those credits is refundable, which means they will receive a refund. Subtracting the credits from the tax

owed yields                         . This is negative, so represents a refund of $3,890.

        YOUR TURN 6.119

  1. Ismail owed $2,350 in taxes. He has a child tax credit of $2,000 and an earned income tax credit of $1,640. After
      applying the tax credit, how much does Ismail owe or how much does he get in a refund?

       VIDEO
      Deductions Versus Credits (https://openstax.org/r/Versus_Credits)

Computing FICA Taxes

FICA stands for the Federal Insurance Contributions Act of 1935. FICA taxes are used solely to fund Social Security and
Medicare and are separate from federal income tax. It amounts to 7.65% of your gross pay, which is withheld from your
paycheck automatically. Your employer is required to match the 7.65% amount. Of the 7.65%, 6.2% goes to Social
Security (SSI), and 1.45% goes to Medicare.
As of 2022, SSI tax only applies to the first $147,000 of earnings. Any gross income above that is not taxed for social
security. This limit changes every year.
Medicare tax, on the other hand, applies to the entirety of your gross income.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.13 · Income Tax 701

  EXAMPLE 6.120

Computed FICA Taxes
McKenzi earned $2,700 in gross income, before taxes, in a given 2-week period. How much does she owe in FICA taxes,
and how much of that is for SSI?

     Solution
The FICA tax is 7.65% of her gross earnings. 7.65% of her $2,700 is $206.55. Also, the SSI is 6.2% of her income, or
$167.40

        YOUR TURN 6.120

  1. Arianne earned $3,200 over a 2-week pay period. How much FICA tax does she pay, and how much of that is for
      SSI?

  EXAMPLE 6.121

Social Security Tax with Higher Income
Renard earned $195,000 in wages for the year. How much in SSI taxes does Renard owe for the year?

     Solution
Since Renard earned more than the taxable limit of $147,000 dollars, he only pays the 6.2% SSI tax on $147,000. This
comes to $9,114.

      YOUR TURN 6.121
1. Andy earned $169,450 in wages this year. How much in SSI taxes does Andy owe?

Calculating Your Income Tax

Your income tax bill and your income tax rate are based on your taxable income. The tax system in the United States is
progressive, meaning that the tax rates are marginal so the higher your taxable income the higher the tax rate you will
pay. Taxable income is broken into brackets, or ranges of income. Each bracket has a different tax rate. The tax brackets
and rates for single filers as of 2022 are given below:

Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

1  0         $10,275                                                              10%

2  $10,276   $41,775                                                              12%

3  $41,776   $89,075                                                              22%

4  $89,076   $170,050                                                             24%

5  $170,051  $215,950                                                             32%

Table 6.3 Federal Income Tax Brackets for Single Filers, 2021-2022
(data source: https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/irs-provides-tax-inflation-
adjustments-for-tax-year-2022)
702 6 · Money Management

                                 Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

                                 6     $215,951  $539,900                              35%

                                 7     $539,901                                        37%

                          Table 6.3 Federal Income Tax Brackets for Single Filers, 2021-2022
                          (data source: https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/irs-provides-tax-inflation-
                          adjustments-for-tax-year-2022)

So if your taxable income is $76,500 and you are filing as a single filer, your tax bill will be 22% of that $76,500, right?
Wrong. Your income is split among those brackets and the money in each bracket is taxed at that bracket's tax rate.
Seems confusing. Here is a list of steps to follow to find the tax owed.
Step 1: Find the bracket for the income.
Step 2: For each bracket below the income bracket, the tax from that bracket is:
Step 2a: Find the difference between the upper limit of that bracket and upper limit of the next lower bracket. If this is
bracket 1, use 0 as the upper limit of the previous bracket.
Step 2b: The tax from that bracket is the bracket tax rate applied to the difference from Step 2a.
Step 3: For the bracket that the income belongs to, find the income minus the lower limit for the bracket.
Step 4: The tax for the bracket of the income is tax rate for that bracket applied to the difference found in Step 3.
Step 5: Add these various tax values to get the total income tax.
There are various tax brackets, and the rates may change in any given year. The income limits may also change. For all
examples going forward, we will use the single filer tax brackets, even if those brackets are not appropriate (e.g., married
or head of household filers).

EXAMPLE 6.122

Income Tax on Taxable Income
Faith has a taxable income of $103,650. How much income tax does Faith owe?

     Solution
Step 1: Faith's income belongs to the 4th tax bracket, $89,076 to $170,050. So the taxes from the first three brackets
follow steps 2a and 2b.

For bracket 1:

Step 2a: The upper limit is $10,275, the upper limit of the previous bracket was 0, so the difference is $10,275.

Step 2b: For the first bracket, she owes 10% of $10,275, or $1,027.50.

For bracket 2:

Step 2a: The upper limit is $41,775, the upper limit from the previous bracket was $10,275, so the difference is $31,500

Step 2b: For the second bracket, she owes 12% of $31,500, or $3,780.

For bracket 3:

Step 2a: The upper limit is $89,075, the upper limit from the previous bracket is $41,175, so the difference was $47,300

Step 2b: For the third bracket, she owes 22% of $47,300, or $10,406.

Step 3: For bracket 4, her income is $103,650, the upper limit of the previous bracket is $89,075. The difference of those

is                                  .

Step 4: The tax he owes for that bracket is 24% of the difference, which is $3,498.

Step 5: The total in taxes that Emmanuel owes is the sum of the taxes found above, or

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     6.13 · Income Tax 703

        YOUR TURN 6.122

  1. Jenna's taxable income is $73,500. Find how much income tax she owes.

      Remember that your employer will estimate how much tax you will owe and withholds it from paychecks. This
      means you may have already paid some, if not all and more, of the income tax you owe.

       VIDEO
      Tax Brackets (https://openstax.org/r/Brackets)

  EXAMPLE 6.123

Finding Income Tax Owed
Emmanuel is preparing his taxes. His W-2 from work shows gross income for the year of $95,250. He also has a
1099-MISC for some freelance art work he did, amounting to $7,500. Emmanuel also deposited $4,500 into a tax-
deferred retirement plan. He paid $7,920 in mortgage interest for the year and $3,740 in property taxes. He also
qualified for $4,000 in child tax credits. Based on this information, how much tax does Emmanuel owe or how much does
he get in a refund?

     Solution
We need to know Emmanuel's taxable income, based on gross income, deductions, and exemptions.
His gross income is the amount from his W-2 and his 1099-MISC. Adding these gives a gross income of

                                          .
Subtracting his deductions will yield his AGI. His deductions are $7,920 for mortgage interest, $3,740 for property taxes,
and $4,500 deposited into his retirement account. Adding these, his total deductions are $16,160. Subtracting the
deductions from the gross income, we find his AGI to be $86,590.
Emmanuel seems to have no exemptions, so his AGI and his taxable income are the same.
We find the taxes Emmanuel owes using the process outlined above.
Step 1: His income belongs to the third tax bracket, $41,776 to $89,0875. So the taxes from the first two brackets follow
steps 2a and 2b.
For bracket 1:
Step 2a: The upper limit is $10,275, the upper limit of the previous bracket was 0, so the difference is $10,275.
Step 2b: For the first bracket, he owes 10% of $10,275, or $1,027.50.
For bracket 2:
Step 2a: The upper limit is $41,775, the upper limit from the previous bracket was $10,275, so the difference is $31,500
Step 2b: For the second bracket, he owes 12% of $31,500, or $3,780.
Step 3: For bracket 3, his income is $86,590, the upper limit of the previous bracket is $41,775. The difference of those is

                                          .
Step 4: The tax he owes for that bracket is 22% of the difference, which is $9,859.30.
Step 5: The total in taxes that Emmanuel owes is the sum of the taxes found above, or

                                                              .
Once his taxes are computed, he subtracts his tax credits. His only tax credit is $4,000. The total he owes in taxes is

                                                 .
704 6 · Money Management

               YOUR TURN 6.123

         1. Jacob is preparing his taxes. His W-2 from work shows gross income for the year of $39,885. He also has a
              1099-INT for a savings account, amounting to $378. Jacob also deposited $2,500 into a tax-deferred retirement
              plan. He also qualified for $2,000 in child tax credits and $4,000 in child and dependent care tax credit. Based on
              this information, how much tax does Jacob owe or how much does he receive in a refund?

     Check Your Understanding

       86. Gross income consists of what?
       87. Taxable income is found after what is done to gross income?
       88. If the gross income is $50,000 and there are three deductions of $2,000, $3,000, and $8,000, what is the adjusted

             gross income?
       89. When is a tax credit applied?
       90. Do you pay 6.2% for SSI tax for all your earnings?
       91. For a taxable income of $41,800, how much income tax is owed?
       92. If $5,600 is owed in taxes but there are $4,000 in tax credits, how much income tax is owed?

             SECTION 6.13 EXERCISES

        1. What is gross income?
        2. How is adjusted gross income derived from gross income?
        3. Is there a difference between AGI and taxable income? If so, what is the difference?
        4. How are deductions different from tax credits?
        5. What are the two components of the FICA tax?
        6. What taxes do employers match?
        7. If you are in the 32% tax bracket, is your tax computed on your full income?
        8. What does it mean for a tax credit to be refundable?
       In the following exercises, compute the gross income.

             9. Wages from W-2 are $32,800, freelance income from a 1099-MISC is $1,050, and a gift given to a family member
                  of $2,760.

           10. Wages from W-2 are $59,380, interest income from 1099-INT is $1,500, freelance income from a 1099-MISC is
                  $3,500, and a split club raffle winning of $6,755.

           11. Wages from job 1 on W-2 are $36,200, wages from job 2 on W-2 are $21,400, interest income from a 1099-INT is
                  $374.

           12. Wages from W-2 are $121,450, interest from a 1099-INT is $3,400.
       In the following exercises find the adjusted gross income, AGI, based on gross income and deductions.

           13. Gross income was $65,700, $2,280 deposited in a tax-deferred IRA, mortgage interest was $4,715, property
                  taxes were $3,065.

           14. Gross income was $183,200, $5,000 deposited in a tax-deferred IRA, $7,300 in charitable contributions, $8,350
                  in mortgage interest, and $6,900 in property taxes.

           15. Gross income was $31,200, $1,500 deposited in a tax-deferred IRA account.
           16. Gross income was $41,500, $1,250 deposited in a tax-deferred IRA account, $4,210 in mortgage interest, $2,980

                  in property tax.
       In the following exercises, find the taxable income based on AGI and exemptions.

           17. AGI of $34,560, $2,500 disbursement from a health savings account for a qualifying medical expense.
           18. AGI of $56,750, gift given to a family member of $8,000, $550 in bond interest.
           19. AGI of $120,940, gift given to a family member of $15,000, bond interest of $4,500.
           20. AGI of $28,450, gift given to a family member of $2,000.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                            6.13 · Income Tax 705

In the following exercises, find the taxes owed or refund received based on income tax bill and tax credits.
    21. Tax bill of $5,300, child tax credit of $4,000, earned income tax credit of $1,630.
    22. Tax bill is $17,300, child tax credit of $4,000, child and dependent care tax credit $8,000, lifetime learning credit
          of $1,000.
    23. Tax bill of $5,205, child tax credit of $6,000, earned income tax credit of $2,450.
    24. Tax bill of $11,300, child tax credit of $2,000, earned income tax credit of $650, child and dependent care credit
          of $4,000.
    25. Tax bill of $13,750, child tax credit of $2,000, earned income tax credit of $780, child and dependent care credit
          of $2,000.

In the following exercises, determine the SSI tax and the total FICA tax for the given incomes.
    26. Earning for pay period were $3,500.
    27. Earnings for pay period were $1,400.
    28. Earnings for pay period were $3,150.
    29. Earnings for the year were $135,000.
    30. Earnings for the year were $203,400.

In the following exercises, find the income tax owed using the taxable income and the tax table below, for a person
filing single.

                                    Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

1  0         $10,275   10%

2  $10,276   $41,775   12%

3  $41,776   $89,075   22%

4  $89,076   $170,050  24%

5  $170,051  $215,950  32%

6  $215,951  $539,900  35%

7  $539,901            37%

    31. Taxable income of $36,250.
    32. Taxable income of $63,500.
    33. Taxable income of $209,450.
    34. Taxable income of $92,250.

35. Alexandra is preparing her taxes. Her W-2 from work shows gross income for the year of $51,300. She also has a
      1099-INT for interest on a savings account for $910. Alexandra also deposited $2,750 into a tax-deferred
      retirement plan. She paid $2,150 in mortgage interest for the year and $2,060 in property taxes. Based on this
      information, how much tax does Alexandra owe or how much does she get in a refund?

36. Tymoteusz is preparing his taxes. His W-2 from work shows gross income for the year of $47,680. He also has a
      1099-MISC for some freelance consulting he did, amounting to $1,800. Tymoteusz deposited $3,000 into a tax-
      deferred retirement plan. He also qualified for $2,000 in child tax credits and $4,000 in child and dependent care
      tax credits. Based on this information, how much tax does Tymoteusz owe or how much does he get in a refund?
706 6 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

6.1 Understanding Percent

  · Percent
  · Fractional form
  · Decimal form
  · Total
  · Base
  · Percent of the total
  · Part
  · Amount

6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax

  · Discount
  · Cost
  · Markup
  · Retail price

6.3 Simple Interest

  · Interest
  · Principal
  · Annual percentage rate
  · Simple interest
  · Term
  · Due
  · Origination date
  · Payoff amount
  · Future value
  · Partial payment
  · Present value

6.4 Compound Interest

  · Compound interest
  · Effective annual yield

6.5 Making a Personal Budget

  · Budget
  · Necessary expenses
  · Fixed expenses
  · Variable expenses
  · 50-30-20 budget philosophy

6.6 Methods of Savings

  · Savings account
  · 1099 form
  · Certificate of deposit
  · Money market account
  · Return on investment
  · Ordinary annuity

6.7 Investments

  · Bonds
  · Maturity date
  · Stocks
  · Dividend
  · Mutual fund

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     6 · Chapter Summary 707

  · Prospectus
  · Issue price
  · Shares
  · Stock table
  · Individual retirement account
  · Roth IRA
  · 401(k)

6.8 The Basics of Loans

  · Fixed interest rate
  · Variable interest rate
  · Installment loan
  · Loan amortization
  · Revolving credit
  · Amortization table
  · Cost of finance

6.9 Understanding Student Loans

  · FAFSA
  · College funding gap
  · Subsidized loan
  · Unsubsidized loan
  · Parent loan for undergraduate students
  · Private student loan
  · School-channel loan
  · Direct-to-consumer loan
  · Standard repayment plan
  · Federal consolidation
  · Refinancing
  · Private consolidation
  · Graduated repayment plan
  · Extended repayment plan
  · Discretionary income
  · Pay as you earn (PAYE) repayment plan
  · Revised pay as you earn (REPAYE) repayment plan
  · Income-based (IBR) repayment plan
  · Income-contingent (ICR) repayment plan
  · Delinquent
  · Default
  · Rehabilitation

6.10 Credit Cards

  · Reward program
  · Annual fee
  · Credit limit
  · Bank-issued credit card
  · Store-issued credit card
  · Travel and entertainment cards
  · Charge cards
  · Billing period
  · Balance
  · Minimum payment
  · Average daily balance

6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car

  · Title and registration fees
  · Destination fee
  · Documentation fee
708 6 · Chapter Summary

  · Dealer preparation fee
  · Extended warranty
  · Down payment
  · Acquisition fee
  · Security deposit
  · Disposition fees
  · Liability insurance
  · Collision insurance
  · Comprehensive insurance
  · Uninsured or underinsured motorist insurance
  · Medical payment insurance
  · Personal injury insurance
  · Gap insurance
  · Rental reimbursement insurance

6.12 Renting and Homeownership

  · Lease
  · Landlord
  · Mortgage
  · Escrow account
  · Assessed value

6.13 Income Tax

  · Gross income
  · Adjusted gross income
  · Exemption
  · Taxable income
  · Deduction
  · Tax credit
  · Earned income credit
  · American opportunity credit
  · Lifetime learning credit
  · Child tax credit
  · Child and dependent care tax credit
  · Premium tax credit

Key Concepts

6.1 Understanding Percent

  · Know what a percent is as a fraction, a decimal, and as a part of the whole.
  · Use the percent equation to find any of the three values that are related by the equation.
  · Apply the percent equation in applications.

6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax

  · Discounts are markdowns from an original price.
  · Mark-ups are increases to the price paid by a retailer to cover their costs.
  · be able to calculate the markup based on a percentage of the cost
  · Sales taxes vary from state to state and often county to county.
  · Retail prices, sales prices and percent discounts can be calculated if the other two values are known.
  · Original costs, retail prices, and percent markup can be calculated if the other two values are known.
  · In calculations, sales tax acts like a markup.

6.3 Simple Interest

  · Interest is money that is paid by a borrower for the privilege of borrowing the money.
  · Simple interest is computed by substituting the principal, interest rate, and number of years into the formula

  · The payoff for a loan is the amount of principal remaining on a loan plus the interest that accumulated on the loan
      since the last payment.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      6 · Chapter Summary 709

  · The future value of an investment yielding simple interest is the original principal plus the interest earned on the
      investment.

  · When making a partial payment, some of the payment pays off all the accumulated interest, while the remainder of
      the payment is applied to the principal of the loan.

  · Finding the present value of an investment is used to determine how much should be invested now in order to
      achieve a specific goal.

6.4 Compound Interest

  · Compound interest means that the interest earned during one period will earn interest in later periods. Essentially,
      the amount of the principal grows from period to period.

  · The important values in computing compound interest are the interest rate, the principal, the length of time the
      investment, and the number of times the investment is compounded.

  · Compound interest has minimal impact early, but later has a very large impact.
  · You can determine how much to invest today in order to reach a goal for some time later.
  · Compound interest can be translated into an effective annual yield, which allows for comparison between

      investment options.

6.5 Making a Personal Budget

  · A budget is a set of guidelines for how to allocate your income.
  · Budgeting helps to plan for many of life's expenses
  · Budgets are used to compare income to expenses. When expenses exceed income, changes have to be made.
  · Budgets can help evaluate the affordability of life changes.
  · One guideline for setting a budget is the 50-30-20 budget philosophy. The guidelines suggest that 50% of income is

      allocated to necessary expenses, 30% to expenses that wants, and 20% to savings and other debt reduction.

6.6 Methods of Savings

  · There are three main types of savings accounts, saving accounts, certificates of deposit (CD), and money market
      accounts.

  · Savings account are very risk free, and so yield low interest rates.
  · The differences in the three types of savings accounts relate to their convenience.
  · Savings account typically have a lower interest rate that money market accounts, which typically have lower interest

      rates than CDs.
  · Ordinary annuities more accurately reflect how we save, in that money is deposited repeatedly over time.
  · Spreadsheet software, such as Google Sheets, have built in functions that can be used to quickly calculate both the

      future value of an ordinary annuity account, but also the payment necessary to reach a goal using an ordinary
      annuity.

6.7 Investments

  · There are many different investments with different returns and risks.
  · Bonds are loans form the purchaser to the entity selling the bond.
  · Bonds have some tax benefits, low to no risk, and a low return.
  · Stocks represent part ownership in a company. As such, stock holders share in the profits, and losses, of the

      company.
  · Information, including price, P/E, yearly highs and lows, and dividend amount can be found in online stock tables

      available on many websites.
  · Mutual funds represent collections of professionally administered investment vehicles. Have shares in a mutual

      fund has lower risk than ownership of stocks.
  · Retirement accounts employ some of the same strategies as mutual funds, in that they spread the risk and are

      professionally managed.
  · IRAs and Roth IRAs differ on when taxes are paid on the money, and who can use them. Roth IRAs have income

      limits while traditional IRAs do not.

6.8 The Basics of Loans

  · There are many reasons for a loan, but primarily it is taken out for a large expense when cash is not available.
  · Each payment for an installment loan consists of an interest portion and a principal portion.
  · There is a formula to calculate the payment necessary to pay off a loan in installments.
  · Amortization schedules, or tables, show how each payment is applied to principal and interest. It also includes other

      details such as remaining balance and total interest paid.
710 6 · Chapter Summary

  · Loans often have other fees associated with them such as origination fees or application fees. The total of the
      interest paid and the fees is the cost of finance.

6.9 Understanding Student Loans

  · The FAFSA must be filled out each year that a student wishes to borrow for.
  · A student's funding gap determines how much they need in loans to pay for college.
  · Federal subsidized student loans defer payments until after graduation and interest does not accrue on these loans.
  · Unsubsidized student loans defer payment until after graduation but interest begins accruing as soon as the loan

      finds are disbursed.
  · There are both yearly and aggregate limits for student loans to prevent over-borrowing, among other reasons.
  · Federal direct loans have a low interest rate set by the government, but other student loans have varying rates of

      interest set by the banks.
  · The standard repayment plan lasts 10 years and is made up of monthly payments.
  · Consolidating or refinancing student loans merges many student loans into one loan.
  · If only federal loans are consolidated, the interest rate is the same as the individual loans, currently set at 4.99%.
  · If other loans are refinanced together, the interest rate may be lower with the new loan.
  · Other repayment plans are available. Such a plan may have payment that start small and grow as the loan is paid

      off, or it may have a longer term, or may be based on the discretionary income of the student.
  · Being delinquent on a student loan is a precursor to being in default. Making payments in a timely fashion allows

      the student to avoid this situation.

6.10 Credit Cards

  · Credit cards can be a flexible way to pay for almost anything, but can become a financial hazard if used unwisely.
  · When deciding which credit card to apply for, evaluate the interest rate, fees (annual and late), reward programs and

      credit limit. Be sure they meet your criteria.
  · Paying off the balance of your credit card every month will control your spending and will never result in paying

      interest.
  · Credit card statements hold all important information about your credit card, including payment, balances, charges

      and billing cycle dates.
  · Although the minimum payment is attractive precisely because it is so small, paying only the minimum results is a

      long payoff term and higher interest costs.

6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car

  · There are many factors to consider when choosing to buy or lease a car.
  · The cost of the car is increased by a number of fees and sales tax.
  · There are advantages to buying a car and advantages to leasing a car. The decision between the two depends on

      the preference of the buyer.
  · Insurance covers costs associate with accidents. It is made up of various components.
  · The costs of owning a car, including insurance and maintenance, should be a part of the budgeting process.
  · Budgeting for unexpected repairs can ease the stress of encountering large repair bill.

6.12 Renting and Homeownership

  · There are many points of comparison between renting and buying a house.
  · Before deciding to buy a house, you should carefully consider all the responsibilities that come with home

      ownership.
  · Renting comes with more restrictions on the renter, but with fewer costs and is easier to move from.
  · Owning a house has more costs but has more freedom, plus the owner creates equity.
  · Mortgages are loans, and payments are calculated in the same way as any other loan.
  · Amortization tables help a homeowner understand the mortgage and how the payments are applied to the

      principal and interest.
  · In addition to paying the amount financed for a mortgage, the monthly payment will include an escrow payment,

      which covers insurance and taxes.

6.13 Income Tax

  · Federal income tax is based on income after certain adjustments.
  · Gross income is income from all sources, including gifts and winnings.
  · Before taxes are calculated, the taxable income is found by subtracting deductions and exemptions from gross

      income.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       6 · Chapter Summary 711

  · Income tax is progressive, increasing in rate as income increases.
  · Being in the 32% tax bracket means some of your income is taxed at 10%, some at 12%, some at 22%, some at 24%,

      and the rest at 32%.
  · Income in each tax bracket is taxed at that bracket's rate, which means in 2022 the first $10,275 earned is taxed at

      10% only.
  · Tax credits are subtracted from the taxes that are owed.
  · Some tax credits are refundable, which means they can make the amount you owe negative, which results in a

      refund.

Videos

6.1 Understanding Percent

  · Finding Percent of a Total (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem1)
  · Finding the Total from the Percent and the Part (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem2)
  · Finding the Percent When the Total and the Part Are Known (https://openstax.org/r/solve_percent_problem3)

6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax

  · Computing Price Based on a Percent Off Coupon (https://openstax.org/r/Computing_Price_Based)
  · Finding Sales Tax Percentage (https://openstax.org/r/Finding_Sales_Tax)

6.4 Compound Interest

  · Compound Interest (https://openstax.org/r/compound_interest_beginners)
  · Compare Simple Interest to Interest Compounded Annually (https://openstax.org/r/

      compare_simple_compound_interest1)
  · Compare Simple Interest and Compound Interest for Different Number of Periods Per Year (https://openstax.org/r/

      compare_simple_compound_interest2)

6.5 Making a Personal Budget

  · Creating a Budget (https://openstax.org/r/creating_budget)
  · 50-30-20 Budget Philosophy (https://openstax.org/r/50-30-20_budgeting_rule)

6.6 Methods of Savings

  · Return on Investment, ROI (https://openstax.org/r/This_video)
  · Future Value Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/cell_references)

6.7 Investments

  · Bonds (https://openstax.org/r/investing_basics_bonds)
  · Reading Stock Summary Online (https://openstax.org/r/Reading_Stock)
  · Mutual Funds (https://openstax.org/r/investing_basics_mutual_funds)
  · 401(k) Accounts (https://openstax.org/r/401(k)s)

6.8 The Basics of Loans

  · Credit Scores Explained (https://openstax.org/r/credit_scores_explained)
  · Reading an Amortization Table (https://openstax.org/r/Amortization_Table)

6.9 Understanding Student Loans

  · Types of Student Loans (https://openstax.org/r/Student_Loans)
  · Repayment Plans (https://openstax.org/r/student_loan_repayment_plans)

6.10 Credit Cards

  · Choosing a Credit Card (https://openstax.org/r/Credit_Card)
  · Reading Credit Card Statements (https://openstax.org/r/Reading_Credit)

6.12 Renting and Homeownership

  · Rent or Buy (https://openstax.org/r/Rent_or_Buy)
  · Closing Costs (https://openstax.org/r/closing_costs)
712 6 · Chapter Summary

6.13 Income Tax

  · Deductions Versus Credits (https://openstax.org/r/Versus_Credits)
  · Tax Brackets (https://openstax.org/r/Brackets)

Formula Review

6.1 Understanding Percent

part = percent x total

6.2 Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax

6.3 Simple Interest

6.4 Compound Interest

6.6 Methods of Savings

6.7 Investments

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 6 · Chapter Summary 713

6.8 The Basics of Loans
6.9 Understanding Student Loans

6.10 Credit Cards
6.11 Buying or Leasing a Car

6.12 Renting and Homeownership

Projects

Creating Your Future Budget

In this project, you will create a budget based on a job you are likely to have after you graduate.
 1. Go online and research the average starting salary for the profession you are studying for. Use at least two sources.

      Be sure to record the web address from your search.
 2. Approximate your monthly take-home pay. You may use the SmartAsset (https://openstax.org/r/

      paycheck_calculator) website to estimate this.
 3. Use the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to determine how much you should budget for needs, wants and savings, or

      extra debt reduction.
 4. Create a list of likely expenses. This list must include rent/mortgage, utilities, food, and school loan repayment. You

      may also want to include car payments, gasoline, and other items.
 5. Categorize each expense as need, want, or savings.
 6. Using the amounts found in step 3, decide how much to allocate to each of your expenses. It may help to quickly

      research how much rent is where you want to live.
 7. Discuss the choices you had to make, and why you prioritized some expenses over others.

Interest Rate and Time: What Is the Relationship?

The interplay between interest rate and time for an annuity is not easily seen. How the amount that must be deposited
per compounding period, , changes based on the time and interest rate would be useful to understand. In this
project, you will explore this relationship. We will use a fixed future value of = $1,000,000 and a fixed number of
periods per year, 12 (monthly compounding). With those, we'll find various annuity payments that must be made to
714 6 · Chapter Summary

reach the goal.
The annual interest rate for the investment is in the top row. The number of years for the investment is in the left
column. In each cell (or box), find the monthly payment necessary to reach the goal of $1,000,000.

                                                                                         Annual Interest Rate
                                                                       1.5% 2.0% 3.0% 5.0% 7.5% 10.0%
                                 Number of Years 10
                                                               15
                                                               20
                                                               30
                                                               40
                                                               45

Describe how the interest rates and number of years impact the payment necessary to reach the goal of $1,000,000.

Finding a Home

In this project you will identify a home you like, and then estimate the costs associated with that home.
 1. Find a home in your region that you would like to buy using an online search of listings in your area. Zillow is a good

      place to begin.
 2. Find the asking price for this home. Assume you would pay that price.
 3. Find an estimation for closing costs in your area. Assume you finance those costs also.
 4. Estimate the taxes to be paid on the home per year. It is likely that the online listing of the home has an estimate for

      the taxes for the house.
 5. Use Google to determine the average homeowner's insurance cost in your region.
 6. Use the internet to determine the average interest rate for a 30-year mortgage.
 7. Find how much you would pay per month, based on the answers to the previous questions, including the escrow

      payments for taxes and insurance.
 8. Assume you will pay $50 per $100,000 borrowed in PMI. Add this to the monthly payment.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       6 · Chapter Summary 715

Chapter Review

Understanding Percent
 1. Convert 0.45 to percent form.

 2. What is 70% of 200?

 3. Rewrite the fraction as a percentage.

 4. 20 is what percent of 500?

Discounts, Markups, and Sales Tax
 5. An item with a retail price of $250.00 is on sale for 30% off. What is the sale price of the item? Round to the nearest
      penny.

 6. The sales price of an item is $38.50 after a 40% discount. What was the retail price of the item? Round to the
      nearest penny.

 7. A retailer buys an item for $1,000.00 and has a 65% markup. What is the retail price of the item? Round to the
      nearest penny.

 8. The sale price of an item is $46.00 and the retail price is $65.00. What is the percent discount? Round to two
      decimal places.

 9. The retail price of an item is $345.38 and sales tax in the region is 8.25%. How much is the sales tax?

Simple Interest
10. $3,000 is invested in a 5-year CD earning 2.25% interest. How much is the CD worth in 5 years?

11. A $4,000.00 simple interest loan is taken out for 3 years at 12.5%. How much is owed when the loan comes due?

12. A $10,000 loan with annual simple interest of 14.9% is taken out for 90 days. How much is due in 90 days?

13. A simple interest loan for $20,000 is taken out at 13.9% annual interest rate. A partial payment of $13,500.00 is
      made 30 days into the loan period. After this payment, what will the remaining balance be?

14. Find the present value of an investment with future value of $15,000 if the investment earns 3.55% simple interest
      for 10 years?

Compound Interest
15. Find the future value after 20 years of $15,000 deposited in an account bearing 4.26% interest compounded

      quarterly.

16. What is the effective annual yield for an account bearing 3.21% interest compounded quarterly? Round to two
      decimal places if necessary.

17. Find the present value of $100,000 in an account bearing 5.25% interest compounded daily after 30 years.

Making a Personal Budget
18. In budgeting, what is the difference between an expense that is a need and an expense that is a want?

19. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to a monthly income of $6,000.00.

20. Create the budget for a person with the following income and bills, and determine how much the income exceeds
      or falls short of the expenses:
      Job = $5,250, Side job = $550, rent = $1,150.00, utilities = $150.00, internet = $39.99, student loans = $375.00, food
      = $550.00, bus and subway = $112.00, credit cards = $200.00, entertainment = $400.00, clothing = $150.00.

21. In question 20, the budget for a person was created. Can the person afford to buy a car if the monthly payments
      will be $365.50, monthly car insurance will be $114.75, and gasoline will be $200.00?

Methods of Savings
22. Why is a CD less flexible than a money market account?

23. Which is likely to have the highest interest rate, a savings account, CD, or money market account?

24. $3,000 is deposited in a money market account bearing 3.88% interest compounded monthly. How much is the
      account worth in 15 years?

25. Refer to question 24. What is the return on investment for the money market account? Round to two decimal
716 6 · Chapter Summary

      places, if necessary.
26. $300 is deposited monthly in an ordinary annuity that bears 6.5% interest compounded monthly. How much is in

      the annuity after 30 years?
27. How much must be deposited quarterly in an account bearing 4.89% interest compounded quarterly for 30 years

      so the account has a future value of $500,000?
Investments
28. Why is investing in a stock riskier than in a mutual fund?
29. Which investment offers high rates of return with reduced risk?
30. Which investment offer a fixed rate of return over time?
31. Which is the riskiest investment?
32. How much is earned on a 10-year bond with issue price of $1,000 that pays 3.9% annually?
33. Henri's employer matches up to 6% of salary for IRA contributions. Henri's annual income is $52,500. If Henri

      wants to deposit $3,000 annually in his IRA, how much in matching funds does the employer deposit in the IRA?
34. How much must be deposited quarterly in a mutual fund that is expected to earn 11.2% interest compounded

      quarterly if the account is to be worth $1,000,000 after 38 years?
35. Lorraine purchases stocks for $5,000. The stocks paid dividends by reinvesting the dividends in stock. She sold the

      stock for $13,750 after 6 years. What was Lorraine's annual return on that investment? Round to two decimal
      places if necessary.
36. What are two ways stocks earn money?
The Basics of Loans
37. What is an installment loan?
38. An installment loan with monthly payments has an outstanding balance of $3,560. If the annual interest rate is 9%,
      how much interest will be paid that month?
39. A loan for $42,000 is taken out for 6 years at 7.5% interest. What are the payments for that loan?
40. The total interest paid on a loan was $4,500. The loan had an origination fee of $400.00, a $125.00 processing fee,
      and a filing fee of $250.00. How much was the cost of financing for that loan?
41. Using the amortization table below, what is the remaining balance after payment 25?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       6 · Chapter Summary 717

Understanding Student Loans
42. If a college program takes 5 years, how long is the student's eligibility period for student loans?
43. What is the funding gap for a student with cost of college equal to $35,750 and non-loan financial aid of $24,150?
44. What is the maximum amount of federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans for a dependent student in their third

      year of an undergraduate data science program?
45. A single person has gross income of $28,500. Their poverty guideline is $12,000. What is their discretionary

      income?
Credit Cards
46. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from March 15 to April 14. The balance at the start of the billing cycle is

      $450.00. The list of transactions on the card is below. Find the average daily balance for the billing cycle.
718 6 · Chapter Summary

                                 Date    Activity       Amount

                                 15-Mar Billing Date Balance $450.00

                                 21-Mar  Movie          $50.00

                                 28-Mar  Gasoline       $65.00

                                 31-Mar  Snacks         $15.50

                                 1-Apr   Dinner         $63.60

                                 1-Apr   Payment        $300.00

                                 1-Apr   Gasoline       $48.90

                                 9-Apr   Plane Tickets  $288.50

47. The average daily balance for Greg's last credit card statement was $1,403.50. The card charges 15.9% interest. If
      the billing cycle for that statement was 30 days, how much interest is Greg charged?

48. The billing cycle for a credit card goes from March 15 to April 14. The balance at the start of the billing cycle is
      $450.00. The list of transactions on the card is below. The interest rate is 15.9%. What is the balance due at the end
      of the billing cycle?

                                 Date    Activity       Amount

                                 15-Mar Billing Date Balance $450.00

                                 21-Mar  Movie          $50.00

                                 28-Mar  Gasoline       $65.00

                                 31-Mar  Snacks         $15.50

                                 1-Apr   Dinner         $63.60

                                 1-Apr   Payment        $300.00

                                 1-Apr   Gasoline       $48.90

                                 9-Apr   Plane Tickets  $288.50

Buying or Leasing a Car
49. Name three common fees when leasing a car.

50. Name three common fees when buying a car.

51. If the cost of a car is $35,500, and the residual value of the car after 3 years is $27,800, what is the monthly
      depreciation for the car?

52. What is the annual interest rate if the money factor is 0.000045?

53. What is the payment for a lease on a car if the price of the car is $29,900, the residual price of the car is $16,500,
      the lease is for 24 months, and the APR is 8.9%?

Access for free at openstax.org
                            6 · Chapter Summary 719

Renting and Homeownership
54. Name two advantages of renting a residence.

55. Name two advantages of buying a home.

56. What is PMI?

57. What are the monthly payments for a 25-year mortgage for $165,000 at 4.8% interest, not including escrow?

58. What are the monthly payments, including escrow, for a 25-year mortgage for $165,000 at 4.8% interest, if the
      property taxes are $5,200 annually, the homeowner's insurance is $825 every 6 months, and the PMI is $45 per
      month?

Income Tax
59. What is the maximum gift that a person can receive that is an exemption on federal income taxes?

60. Find the gross income if a person earns $51,500 at their full-time job, they earn $5,300 for contracted services, and
      $5,000 in gambling winnings.

61. Find adjusted gross income for a person with a gross income of $67,850, if they had a $2,000 gift, they paid $1,000
      in mortgage interest, $4,250 in property taxes, and they contributed $750 to a qualifying charity.

62. How much SSI is paid by a person with an annual income of $183,500?

63. How much in FICA taxes are paid from a person's paycheck with gross income of $3,450?

64. How much in federal income tax does a person filing single pay if their taxable income is $205,240? Use the tax
      table below.

                                       Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

1  0         $10,275   10%

2  $10,276   $41,775   12%

3  $41,776   $89,075   22%

4  $89,076   $170,050  24%

5  $170,051  $215,950  32%

6  $215,951  $539,900  35%

7  $539,901            37%

Chapter Test

 1. 45 is what percent of 180?
 2. Find 47% of 31. Round to two decimal places.
 3. What is the sale price of a $90 shirt if there is a 25% discount for the shirt?
 4. A small boutique buys purses for $27.50 per purse. What is the boutique's retail price for the purses if they add a

      90% markup?
 5. What was the discount on a computer is the retail price was $1,200 and the sale price is $950? Round to two

      decimal places if necessary.
 6. A 15% simple interest loan of $2,000 is taken out for 75 days. How much is owed when the loan is due?
 7. What is the future value of a $15,000 investment made at 4.65% interest compounded yearly for 10 years?
 8. Apply the 50-30-20 budget philosophy to a monthly income of $3,920.
720 6 · Chapter Summary

 9. $2,500 is deposited in an account that bears 5.25% interest compounded quarterly for 15 years. What is the return
      on investment for that investment? Round to two decimal places if necessary.

10. How much per month must be paid into an ordinary annuity so its future value is $150,000 after 10 years if the
      annuity earns 3.85% interest compounded monthly?

11. Bethanie's employer matches up to 7% of annual salary for deposits into the company sponsored IRA. Bethanie
      earns $62,400 annually. She deposits $8,000 annually inter her IRA. How much does the company deposit in
      Bethanie's IRA?

12. If $360 is deposited monthly in a mutual fund that is expected to earn 9.35% compounded monthly, how much will
      the mutual fund be worth after 23 years?

13. A $14,250, 4-year loan is taken out at 9.15% interest. What are the monthly payments for the loan?
14. Using the amortization table below, how much total interest has been paid after payment 20?

15. What is the maximum amount of federal subsidized and unsubsidized loans per year for an independent student
      in a graduate program?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            6 · Chapter Summary 721

16. Braden takes out a private student loan for $6,250 in his second year of his undergraduate IT program. He begins
      paying the loan after 39 months. If Braden's interest rate was 8%, how much is his balance when he begins to pay
      off the loan?

17. The billing cycle for Therese's credit card is July 7 to August 6 (31 days). The interest rate on the card is 17.9%. The
      balance on her card at the start of the billing cycle is $925.00. The table below has her transactions for the billing
      cycle. What is her balance due at the end of the cycle?

   Date       Activity    Amount

   7-Jul Billing Date Balance $925.00

   10-Jul     Child Care  $850.00

   10-Jul     Gasoline    $51.00

   12-Jul     Food        $135.50

   18-Jul     Payment     $750.00

   18-Jul     Pizza       $35.00

   18-Jul     Gift        $25.00

   21-Jul     Food        $121.75

   30-Jul     Gasoline    $47.50

   1-Aug Department store $173.00

   4-Aug      Food        $98.00

18. The cost of a car is $45,750. The residual price after 2 years is $28,822.50. What is the monthly depreciation for the
      car?

19. Find the payment for a 3-year lease on a car if the price of the car is $30,000, the residual price of the car is
      $20,000, and the APR is 8.5%.

20. What are the monthly payments, excluding escrow, for a 20-year mortgage for $131,500 at 5.15% interest?

21. What are the monthly payments, including escrow, for a 20-year mortgage for $131,500 at 5.15% interest, with
      property taxes of $3,170 per year and homeowner's insurance of $715 every 6 months?

22. If a person earns $2700 gross on a paycheck, how much is taken out in FICA taxes?

23. Find the taxable income for a person who has $81,200 in earnings, $1,250 reported on a 1099-INT for a savings
      account, $5,400 reported on a 1099-MISC for a contract job they did, paid $5,250 in mortgage interest, paid $4,700
      in property taxes, and has $4,200 in bond interest.

24. Find the federal income tax owed by a person filing single who has a taxable income of $114,750. Use the table
      below to determine the taxes.

                                       Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

1          0              $10,275      10%

2  $10,276                $41,775      12%
722 6 · Chapter Summary

                                 Bracket Lower Income Limit Upper Income Limit Tax Rate

                                 3  $41,776   $89,075   22%

                                 4  $89,076   $170,050  24%

                                 5  $170,051  $215,950  32%

                                 6  $215,951  $539,900  35%

                                 7  $539,901            37%

25. If a person owes $20,000 in federal income tax, but qualifies for $4,000 in child tax credit and $8,000 for child and
      dependent care credit, how much federal tax does the person actually pay?

Access for free at openstax.org
                7 · Introduction 723

7  PROBABILITY

Figure 7.1 Roulette is a game whose outcomes are based entirely on the concept of probability. (credit: modification of
work "Roulette wheel" by Håkan Dahlström/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 The Multiplication Rule for Counting
  7.2 Permutations
  7.3 Combinations
  7.4 Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes
  7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability
  7.6 Probability with Permutations and Combinations
  7.7 What Are the Odds?
  7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability
  7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule
  7.10 The Binomial Distribution
  7.11 Expected Value

      Introduction

Casinos are big business; according to the American Gaming Association, commercial casinos in the United States
brought in over $43 billion in revenue in 2019. Casinos must walk a fine line in order to be profitable. Their customers
must lose more money than they win, on average, in order to stay in business. But if the chances of a single customer
winning more money than they lose is too small, people will stop coming in the door to play the games.

In this chapter, we'll study the techniques a casino must use to determine how likely it is that a customer will win a
particular game, and then how the casino decides how much money a winner will rake in so that the customers are
happy, but the casino also turns a profit in the long run. In order to figure out those likelihoods, we have to be able to
somehow consider every possible outcome of these games. For example, in a game that involves players receiving 5
cards from a deck of 52, there are 2,598,960 possibilities for each player. We'll start off this chapter by learning how to
count those possible outcomes.
724 7 · Probability

    7.1 The Multiplication Rule for Counting

Figure 7.2 The Multiplication Rule for Counting allows us to compute more complicated probabilities, like drawing two
aces from a deck. (credit: "Pair of Aces - Poker" by Poker Photos/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Apply the Multiplication Rule for Counting to solve problems.

One of the first bits of mathematical knowledge children learn is how to count objects by pointing to them in turn and
saying: "one, two, three, ..." That's a useful skill, but when the number of things that we need to count grows large, that
method becomes onerous (or, for very large numbers, impossible for humans to accomplish in a typical human lifespan).
So, mathematicians have developed short cuts to counting big numbers. These techniques fall under the mathematical
discipline of combinatorics, which is devoted to counting.

Multiplication as a Combinatorial Short Cut

One of the first combinatorial short cuts to counting students learn in school has to do with areas of rectangles. If we
have a set of objects to be counted that can be physically arranged into a rectangular shape, then we can use
multiplication to do the counting for us. Consider this set of objects (Figure 7.3):

                                                                              Figure 7.3

Certainly we can count them by pointing and running through the numbers, but it's more efficient to group them (Figure
7.4).

                                            Figure 7.4

If we group the balls by 4s, we see that we have 6 groups (or, we can see this arrangement as 4 groups of 6 balls). Since

multiplication is repeated addition (i.e.,              ), we can use this grouping to quickly see that there

are 24 balls.

Let's generalize this idea a little bit. Let's say that we're visiting a bakery that offers customized cupcakes. For the cake,
we have three choices: vanilla, chocolate, and strawberry. Each cupcake can be topped with one of four types of frosting:
vanilla, chocolate, lemon, and strawberry. How many different cupcake combinations are possible? We can think of
laying out all the possibilities in a grid, with cake choices defining the rows and frosting choices defining the columns

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   7.1 · The Multiplication Rule for Counting 725

(Figure 7.5).

                       Figure 7.5

Since there are 3 rows (cakes) and 4 columns (frostings), we have  possible combinations. This is the reasoning

behind the Multiplication Rule for Counting, which is also known as the Fundamental Counting Principle. This rule says

that if there are ways to accomplish one task and ways to accomplish a second task, then there are  ways to

accomplish both tasks. We can tack on additional tasks by multiplying the number of ways to accomplish those tasks to

our previous product.

EXAMPLE 7.1

Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting
Every card in a standard deck of cards has two identifying characteristics: a suit (clubs, diamonds, hearts, or spades;
these are indicated by these symbols, respectively: , , , ) and a rank (ace, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, jack, queen, and
king; the letters A, J, Q, and K are used to represent the words). Each possible pair of suit and rank appears exactly once
in the deck. How many cards are in the standard deck?

     Solution                                                      (Figure 7.6).
Since there are 4 suits and 13 ranks, the number of cards must be
726 7 · Probability

       Figure 7.6 Standard Deck of Cards, Sorted by Rank and Suit (credit: "Playing Cards, USS Arkansas" by Naval History &
       Heritage Command/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

               YOUR TURN 7.1
         1. Joe's Pizza Shack offers pizzas with 4 different types of crust and a choice of 15 toppings. How many different

              one-topping pizzas can be made at Joe's?
         EXAMPLE 7.2
       Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting for 4 Groups
       The University Combinatorics Club has 31 members: 8 seniors, 7 juniors, 5 sophomores, and 11 first-years. How many
       possible 4-person committees can be formed by selecting 1 member from each class?

            Solution
       Since we have 8 choices for the senior, 7 choices for the junior, 5 for the sophomore, and 11 for the first-year, there are

                                        different ways to fill out the committee.

               YOUR TURN 7.2
         1. The menu for Joe's Pizza Shack offers pizzas with 4 different types of crust and a choice of 15 toppings. Suppose

              that Joe's also offers a choice of 3 sauces and 2 cheese blends. How many different one-topping pizzas can be
              made at Joe's now?
         EXAMPLE 7.3
       Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting for More Groups
       The standard license plates for vehicles in a certain state consist of 6 characters: 3 letters followed by 3 digits. There are
       26 letters in the alphabet and 10 digits (0 through 9) to choose from. How many license plates can be made using this
       format?
            Solution
       Since there are 26 different letters and 10 different digits, the total number of possible license plates is

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  7.1 · The Multiplication Rule for Counting 727

                                                             .

        YOUR TURN 7.3

  1. At a certain college, ID cards are issued to all students, faculty, and staff. These cards have unique ID codes for
      each person: a letter to indicate the person's status (S for students, F for faculty, and E for staff), followed by 5
      digits and finally 3 letters (these letters can be anything). How many different ID codes can be created using this
      scheme?

Check Your Understanding

 1. A website that lets you build custom belts has 18 different buckles and 30 different straps. How many different
      belts can be made using those materials?

 2. A chain of chicken restaurants offers a combo that includes your choice of 3 or 5 chicken strips, along with your
      choice of side dish. If there are 7 side dishes, how many different ways are there to build this combo meal?

 3. When you flip a coin, there are 2 possible outcomes: heads and tails. Let's say you flip a coin 10 times, and after
      each you write down the result of the flip (H for heads, T for tails). How many different results (strings of 10
      characters, where each is either an H or a T) are possible?

 4. A T-shirt company allows shoppers to customize their shirts in several ways. There are 5 sizes, 8 shirt colors, 4
      designs, and 5 design colors. How many different shirts can be made?

 5. Josephine is trying to build her class schedule for next semester. Because of her work schedule, she has only 4
      class periods that can work for her, and she must take 4 classes. If there are 15 classes that she could take during
      the first period, 18 during the second, 12 during the third, and 8 during the fourth, how many different schedules
      could Josephine build?

        SECTION 7.1 EXERCISES

An ice-cream parlor sells 26 different flavors of ice cream. A basic sundae has one scoop of any flavor of ice cream, your
choice of one of 3 sauces, and any one of 8 different toppings.

     1. How many different basic sundaes are possible?
     2. The ice-cream parlor also sells a medium sundae. The options are the same except it starts with 2 scoops of ice

          cream, which can be the same flavor or different flavors. How many different medium sundaes are there?
     3. The ice-cream parlor also sells a large sundae. The choice of a large sundae allows you to choose any 3 scoops

          of ice cream, any 2 sauces (they can be the same, or you can choose 2 different ones), and any 3 toppings (that
          might be 3 servings of the same topping, or 2 servings of one topping and a single serving of another, or 3
          different toppings). How many different large sundaes are possible?

 4. A company that builds custom computers offers 4 hard drive sizes, 4 memory sizes, 3 graphics cards, and 3 display
      options. How many computer configurations do they offer, if customers choose one of each customization?

 5. A video game allows users to customize their avatars. There are 12 hair styles that users may choose from, as well
      as 5 hair colors, 8 skin tones, 24 shirts, 12 pants, and 8 shoes. How many different avatars are possible?

 6. A small company has 3 divisions: Sales, Research and Development, and Manufacturing. One person from each
      division will be chosen to create an advisory board for the management group. If there are 8 people in Sales, 15 in
      Research and Development, and 48 in Manufacturing, how many different compositions of the advisory board are
      possible?

 7. A multiple-choice quiz has 5 questions, each of which has 4 possible answers. How many different ways are there
      to respond to this quiz?

 8. The teacher decides to make the quiz from above a little harder by offering 5 responses on each of the 5 questions.
      How many ways are there to respond to this quiz?

 9. In the United States, radio and television broadcast stations are assigned unique identifiers known as call signs.
      Call signs consist of 4 letters. The first is either K or W (generally speaking, stations with a K call sign are west of
728 7 · Probability

             the Mississippi River and stations with a W call sign are east of the river, though there are several exceptions to this
             rule); the remaining 3 letters can be anything. How many possible call signs are there under this system?
       10. Little sister has asked big brother to play a new game she's invented. It uses a modified deck of cards with 3 suits
             and only the numbered cards (those with rank 2 through 10). How many cards are in her deck?
       11. The board game Mastermind has 2 players. One of them is designated the codemaker who creates a code that
             consists of a series of 4 colors (indicated in the game with 4 colored pegs), which may contain repeats. The other
             player, who is the codebreaker, tries to guess the code. If there are 6 colors that the codemaker can use to make
             the code, how many possible codes can be made?

    7.2 Permutations

       Figure 7.7 We can use permutations to calculate the number of different orders of finish in an Olympic swimming heat.
       (credit: "London 2012 Olympics Park Stratford London" by Gary Bembridge/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Use the Multiplication Rule for Counting to determine the number of permutations.
        2. Compute expressions containing factorials.
        3. Compute permutations.
        4. Apply permutations to solve problems.
       Swimming events are some of the most popular events at the summer Olympic Games. In the finals of each event, 8
       swimmers compete at the same time, making for some exciting finishes. How many different orders of finish are
       possible in these events? In this section, we'll extend the Multiplication Rule for Counting to help answer questions like
       this one, which relate to permutations. A permutation is an ordered list of objects taken from a given population. The
       length of the list is given, and the list cannot contain any repeated items.

     Applying the Multiplication Rule for Counting to Permutations

       In the case of the swimming finals, one possible permutation of length 3 would be the list of medal winners (first,
       second, and third place finishers). A permutation of length 8 would be the full order of finish (first place through eighth
       place). Let's use the Multiplication Rule for Counting to figure out how many of each of these permutations there are.

         EXAMPLE 7.4
       Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting to Find the Number of Permutations
       The final heat of Olympic swimming events features 8 swimmers (or teams of swimmers).
        1. How many different podium placements (first place, second place, and third place) are possible?
        2. How many different complete orders of finish (first place through eighth place) are possible?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           7.2 · Permutations 729

Solution

1. Let's start with the first place finisher. How many options are there? Since 8 swimmers are competing, there are 8

possibilities. Once that first swimmer completes the race, there are 7 swimmers left competing for second place.

After the second finisher is decided, there are 6 swimmers remaining who could possibly finish in third place. Thus,

there are 8 possibilities for first place, 7 for second place, and 6 for third place. The Multiplication Rule for Counting

then tells us there are  different ways the winners' podium can be filled out.

2. To look at the complete order of finish, we can continue the pattern we can see in part 1 of this example: There are 5

possibilities for fourth place, 4 for fifth place, 3 for sixth place, 2 for seventh place, and then just 1 swimmer is left to

finish in eighth place. Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting, we see that there are

                         possible orders of finish.

        YOUR TURN 7.4

  1. You have a hand of 5 cards (that happen to create what's called a royal flush in the game of poker): 10 , J , Q ,
      K , and A . Into how many different orders can you put those cards?

Factorials

The pattern we see in Example 7.4 occurs commonly enough that we have a name for it: factorial.
For any positive whole number , we define the factorial of (denoted and read " factorial") to be the product of
every whole number less than or equal to . We also define 0! to be equal to one. We will use factorials in a couple of
different contexts, so let's get some practice doing computations with them.

  EXAMPLE 7.5

Computing Factorials
Compute the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1.
 2. There are two ways to approach this calculation. The first way is to compute the factorials first, then divide:

      However, there is an easier way! You may notice in the second step that there are several terms that can be
      canceled; that's always the case whenever we divide factorials. In this case, notice that we can rewrite the numerator
      like this:

      With that in mind, we can proceed this way by canceling out the 6!:

     That's much easier!

3. Let's approach this one using our canceling technique. When we see two factorials in either the numerator or
     denominator, we should focus on the larger one first. So:
730 7 · Probability

      YOUR TURN 7.5

Compute the following:
    1.
    2.
    3.

Permutations

As we've seen, factorials can pop up when we're computing permutations. In fact, there is a formula that we can use to

make that connection explicit. Let's define some notation first. If we have a collection of objects and we wish to create

an ordered list of of the objects (where  ), we'll call the number of those permutations (read "the number

of permutations of objects taken at a time"). We formalize the formula we'll use to compute permutations below.

FORMULA

If you wondered why we defined   earlier, it was to make formulas like this one work; if we have  objects and want

to order all of them (so, we want the number of permutations of objects taken at a time), we get

                                 . Next, we'll get some practice computing these permutations.

  EXAMPLE 7.6

Computing Permutations
Find the following numbers:

 1. The number of permutations of 12 objects taken 3 at a time
 2. The number of permutations of 8 objects taken 5 at a time
 3. The number of permutations of 32 objects taken 2 at a time

     Solution

1.

2.

3.

        YOUR TURN 7.6

  Find the following numbers:
      1. The number of permutations of 6 objects taken 2 at a time
      2. The number of permutations of 14 objects taken 4 at a time
      3. The number of permutations of 19 objects taken 3 at a time

  EXAMPLE 7.7

Applying Permutations
 1. A high school graduating class has 312 students. The top student is declared valedictorian, and the second-best is

      named salutatorian. How many possible outcomes are there for the valedictorian and salutatorian?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              7.2 · Permutations 731

2. In the card game blackjack, the dealer's hand of 2 cards is dealt with 1 card faceup and 1 card facedown. If the game
     is being played with a single deck of (52) cards, how many possible hands could the dealer get?

3. The University Combinatorics Club has 3 officers: president, vice president, and treasurer. If there are 18 members
     of the club, how many ways are there to fill the officer positions?

Solution

1. This is the number of permutations of 312 students taken 2 at a time, and               .

2. We want the number of permutations of 52 cards taken 2 at a time, and                .

3. Here we're looking for the number of permutations of 18 members taken 3 at a time, and     .

      YOUR TURN 7.7

1. One of the big draws at this year's state fair is the pig race. There are 15 entrants, and prizes are given to the top
    three finishers. How many different combinations of top-three finishes could there be?

WHO KNEW?

Very Big Permutations

Permutations involving relatively small sets of objects can get very big, very quickly. A standard deck contains 52

cards. So, the number of different ways to shuffle the cards--in other words, the number of permutations of 52

objects taken 52 at a time--is  (written out, that's an 8 followed by 67 zeroes). The estimated age of the

universe is only about          seconds. So, if a very bored all-powerful being started shuffling cards at the instant

the universe began, it would have to have averaged at least                   shuffles per second since the

beginning of time to have covered every possible arrangement of a deck of cards. That means the next time you pick
up a deck of cards and give it a good shuffle, it's almost certain that the particular arrangement you created has never
been created before and likely never will be created again.

Check Your Understanding

 6. Compute 5!.
 7. Compute .

8. Compute    .

9. Compute .

10. The standard American edition of the board game Monopoly has a deck of 15 orange Chance cards. In how many
      different ways could the first 4 Chance cards drawn in a game appear?

        SECTION 7.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, give a whole number that's equal to the given expression.
     1. 3!
     2. 9!
     3.
     4.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
732 7 · Probability

           11.
           12.
           13.
           14.
       The following exercises are about the card game euchre, which uses a partial standard deck of cards: It only has the
       cards with ranks 9, 10, J, Q, K, and A for a total of 24 cards. Some variations of the game use the 8s or the 7s and 8s, but
       we'll stick with the 24-card version.
           15. A euchre hand contains 5 cards. How many ways are there to receive a 5-card hand (where the order in which

                  the cards are received matters, i.e., 9 , J , , , is different from J , 9 , , ?
           16. After all 4 players get their hands, the remaining 4 cards are placed facedown in the center of the table. How

                  many arrangements of 4 cards are there from this deck?
           17. Euchre is played with partners. How many ways are there for 2 partners to receive 5-card hands (where the

                  order in which the cards are received matters)?
           18. How many different arrangements of the full euchre deck are possible (i.e., how many different shuffles are

                  there)?
       The following exercises involve a horse race with 13 entrants.

           19. How many possible complete orders of finish are there?
           20. An exacta bet is one where the player tries to predict the top two finishers in order. How many possible exacta

                  bets are there for this race?
           21. A trifecta bet is one where the player tries to predict the top three finishers in order. How many possible trifecta

                  bets are there for this race?
           22. A superfecta bet is one where the player tries to predict the top four finishers in order. How many possible

                  superfecta bets are there for this race?

    7.3 Combinations

       Figure 7.8 Combinations help us count things like the number of possible card hands, when the order in which the cards
       were drawn doesn't matter. (credit: "IMG_3177" by Zanaca/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Distinguish between permutation and combination uses.
        2. Compute combinations.
        3. Apply combinations to solve applications.
       In Permutations, we studied permutations, which we use to count the number of ways to generate an ordered list of a
       given length from a group of objects. An important property of permutations is that the order of the list matters: The
       results of a race and the selection of club officers are examples of lists where the order is important. In other situations,
       the order is not important. For example, in most card games where a player receives a hand of cards, the order in which
       the cards are received is irrelevant; in fact, players often rearrange the cards in a way that helps them keep the cards
       organized.

     Combinations: When Order Doesn't Matter

       In situations in which the order of a list of objects doesn't matter, the lists are no longer permutations. Instead, we call

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   7.3 · Combinations 733

them combinations.

  EXAMPLE 7.8

Distinguishing Between Permutations and Combinations
For each of the following situations, decide whether the chosen subset is a permutation or a combination.

 1. A social club selects 3 members to form a committee. Each of the members has an equal share of responsibility.
 2. You are prompted to reset your email password; you select a password consisting of 10 characters without repeats.
 3. At a dog show, the judge must choose first-, second-, and third-place finishers from a group of 16 dogs.
 4. At a restaurant, the special of the day comes with the customer's choice of 3 sides taken from a list of 6 possibilities.

     Solution
 1. Since there is no distinction among the responsibilities of the 3 committee members, the order isn't important. So,

      this is a combination.
 2. The order of the characters in a password matter, so this is a permutation.
 3. The order of finish matters in a dog show, so this is a permutation.
 4. A plate with mashed potatoes, peas, and broccoli is functionally the same as a plate with peas, broccoli, and mashed

      potatoes, so this is a combination.

      YOUR TURN 7.8

Decide whether the following represent permutations or combinations:
    1. On Halloween, you give each kid who comes to your door 3 pieces of candy, taken randomly from a candy
         dish.
    2. Your class is going on a field trip, but there are too many people for one vehicle. Your instructor chooses half
         the class to take the first vehicle.

Counting Combinations

Permutations and combinations are certainly related, because they both involve choosing a subset of a large group. Let's

explore that connection, so that we can figure out how to use what we know about permutations to help us count

combinations. We'll take a basic example. How many ways can we select 3 letters from the group A, B, C, D, and E? If

order matters, that number is  . That's small enough that we can list them all out in the table below.

                               ABC ABD ABE ACB ACD ACE

                               ADB ADC ADE AEB AEC AED

                               BAC BAD BAE BCA BCD BCE

                               BDA BDC BDE BEA BEC BED

                               CAB CAD CAE CBA CBD CBE

                               CDA CDB CDE CEA CEB CED

                               DCA DAC DAE DBA DBC DBE

                               DCA DCB DCE DEA DEB DEC

                               EAB EAC EAD EBA EBC EBD

                               ECA ECB ECD EDA EDB EDC
734 7 · Probability

       Now, let's look back at that list and color-code it so that groupings of the same 3 letters get the same color, as shown in
       Figure 7.9:

                                                          Figure 7.9

After color-coding, we see that the 60 cells can be seen as 10 groups (colors) of 6. That's no coincidence! We've already
seen how to compute the number of permutations using the formula To compute the number of combinations, let's
count them another way using the Multiplication Rule for Counting. We'll do this in two steps:

Step 1: Choose 3 letters (paying no attention to order).

Step 2: Put those letters in order.

The number of ways to choose 3 letters from this group of 5 (A, B, C, D, E) is the number of combinations we're looking

for; let's call that number (read "the number of combinations of 5 objects taken 3 at a time"). We can see from our

chart that this is ten (the number of colors used). We can generalize our findings this way: remember that the number of

permutations of things taken at a time is                 . That number is also equal to  , and so it must be the

case that                        . Dividing both sides of that equation by gives us the formula below.

FORMULA

  EXAMPLE 7.9

Using the Combination Formula
Compute the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1.

 2.

 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   7.3 · Combinations 735

        YOUR TURN 7.9

  Compute the following:
      1.
      2.
      3.

  EXAMPLE 7.10

Applying the Combination Formula
 1. In the card game Texas Hold'em (a variation of poker), players are dealt 2 cards from a standard deck to form their

      hands. How many different hands are possible?
 2. The board game Clue uses a deck of 21 cards. If 3 people are playing, each person gets 6 cards for their hand. How

      many different 6-card Clue hands are possible?
 3. Palmetto Cash 5 is a game offered by the South Carolina Education Lottery. Players choose 5 numbers from the

      whole numbers between 1 and 38 (inclusive); the player wins the jackpot of $100,000 if the randomizer selects those
      numbers in any order. How many different sets of winning numbers are possible?
     Solution
 1. A standard deck has 52 cards, and a hand has 2 cards. Since the order doesn't matter, we use the formula for
      counting combinations:

 2. Again, the order doesn't matter, so the number of combinations is:

 3. There are 38 numbers to choose from, and we must pick 5. Since order doesn't matter, the number of combinations
      is:

  YOUR TURN 7.10

1. At a charity event with 58 people in attendance, 3 raffle winners are chosen. All receive the same prize, so
    order doesn't matter. How many different groups of 3 winners can be chosen?

2. A sorority with 42 members needs to choose a committee with 4 members, each with equal responsibility.
    How many committees are possible?

The notation and nomenclature used for the number of combinations is not standard across all sources. You'll

sometimes see  instead of . Sometimes you'll hear that expression read as " choose " as shorthand for

"the number of combinations of objects taken at a time."

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Early Eastern Mathematicians
Although combinations weren't really studied in Europe until around the 13th century, mathematicians of the Middle
and Far East had already been working on them for hundreds of years. The Indian mathematician known as Pingala
had described them by the second century BCE; Varhamihira (fl. sixth century) and Halayudha (fl. 10th century)
extended Pingala's work. In the ninth century, a Jain mathematician named Mahvra gave the formula for
736 7 · Probability

combinations that we use today.

In 10th-century Baghdad, a mathematician named Al-Karaji also knew formulas for combinations; though his work is
now lost, it was known to (and repeated by) Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam, whose work survives. Khayyam is
probably best remembered as a poet, with his Rubaiyat being his most famous work.

Meanwhile, in 11th-century China, Jia Xian also was working with combinations, as was his 13th-century successor
Yang Hui.

It is not known whether the discoveries of any of these men were known in the other regions, or if the Indians,
Persians, and Chinese all came to their discoveries independently. We do know that mathematical knowledge and
sometimes texts did get passed along trade routes, so it can't be ruled out.

EXAMPLE 7.11

Combining Combinations with the Multiplication Rule for Counting
The student government at a university consists of 10 seniors, 8 juniors, 6 sophomores, and 4 first-years.

1. How many ways are there to choose a committee of 8 people from this group?
2. How many ways are to choose a committee of 8 people if the committee must consist of 2 people from each class?

Solution

1. There are 28 people to choose from, and we need 8. So, the number of possible committees is                             .

2. Break the selection of the committee members down into a 4-step process: Choose the seniors, then choose the

juniors, then the sophomores, and then the first-years, as shown in the table below:

                                 Class       Number of Ways to Choose Committee Representatives

                                 senior

                                 junior

                           sophomore

                                 first-year

The Multiplication Rule for Counting tells us that we can get the total number of ways to complete this task by
multiplying together the number of ways to do each of the four subtasks. So, there are
possible committees with these restrictions.

      YOUR TURN 7.11

1. How many ways are there to choose a hand of 6 cards from a standard deck with the constraint that 3 are , 2
    are , and 1 is ?

Check Your Understanding

11. Suppose you want to count the number of ways that you can arrange the apps on the home screen on your phone.
      Should you use permutations or combinations?

12. Your little brother is packing up for a family vacation, but there's only room for 3 of his toys. If you want to know
      how many possible groups of toys he can bring, should you use permutations or combinations?

13. Compute             .

14. Compute          .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            7.3 · Combinations 737

15. You're planning a road trip with some friends. Though you have 6 friends you'd consider bringing along, you only
      have room for 3 other people in the car. How many different possibilities are there for your road trip squad?

16. You're packing for a trip, for which you need 3 shirts and 3 skirts. If you have 8 shirts and 5 skirts that would work
      for the trip, how many different ways are there to pack for the trip?

        SECTION 7.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, decide whether the situation describes a permutation or a combination.
     1. You're packing for vacation, and you need to pick 5 shirts.
     2. You and your friends are about to play a game, and you need to decide who will have the first turn, second turn,
          and so on.
     3. You are watching your favorite reality show, and you want to know how many possibilities there are for the
          order of finish for the top three.
     4. You are going to be working in groups of 4 with your classmates, and you want to know how many possibilities
          there are for the composition of your group.

For the following exercises, express your answers as whole numbers.
     5.
     6.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.

17. In most variations of the card game poker, a hand consists of 5 cards, where the order doesn't matter. How many
      different poker hands are there?

18. A professor starts each class by choosing 3 students to present solutions to homework problems to the class. If
      there are 41 students in the class, in how many different ways can the professor make those selections?

19. An election for at-large members of a school board has 7 candidates; 3 will be elected. How many different ways
      can those 3 seats be filled?

20. There are 20 contestants on a reality TV show; at the end of the first episode, 10 are eliminated. How many
      different groups of eliminated contestants are possible?

21. At a horse race, bettors can place a bet called an exacta box. For this bet, the player chooses 2 horses; if those
      horses finish first and second (in either order), the player wins. In a race with 12 horses in the field, how many
      possible exacta box bets are there?

The following exercises are about the card game euchre, which uses a partial standard deck of cards: it only has the

cards with ranks 9, 10, J, Q, K, and A (for a total of 24 cards). Some variations of the game use the 8s or the 7s and 8s,

but we'll stick with the 24-card version.

22. A euchre hand contains 5 cards. How many ways are there to receive a 5-card hand (where the order in which

the cards are received doesn't matter, i.e., 9 , J , , , is the same as J , 9 , , )?

23. After all 4 players get their hands, the remaining 4 cards are placed face down in the center of the table. How

many different groups of 4 cards are there from this deck?

24. Euchre is played with partners. How many ways are there for 2 partners to receive 5-card hands (where, as

above, the order doesn't matter)? Hint: After the first person gets their cards, there are  cards left

for the second person.

You and 5 of your friends are at an amusement park, and are about to ride a roller coaster. The cars have room for 6
people arranged in 3 rows of 2, so you and your friends will perfectly fill one car.

    25. How many ways are there to choose the 2 people in the front row?
    26. Assuming the front row has been selected, how many ways are there to choose the 2 people in the middle row?
738 7 · Probability

           27. Assuming the first 2 rows have been selected, how many ways are there to choose the 2 people in the back
                  row?

           28. Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting and your answers to the earlier parts of this exercise, how many
                  ways are there for your friends to sort yourselves into rows to board the roller coaster?

       The University Combinatorics Club has 18 members. Four of them will be selected to form a committee.
           29. How many different committees of 4 are possible, assuming all of the duties are shared equally?
           30. Instead of sharing responsibility equally, one person will be chosen to be the committee chair. How many
                  different committees are possible? Count these by selecting a chair first, then selecting the remaining 3
                  members of the committee from the remaining club members and use the Multiplication Rule for Counting.
                  Show your work.
           31. Let's count the number of committees with chairs a different way: First, choose 4 people for the committee (as
                  in the first question), then choose 1 of the 4 to be chair. Show your work. Do you get the same number?

       Powerball® is a multistate lottery game, which costs $2 to play. Players fill out a ticket by choosing 5 numbers between
       1 and 69 (these are the white balls) and then a single number between 1 and 26 (this is the Powerball).

           32. How many different ways are there to choose the white balls? Players who match these 5 numbers exactly (but
                  not the Powerball) win $1 million.

           33. How many ways are there to choose the Powerball? Players who correctly pick the Powerball win $4.
           34. How many ways are there to play the game altogether? Players who match all 5 white balls and the Powerball

                  win (or share) the grand prize. (The grand prize starts at $40 million; if no players win the grand prize, the value
                 goes up for the next drawing. The highest value it has ever reached is $1.586 billion!) How many ways are there
                  to fill out a single Powerball ticket?
       35. You are in charge of programming for a music festival. The festival has a main stage, a secondary stage, and
             several smaller stages. There are 40 bands confirmed for the festival. Five of those will play the main stage, and 8
             will play the secondary stage. How many ways are there for you to allocate bands to these 2 stages?

    7.4 Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes

       Figure 7.10 In genetics, the characteristics of an offspring organism depends on the characteristics of its parents. (credit:
       "Pea Plant" by Maria Keays/Flickr, CC BY 2.0))

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Determine the sample space of single stage experiment.
        2. Use tables to list possible outcomes of a multistage experiment.
        3. Use tree diagrams to list possible outcomes of a multistage experiment.
       In the 19th century, an Augustinian friar and scientist named Gregor Mendel used his observations of pea plants to set
       out his theory of genetic propagation. In his work, he looked at the offspring that resulted from breeding plants with
       different characteristics together. For applications like this, it is often insufficient to only know in how many ways a

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 739

process might end; we need to be able to list all of the possibilities. As we've seen, the number of possible outcomes can
be very large! Thus, it's important to have a strategy that allows us to systematically list these possibilities to make sure
we don't leave any out. In this section, we'll look at two of these strategies.

Single Stage Experiments

When we are talking about combinatorics or probability, the word "experiment" has a slightly different meaning than it
does in the sciences. Experiments can range from very simple ("flip a coin") to very complex ("count the number of
uranium atoms that undergo nuclear fission in a sample of a given size over the course of an hour"). Experiments have
unknown outcomes that generally rely on something random, so that if the experiment is repeated (or replicated) the
outcome might be different. No matter what the experiment, though, analysis of the experiment typically begins with
identifying its sample space.

The sample space of an experiment is the set of all of the possible outcomes of the experiment, so it's often expressed

as a set (i.e., as a list bound by braces; if the experiment is "randomly select a number between 1 and 4," the sample

space would be written  ).

EXAMPLE 7.12

Finding the Sample Space of an Experiment
For each of the following experiments, identify the sample space.

1. Flip a coin (which has 2 faces, typically called "heads" and "tails") and note which face is up.
2. Flip a coin 10 times and count the number of heads.
3. Roll a 6-sided die and note the number that is on top.
4. Roll two 6-sided dice and note the sum of the numbers on top.

Solution

1. If we use "H" to denote "heads is facing up" and "T" to denote "tails is facing up", then the sample space is {H, T}.

2. It's possible (though unlikely) that there will be no heads flipped; the outcome in that case would be "0." It's also

possible (more likely, but still quite unlikely) that only one flip will result in heads. Any other whole number is

possible, up to the maximum: We're flipping the coin 10 times, so we can't get any more than 10 heads. So, the

sample space is {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}.

3. There are 6 numbers on the die: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. So, the sample space for a single roll of the die is {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.

4. If we roll 2 dice, the smallest possible sum we could get is    and the biggest is                . Every other

whole number between those two is possible. So, the sample space is {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12}.

        YOUR TURN 7.12

  Identify the sample space of each experiment.
      1. You draw a card from a standard deck and note its suit.
      2. You draw a card from a standard deck and note its rank.
      3. You roll a 4-sided die and note the number on the bottom. (A 4-sided die is shaped like a pyramid, so when it
           comes to rest, there's no single side facing up.)
      4. You roll three 4-sided dice and note the sum of the numbers on the bottom.

Multistage Experiments

Some experiments have more complicated sample spaces because they occur in stages. These stages can occur in
succession (like drawing cards one at a time) or simultaneously (rolling 2 dice). Sample spaces get more complicated as
the complexity of the experiment increases, so it's important to choose a systematic method for identifying all of the
possible outcomes. The first method we'll discuss is the table.

Using Tables to Find Sample Spaces

Tables are useful for finding the sample space for experiments that meet two criteria: (1) The experiment must have only
two stages, and (2) the outcomes of each stage must have no effect on the outcomes of the other. When the stages do
not affect each other, we say the stages are independent. Otherwise, the stages are dependent and so we can't use
tables; we'll look at a method for analyzing dependent stages soon.
740 7 · Probability

         EXAMPLE 7.13

       Determining Independence
       Decide whether the two stages in these experiments are independent or dependent.
        1. You flip a coin and note the result, and then flip the coin again and note the result.
        2. You draw 2 cards from a standard deck (52 cards), one at a time.

            Solution
        1. No matter what happens on the first flip, the second flip has the same sample space: {H, T} (You'll sometimes hear

             the phrase "The coin has no memory"). So, these stages are independent.
        2. Let's say that the first card you draw is A . The sample space for the second draw consists of all the cards except A

             (since that card is no longer in the deck, you can't draw it again). If instead that first card was 2 , the sample space
             for the second draw is different: it's every card except 2 . Since the sample space for the second card changes
             based on the result of the first draw, these stages are dependent.

               YOUR TURN 7.13

         Decide whether the two stages in these experiments are dependent or independent.
             1. You're getting dressed to go to a party, and you plan to wear a blouse and a skirt. You choose the blouse first,
                  then the skirt (assume that you'd be comfortable wearing any of your skirts with any of your blouses).
             2. On further reflection, you realize that some of your skirts clash with some of your blouses. So, you choose the
                  blouse first, and then choose a skirt that goes with your chosen blouse.

       If you have a two-stage experiment with independent stages, a table is the most straightforward way to identify the
       sample space. To build a table, you list the outcomes of one stage of the experiment along the top of the table and the
       outcomes of the other stage down the side. The cells in the interior of the table are then filled using the outcomes
       associated with each cell's row and column. Let's look at an example.

         EXAMPLE 7.14

       Using Tables to Identify Sample Spaces
       Identify the sample spaces of these experiments using tables.
        1. You roll two dice: one 4-sided and one 6-sided.
        2. You're in an ice-cream shop, and you're going to get a single scoop of ice cream with a topping. The flavors of ice

             cream you're considering are vanilla, chocolate, and rocky road; the toppings are fudge, whipped cream, and
             sprinkles.
        3. The pea plants you're breeding have two possible pod colors: green and yellow. These colors are decided by a
             particular gene, which comes in two types: "G" for green, and "g" for yellow (In genetics, capital letters usually
             denote dominant genes, while lower-case letters denote recessive genes). Each plant has two genes. If you breed a
             Gg pea plant with a gg plant, the offspring plant will get one gene from each parent. What are the possible
             outcomes?
            Solution
        1. Step 1: Make the outline of a table, with the results of the 4-sided roll on one side and the results of the 6-sided roll
             on the other. In practice, it doesn't matter which you choose; for this example, we'll put the 4-sided results on top
             (labeling the columns of the chart) and the 6-sided results on the side (labeling the rows of the chart) as shown in
             the following table:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 741

                                      4-Sided Roll
                                     1234
         6-Sided Roll 1
                               2
                               3
                               4
                               5
                               6

Step 2: Fill in the results in each cell of the table below. Use the notation of an ordered pair, with the row label first.

                        4-Sided Roll

                     1  2  3                        4

         6-Sided Roll 1 (1,1) (1,2) (1,3) (1,4)

                     2 (2,1) (2,2) (2,3) (2,4)

                     3 (3,1) (3,2) (3,3) (3,4)

                     4 (4,1) (4,2) (4,3) (4,4)

                     5 (5,1) (5,2) (5,3) (5,4)

                     6 (6,1) (6,2) (6,3) (6,4)

     So, for example, (3,2) represents the outcome where the 6-sided roll results in a 3, and the 4-sided roll gives us a 2.
     Thus, the sample space of the experiment is {(1,1), (1,2), (1,3), (1,4), (2,1), (2,2), (2,3), (2,4), (3,1), (3,2), (3,3), (3,4), (4,1),
     (4,2), (4,3), (4,4), (5,1), (5,2), (5,3), (5,4), (6,1), (6,2), (6,3), (6,4)}.

2. Step 1: Let's put the flavors on the rows and the toppings on the columns of the following table:

                                                                                                   Toppings

                     fudge whipped cream sprinkles

Flavors  vanilla

         chocolate

         rocky road

Step 2: We can fill in the cells of the table below with the resulting combinations.
742 7 · Probability

                                                     Toppings

                                 fudge               whipped cream               sprinkles

Flavors              vanilla     vanilla with fudge  vanilla with whipped cream  vanilla with sprinkles

                     chocolate chocolate with fudge chocolate with whipped cream chocolate with sprinkles

                     rocky road rocky road with fudge rocky road with whipped cream rocky road with sprinkles

     So, the sample space is {vanilla with fudge, vanilla with whipped cream, vanilla with sprinkles, chocolate with fudge,
     chocolate with whipped cream, chocolate with sprinkles, rocky road with fudge, rocky road with whipped cream,
     rocky road with sprinkles}.
3. Step 1: We'll put the parents' genes (P1 and P2) as labels on the rows and columns of the following table:

                                                                                              P2

                                                                                           gg

                                                                            P1 G

                                                                                     g

Step 2: We'll fill in the offspring's gene composition, listing parent 1's gene first in the table below.
                                                                                        P2

                                                                                    gg
                                                                    P1 G Gg Gg

                                                                             g gg gg

Thus, the sample space is {Gg, Gg, gg, gg}. (Diagrams like this, which allow us to identify the genotypes of offspring,
are called Punnett squares in honor of Reginald Punnett (1875-1967), who first used them in the context of
genetics.)

        YOUR TURN 7.14

  1. Use a table to identify the sample space of an experiment in which you flip a coin and roll a 6-sided die.

Using Tree Diagrams to Identify Sample Spaces

In experiments where there are more than two stages, or where the stages are dependent, a tree diagram is a helpful
tool for systematically identifying the sample space. Tree diagrams are built by first drawing a single point (or node),
then from that node we draw one branch (a short line segment) for each outcome of the first stage. Each branch gets its
own node at the other end (which we typically label with the corresponding outcome for that branch); from each of
these, we draw another branch for each outcome of the second stage, assuming that the outcome of the first stage
matches the branch we were on. If there are other stages, we can continue from there by continuing to add branches
and nodes. This sounds really complicated, but it's easier to understand through an example.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                 7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 743

  EXAMPLE 7.15
Using a Tree Diagram to Identify a Sample Space
Use a tree diagram to find the sample spaces of each of the following experiments:
 1. You flip a coin 3 times, noting the outcome of each flip in order.
 2. You flip a coin. If the result is heads, you roll a 4-sided die. If it's tails, you roll a 6-sided die.
 3. You are planning to go on a hike with a group of friends. There are 3 trails to consider: Abel Trail, Borel Trail, and

      Condorcet Trail. One of your friends, Jess, requires a wheelchair; if she joins you, the group couldn't handle the rocky
      Condorcet Trail.
     Solution
 1. Step 1: Let's start by placing our first node (Figure 7.11).

                                                                                 Figure 7.11
      Step 2: We'll add two branches, one for each outcome of the first coin flip, and label them (Figure 7.12).

                                                                                 Figure 7.12
      Step 3: We're ready for stage two of the experiment: another coin flip. At each node, we add in branches that
      represent those outcomes (Figure 7.13).

                                                                                 Figure 7.13
      Finally, we can add another set of branches for the outcomes of the third stage (Figure 7.14).
744 7 · Probability

                                                                          Figure 7.14

(These final nodes are called leaves.)

Step 4: We can write down the outcomes in the sample space by tracing the path out to each leaf, writing down the
outcome at each node we pass through. For example, this leaf (Figure 7.15):

                                         Figure 7.15

is reached via this path (Figure 7.16):

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 745

                                                                          Figure 7.16
Step 5: We'll label that leaf as "HTH" (Figure 7.17), since the path passes through nodes labeled H, T, and H on its
way out to our leaf.

                                                                          Figure 7.17
Step 6: We can label the remaining leaves using the same method (Figure 7.18).
746 7 · Probability

                                                                                        Figure 7.18
             The sample space is the labels on the leaves: {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}.
        2. Step 1: We'll start with our initial node (Figure 7.19).

                                                                                        Figure 7.19
             Step 2: We'll add in branches for the outcomes of the first stage (Figure 7.20), which is the coin flip.

                                                                                        Figure 7.20
             Step 3: The second stage of the experiment depends on the outcome of the first stage.
        a. If the outcome of the first stage was H, then we roll a 4-sided die. So, only on the node for H, we'll add in the
             outcomes of a 4-sided die roll (Figure 7.21).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 747

                                                                                Figure 7.21
b. If the outcome of the first stage was T, then we roll a 6-sided die. So, we'll add those branches to the node for T

     (Figure 7.22).

                                                                                Figure 7.22
     Step 4: We can label the leaves to get the sample space (Figure 7.23).
748 7 · Probability

                                                                                        Figure 7.23
             The sample space is: {H1, H2, H3, H4, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6}.
        c. Step 1: Let's label the trails A, B, and C for ease of labeling. Even though the trails are listed first in the exercise, we
             can't use the trail choice as our first stage: the trails available to us depend on whether Jess is able to join the trip.
             So, the first stage is whether Jess joins us (J) or not (N) (Figure 7.24).

                                                                                        Figure 7.24
             Step 2: We list the appropriate trails on each branch (Figure 7.25).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            7.4 · Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes 749

                                               Figure 7.25

So, the sample space is {JA, JB, NA, NB, NC}.

        YOUR TURN 7.15

  1. You have a modified deck of cards containing only J , Q , and K . You draw 2 cards without replacing them
      (where order matters). Use a tree diagram to identify the sample space.

Check Your Understanding

17. You flip a coin 6 times and note the number of heads. What is the sample space of this experiment?

18. You are ordering a combo meal at a restaurant. The meal comes with either 8 or 12 chicken nuggets, and your
      choice of crinkle fries, curly fries, or onion rings. Create a table to help you identify the sample space containing
      your combo meal possibilities.

19. You need one more class to fill out your schedule for next semester. You want to take either History 101 (H),
      English 220 (E), or Sociology 112 (S). There are two professors teaching the history class: Anderson (A) and Burr (B);
      one professor teaching the English class: Carter (C); and three people teaching sociology: Johnson (J), Kirk (K), and
      Lambert (L). Create a tree diagram that helps you identify all your options.

20. Identify the sample space from Exercise 18.

21. Identify the sample space from Exercise 19.

        SECTION 7.4 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, you are rolling a special 6-sided die that has both a colored letter and a colored number on
each face. The faces are labeled with: a red 1 and a blue A, a red 1 and a green A, an orange 1 and a green B, an orange
2 and a red C, a purple 3 and a brown D, an orange 4 and a blue E. You will roll the die once and take note of something
about the face that is showing. Identify the sample space:

     1. You note the number.
     2. You note the letter.
     3. You note the color of the number.
     4. You note the color of the letter.
     5. You note the number and letter.
     6. You note the number and its color.
     7. You note the letter and its color.

In Example 7.13, we used a table to identify the possible genetic result when two pea plants are bred; offspring plants
get one of the two genes from each parent. Use tables to identify the sample space of offspring for the parents listed in
750 7 · Probability

       the following exercises:
             8. GG and gg
             9. GG and Gg
           10. Gg and Gg

       You're visiting a pasta bar, where you have your choice of pasta types (cavatappi, ziti, or penne) and sauce (marinara,
       alfredo, or pesto).

           11. Make a table that shows the sample space for your choices.
           12. Write out the sample space for the pasta bar.

       You have a new art print that you'd like to get framed. You have 3 good choices for the material of the frame: oak,
       maple, and cherry. You'll also choose a framing mat, for which there are 4 possible colors that will work with your print:
       plum, lilac, periwinkle, and violet.

           13. Make a table that shows the sample space for your choices.
           14. Write out the sample space for the framing choices.

       You are shopping for a new laptop. The brand you're considering offers laptops with screen sizes 11", 13", 14", 15", and
       17". It also offers five memory choices: 4GB, 8GB, 12GB, 16GB, and 32GB.

           15. Make a table that shows the sample space for your choices.
           16. Write out the sample space for the laptop choices.

       For the following exercises, decide whether the described two-stage experiments have independent or dependent
       stages.

           17. Siobhan and Tristan are trying to decide where they will have dinner. Siobhan wants to go to Antoine's, Burger
                  Hut, or the Chowder Palace. Tristan prefers Burger Hut, Chowder Palace, or Duck Duck Taco. They will flip a coin
                  to decide who gets to choose, then that person selects a restaurant from their list.

           18. On the TV game show The Price Is Right, contestants play games to try to win prizes. One of these games is
                  called "Let `Em Roll." In this game, players roll five 6-sided dice. These dice each have 3 faces labeled with a car;
                  the other 3 faces are labeled with prize money amounts (one each of $500, $1,000, and $1,500). Players get to
                  roll all 5 dice, and then have the opportunity to win additional rolls. If all 5 dice show a car, the contestant wins a
                  new car. If not, the contestant can use any additional rolls to reroll the dice with prize money showing to try to
                  win the car (or, they can take the total amount of money showing on the dice and end the game). Josh is playing
                  this game, and he has 2 rolls total (these are the two stages of the experiment; the number of cars showing on
                  the dice will be the reported outcome of each stage).

           19. In the game Rock, Paper, Scissors, each of 2 players secretly chooses 1 of the 3 title objects. The players reveal
                  their choices simultaneously using hand signals. If the players choose the same object, the game is a tie; if they
                  choose different objects, the winner is determined by the following rules: rock beats scissors, scissors beats
                  paper, paper beats rock. Jim and Eva are gearing up to play the game. The two stages of the experiment are
                  Jim's and Eva's choices.

           20. Paul is at the racetrack and is about to place a daily double bet, where he will try to predict the winner of 2
                  consecutive races. The stages of the experiment are the two races.

           21. Mishka is looking for a song to play on a jukebox. The machine requires the user to choose an artist first, then
                  choose a song from among that artist's songs. The stages of the experiment are choosing the artist and
                  choosing the song.

       John is playing a game that involves flipping a coin and rolling dice. The coin flip happens first. If the outcome is heads,
       the player rolls a 4-sided die. If the outcome is tails, the player rolls a 6-sided die.

           22. Create a tree diagram to display the possible outcomes of this game.
           23. Give the sample space for the game.

       In the casino game roulette, a wheel with colored and numbered pockets is spun. At the same time, a marble is spun in
       the opposite direction in such a way that after a minute or so the marble drops into one of the pockets. Players try to
       guess the color (red, black, or green) or the number that will appear.

           24. Draw a tree diagram that shows the possible color outcomes for 3 spins of the wheel.
           25. Give the sample space for the three-stage experiment.

       26. Siobhan and Tristan are trying to decide where they will have dinner. Siobhan wants to go to Antoine's, Burger Hut,
             or the Chowder Palace. Tristan prefers Burger Hut, Chowder Palace, or Duck Duck Taco. They will flip a coin to
             decide who gets to choose, then that person selects a restaurant from their list. Use an appropriate method to
             identify the sample space of possible outcomes, which include the person who chooses and the restaurant.

       27. On the TV game show The Price Is Right, contestants play games to try to win prizes. One of these games is called

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 751

      "Let `Em Roll." In this game, players roll five 6-sided dice. These dice each have 3 faces labeled with a car; the other
      3 faces are labeled with prize money amounts (one each of $500, $1000, and $1500). Players get to roll all 5 dice,
      then have the opportunity to win additional rolls. If all 5 dice show a car, the contestant wins a new car. If not, the
      contestant can use any additional rolls to reroll the dice with prize money showing to try to win the car (or, they can
      take the total amount of money showing on the dice and end the game). Kathleen is playing this game, and she
      has 3 rolls to try to win the car. On her first roll, 3 of the dice showed cars. Use an appropriate method to find the
      sample space of the number of cars showing after each of the following rolls. Give those outcomes as ordered
      pairs: (number of cars after the second roll, number of cars after the third roll).
28. In the game Rock, Paper, Scissors, each of 2 players chooses 1 of the 3 title objects. The players reveal their choices
      simultaneously using hand signals. Jim and Eva are gearing up to play the game. List the sample space of all the
      possible outcomes of the first round of their game as ordered pairs of the form (Jim's choice, Eva's choice).

7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability

Figure 7.26 When you roll two dice, some outcomes (like rolling a sum of seven) are more likely than others (rolling a
sum of twelve). (credit: "Dice Isn't Just A Game; It's A Way of Life" by Leah Love/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Define probability including impossible and certain events.
 2. Calculate basic theoretical probabilities.
 3. Calculate basic empirical probabilities.
 4. Distinguish among theoretical, empirical, and subjective probability.
 5. Calculate the probability of the complement of an event.
It all comes down to this. The game of Monopoly that started hours ago is in the home stretch. Your sister has the dice,
and if she rolls a 4, 5, or 7 she'll land on one of your best spaces and the game will be over. How likely is it that the game
will end on the next turn? Is it more likely than not? How can we measure that likelihood? This section addresses this
question by introducing a way to measure uncertainty.

Introducing Probability

Uncertainty is, almost by definition, a nebulous concept. In order to put enough constraints on it that we can
mathematically study it, we will focus on uncertainty strictly in the context of experiments. Recall that experiments are
processes whose outcomes are unknown; the sample space for the experiment is the collection of all those possible
outcomes. When we want to talk about the likelihood of particular outcomes, we sometimes group outcomes together;
for example, in the Monopoly example at the beginning of this section, we were interested in the roll of 2 dice that might
fall as a 4, 5, or 7. A grouping of outcomes that we're interested in is called an event. In other words, an event is a subset
of the sample space of an experiment; it often consists of the outcomes of interest to the experimenter.
Once we have defined the event that interests us, we can try to assess the likelihood of that event. We do that by
752 7 · Probability

assigning a number to each event ( ) called the probability of that event ( ). The probability of an event is a number
between 0 and 1 (inclusive). If the probability of an event is 0, then the event is impossible. On the other hand, an event
with probability 1 is certain to occur. In general, the higher the probability of an event, the more likely it is that the event
will occur.

EXAMPLE 7.16

Determining Certain and Impossible Events
Consider an experiment that consists of rolling a single standard 6-sided die (with faces numbered 1-6). Decide if these
probabilities are equal to zero, equal to one, or somewhere in between.

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.

     Solution
Let's start by identifying the sample space. For one roll of this die, the possible outcomes are {1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6}. We can use
that to assess these probabilities:

1. We see that 4 is in the sample space, so it's possible that it will be the outcome. It's not certain to be the outcome,

    though. So,                  .

2. Notice that 7 is not in the sample space. So,     .

3. Every outcome in the sample space is a positive number, so this event is certain. Thus,                                      .

4. Since is not in the sample space,              .

5. Some outcomes in the sample space are even numbers (2, 4, and 6), but the others aren't. So,

                                    .

6. Every outcome in the sample space is a single-digit number, so                                .

      YOUR TURN 7.16

Jorge is about to conduct an experiment that consists of flipping a coin 4 times and recording the number of heads
    . Decide if these probabilities are equal to zero, equal to one, or somewhere in between.
    1.
    2.
    3.

Three Ways to Assign Probabilities

The probabilities of events that are certain or impossible are easy to assign; they're just 1 or 0, respectively. What do we
do about those in-between cases, for events that might or might not occur? There are three methods to assign
probabilities that we can choose from. We'll discuss them here, in order of reliability.

Method 1: Theoretical Probability

The theoretical method gives the most reliable results, but it cannot always be used. If the sample space of an
experiment consists of equally likely outcomes, then the theoretical probability of an event is defined to be the ratio of
the number of outcomes in the event to the number of outcomes in the sample space.

FORMULA

For an experiment whose sample space   consists of equally likely outcomes, the theoretical probability of the
event is the ratio

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 753

where  and    denote the number of outcomes in the event and in the sample space, respectively.

EXAMPLE 7.17

Computing Theoretical Probabilities
Recall that a standard deck of cards consists of 52 unique cards which are labeled with a rank (the whole numbers from 2
to 10, plus J, Q, K, and A) and a suit ( , , , or ). A standard deck is thoroughly shuffled, and you draw one card at
random (so every card has an equal chance of being drawn). Find the theoretical probability of each of these events:

1. The card is .
2. The card is a .
3. The card is a king (K).

     Solution
There are 52 cards in the deck, so the sample space for each of these experiments has 52 elements. That will be the
denominator for each of our probabilities.

1. There is only one in the deck, so this event only has one outcome in it. Thus,  .

2. There are 13 in the deck, so                    .

3. There are 4 cards of each rank in the deck, so     .

        YOUR TURN 7.17

  You are about to roll a fair (meaning that each face has an equal chance of landing up) 6-sided die, whose faces are
  labeled with the numbers 1 through 6. Find the theoretical probabilities of each outcome.

      1. You roll a 4.
      2. You roll a number greater than 2.
      3. You roll an odd number.

      It is critical that you make sure that every outcome in a sample space is equally likely before you compute
      theoretical probabilities!

  EXAMPLE 7.18

Using Tables to Find Theoretical Probabilities
In the Basic Concepts of Probability, we were considering a Monopoly game where, if your sister rolled a sum of 4, 5, or 7
with 2 standard dice, you would win the game. What is the probability of this event? Use tables to determine your
answer.

     Solution
We should think of this experiment as occurring in two stages: (1) one die roll, then (2) another die roll. Even though
these two stages will usually occur simultaneously in practice, since they're independent, it's okay to treat them
separately.
Step 1: Since we have two independent stages, let's create a table (Figure 7.27), which is probably the most efficient
method for determining the sample space.
754 7 · Probability

                                                                                    Figure 7.27
       Now, each of the 36 ordered pairs in the table represent an equally likely outcome.
       Step 2: To make our analysis easier, let's replace each ordered pair with the sum (Figure 7.28).

                                                                                    Figure 7.28
       Step 3: Since the event we're interested in is the one consisting of rolls of 4, 5, or 7. Let's shade those in (Figure 7.29).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 755

                                                                             Figure 7.29
Our event contains 13 outcomes, so the probability that your sister rolls a losing number is .

        YOUR TURN 7.18
  1. If you roll a pair of 4-sided dice with faces labeled with the numbers 1 through 4, what is the probability of rolling

      a sum of 6 or 7?
  EXAMPLE 7.19
Using Tree Diagrams to Compute Theoretical Probability
If you flip a fair coin 3 times, what is the probability of each event? Use a tree diagram to determine your answer
 1. You flip exactly 2 heads.
 2. You flip 2 consecutive heads at some point in the 3 flips.
 3. All 3 flips show the same result.

     Solution
Let's build a tree to identify the sample space (Figure 7.30).
756 7 · Probability

                                 Figure 7.30

The sample space is {HHH, HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}, which has 8 elements.

1. Flipping exactly 2 heads occurs three times (HHT, HTH, THH), so the probability is .

2. Flipping 2 consecutive heads at some point in the experiment happens 3 times: HHH, HHT, THH. So, the probability
     is .

3. There are 2 outcomes that all show the same result: HHH and TTT. So, the probability is  .

      YOUR TURN 7.19

You have a modified deck of cards containing only 3 , 4 , and 5 . You draw 2 two cards without replacing them
(where order matters). What is the probability of each event?

    1. The first card drawn is 3 .
    2. The first card drawn has a lower number than the second card.
    3. One of the cards drawn is 4 .

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Gerolamo Cardano

The first known text that provided a systematic approach to probabilities was written in 1564 by Gerolamo Cardano
(1501-1576). Cardano was a physician whose illegitimate birth closed many doors that would have otherwise been
open to someone with a medical degree in 16th-century Italy. As a result, Cardano often turned to gambling to help
ends meet. He was a remarkable mathematician, and he used his knowledge to gain an edge when playing at cards
or dice. His 1564 work, titled Liber de ludo aleae (which translates as Book on Games of Chance), summarized
everything he knew about probability. Of course, if that book fell into the hands of those he played against, his
advantage would disappear. That's why he never allowed it to be published in his lifetime (it was eventually published
in 1663). Cardano made other contributions to mathematics; he was the first person to publish the third degree
analogue of the Quadratic Formula (though he didn't discover it himself), and he popularized the use of negative
numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 757

Method 2: Empirical Probability

Theoretical probabilities are precise, but they can't be found in every situation. If the outcomes in the sample space are
not equally likely, then we're out of luck. Suppose you're watching a baseball game, and your favorite player is about to
step up to the plate. What is the probability that he will get a hit?

In this case, the sample space is {hit, not a hit}. That doesn't mean that the probability of a hit is , since those outcomes

aren't equally likely. The theoretical method simply can't be used in this situation. Instead, we might look at the player's

statistics up to this point in the season, and see that he has 122 hits in 531 opportunities. So, we might think that the

probability of a hit in the next plate appearance would be about  . When we use the outcomes of previous

replications of an experiment to assign a probability to the next replication, we're defining an empirical probability.
Empirical probability is assigned using the outcomes of previous replications of an experiment by finding the ratio of the
number of times in the previous replications the event occurred to the total number of previous replications.

Empirical probabilities aren't exact, but when the number of previous replications is large, we expect them to be close.
Also, if the previous runs of the experiment are not conducted under the exact set of circumstances as the one we're
interested in, the empirical probability is less reliable. For instance, in the case of our favorite baseball player, we might
try to get a better estimate of the probability of a hit by looking only at his history against left- or right-handed pitchers
(depending on the handedness of the pitcher he's about to face).

WHO KNEW?

Probability and Statistics

One of the broad uses of statistics is called statistical inference, where statisticians use collected data to make a guess
(or inference) about the population the data were collected from. Nearly every tool that statisticians use for inference
is based on probability. Not only is the method we just described for finding empirical probabilities one type of
statistical inference, but some more advanced techniques in the field will give us an idea of how close that empirical
probability might be to the actual probability!

EXAMPLE 7.20

Finding Empirical Probabilities
Assign an empirical probability to the following events:

1. Jose is on the basketball court practicing his shots from the free throw line. He made 47 out of his last 80 attempts.
     What is the probability he makes his next shot?

2. Amy is about to begin her morning commute. Over her last 60 commutes, she arrived at work 12 times in under half
     an hour. What is the probability that she arrives at work in 30 minutes or less?

3. Felix is playing Yahtzee with his sister. Felix won 14 of the last 20 games he played against her. How likely is he to win
     this game?

Solution

1. Since Jose made 47 out of his last 80 attempts, assign this event an empirical probability of     .

2. Amy completed the commute in under 30 minutes in 12 of the last 60 commutes, so we can estimate her probability

of making it in under 30 minutes this time at             .

3. Since Felix has won 14 of the last 20 games, assign a probability for a win this time of       .

      YOUR TURN 7.20

1. Jessie is in charge of quality control at a factory manufacturing SUVs. Today, she's checking the placement of the
    taillight housing. Of the last thousand units off the line, 13 had faulty placement. What empirical probability
    might Jesse assign to the next vehicle coming off the line having bad placement?
758 7 · Probability

         WORK IT OUT

         Buffon's Needle
         A famous early question about probability (posed by Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon in the 18th century) had
         to do with the probability that a needle dropped on a floor finished with wooden slats would lay across one of the
         seams. If the distance between the slats is exactly the same length as the needle, then it can be shown using calculus
         that the probability that the needle crosses a seam is . Using toothpicks or matchsticks (or other uniformly long and
         narrow objects), assign an empirical probability to this experiment by drawing parallel lines on a large sheet of paper
         where the distance between the lines is equal to the length of your dropping object, then repeatedly dropping the
         objects and noting whether the object touches one of the lines. Once you have your empirical probability, take its
         reciprocal and multiply by 2. Is the result close to ?

     Method 3: Subjective Probability

       In cases where theoretical probability can't be used and we don't have prior experience to inform an empirical
       probability, we're left with one option: using our instincts to guess at a subjective probability. A subjective probability is
       an assignment of a probability to an event using only one's instincts.
       Subjective probabilities are used in cases where an experiment can only be run once, or it hasn't been run before.
       Because subjective probabilities may vary widely from person to person and they're not based on any mathematical
       theory, we won't give any examples. However, it's important that we be able to identify a subjective probability when we
       see it; they will in general be far less accurate than empirical or theoretical probabilities.

         EXAMPLE 7.21

       Distinguishing among Theoretical, Empirical, and Subjective Probabilities
       Classify each of the following probabilities as theoretical, empirical, or subjective.
        1. An eccentric billionaire is testing a brand new rocket system. He says there is a 15% chance of failure.
        2. With 4 seconds to go in a close basketball playoff game, the home team need 3 points to tie up the game and send

             it to overtime. A TV commentator says that team captain should take the final 3-point shot, because he has a 38%
             chance of making it (greater than every other player on the team).
        3. Felix is losing his Yahtzee game against his sister. He has one more chance to roll 2 dice; he'll win the game if they
             both come up 4. The probability of this is about 2.8%.
            Solution
        1. This experiment has never been run before, so the given probability is subjective.
        2. Presumably, the commentator has access to each player's performance statistics over the entire season. So, the
             given probability is likely empirical.
        3. Rolling 2 dice results in a sample space with equally likely outcomes. This probability is theoretical. (We'll learn how
             to calculate that probability later in this chapter.)

               YOUR TURN 7.21

         Classify each of the following probabilities as theoretical, empirical, or subjective.
             1. You have entered a raffle with 500 entrants. Your probability of winning is 0.2%.
             2. Your little brother takes the bus to school each morning. On the first day of school, you believe that the
                  probability that the bus arrives between 7:15 AM and 7:30 AM is about 80%.
             3. Your little brother takes the bus to school each morning. On the last day of school, you believe that the
                  probability that the bus arrives between 7:15 AM and 7:30 AM is about 73%.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 759

      WHO KNEW?

Benford's Law

In 1938, Frank Benford published a paper ("The law of anomalous numbers," in Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society) with a surprising result about probabilities. If you have a list of numbers that spans at least a
couple of orders of magnitude (meaning that if you divide the largest by the smallest, the result is at least 100), then
the digits 1-9 are not equally likely to appear as the first digit of those numbers, as you might expect. Benford arrived
at this conclusion using empirical probabilities; he found that 1 was about 6 times as likely to be the initial digit as 9
was!

New Probabilities from Old: Complements

One of the goals of the rest of this chapter is learning how to break down complicated probability calculations into easier
probability calculations. We'll look at the first of the tools we can use to accomplish this goal in this section; the rest will
come later.

Given an event , the complement of (denoted ) is the collection of all of the outcomes that are not in . (This is

language that is taken from set theory, which you can learn more about elsewhere in this text.) Since every outcome in

the sample space either is or is not in , it follows that       . So, if the outcomes in are equally likely,

we can compute theoretical probabilities                   and  . Then, adding these last two equations, we get

Thus, if we subtract  from both sides, we can conclude that     . Though we performed this

calculation under the assumption that the outcomes in are all equally likely, the last equation is true in every situation.

FORMULA

How is this helpful? Sometimes it is easier to compute the probability that an event won't happen than it is to compute
the probability that it will. To apply this principle, it's helpful to review some tricks for dealing with inequalities. If an
event is defined in terms of an inequality, the complement will be defined in terms of the opposite inequality: Both the
direction and the inclusivity will be reversed, as shown in the table below.

                                                   If is defined with: then is defined with:
760 7 · Probability

EXAMPLE 7.22

Using the Formula for Complements to Compute Probabilities
 1. If you roll a standard 6-sided die, what is the probability that the result will be a number greater than one?
 2. If you roll two standard 6-sided dice, what is the probability that the sum will be 10 or less?
 3. If you flip a fair coin 3 times, what is the probability that at least one flip will come up tails?

Solution

1. Here, the sample space is {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. It's easy enough to see that the probability in question is , because there

are 5 outcomes that fall into the event "roll a number greater than 1." Let's also apply our new formula to find that

probability. Since is defined using the inequality  , then is defined using             . Since there's only one

outcome (1) in , we have         . Thus,                            .

2. In Example 7.18, we found the following table of equally likely outcomes for rolling 2 dice (Figure 7.31):

                                                    Figure 7.31

Here, the event is defined by the inequality        . Thus,         is defined by  . There are three outcomes
in : two 11s and one 12. Thus,                                       .

3. In Example 7.15, we found the sample space for this experiment consisted of these equally likely outcomes: {HHH,

HHT, HTH, HTT, THH, THT, TTH, TTT}. Our event is defined by         , so is defined by  . The only outcome

in is the first one on the list, where zero tails are flipped. So,                      .

        YOUR TURN 7.22

  1. If you roll a pair of 4-sided dice with faces labeled 1 through 4, what is the probability that the sum of the
      resulting numbers will be greater than 3? Hint: You found this sample space in an earlier Your Turn.

Check Your Understanding

You have two coins: a nickel and a quarter. You flip them both. Find the probabilities of these events:
    22. Both come up heads.
    23. The quarter comes up heads.
    24. You get one heads and one tails.
    25. You get three tails.

Decide whether the given probabilities were most likely derived theoretically, empirically, or subjectively.
    26. A poker player has a 16% chance of making a hand called a flush on the next card.
    27. Your friend Jacob tells you that there's a 20% chance he'll get married in the next 5 years.
    28. Ashley has a coin that they think might not be fair, so they flip it 100 times and note that the result was heads 58

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              7.5 · Basic Concepts of Probability 761

         times. So, Ashley says the probability of flipping heads on that coin is about 58%.

If you flip a fair coin 50 times, the probability of getting 20 or fewer heads is about 10.1% (a fact we'll learn how to verify

later).

29. If is the event "number of heads is 20 or fewer", describe the event using an inequality.

30. Find  .

        SECTION 7.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, we are considering two special 6-sided dice. Each face is labeled with a number and a letter:
the first die has faces 1A, 1B, 2A, 2C, 4A, 4E; the second has faces 1A, 1A, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3C. Assume that each face has an
equal probability of landing face up.

     1. Use a table to identify the sample space of the experiment in which we roll both dice and note the sum of the
          two numbers that are showing.

     2. What is the probability that we roll a sum less than 8?
     3. What is the probability that we roll a sum larger than 8?
     4. What is the probability that we roll a sum less than or equal to 2?
     5. What is the probability that we roll a sum greater than 2?
     6. What is the probability that we roll an even sum?
     7. What is the probability that we roll an odd sum?
     8. Use a table to identify the sample space of the experiment in which we roll both dice and note the two letters

          that are showing.
     9. What is the probability that no As are showing?
    10. What is the probability that at least one A is showing?
    11. What is the probability that two As are showing?
    12. What is the probability that two of the same letter are showing?
    13. What is the probability that the letter on the first die comes alphabetically before the letter on the second die?
    14. What is the probability that two vowels are showing?
    15. What is the probability that two consonants are showing?
    16. What is the probability that one consonant and one vowel are showing?

In the following Exercises, decide whether the given probability was likely determined theoretically, empirically, or
subjectively.

    17. Carolyn is breeding two pea plants, and notes that 8 of the 25 offspring plants have yellow peas. So, she
          concludes that there's a 32% chance that an offspring of these two plants will have yellow peas.

    18. At the beginning of the semester, Malik estimates there's a 30% chance that he'll earn As in all his classes.
    19. Abbie is deciding where she will attend college in the fall. Right now, she thinks there's an 80% chance she'll

          attend an in-state school.
    20. If you roll three standard 6-sided dice, the probability that the sum will be 8 is .

    21. According to the app he uses to play the game, Jason has won 18 of the last 100 games of solitaire he's played.
          So, the probability that he wins the next one is about 18%.

    22. Jim and Anne are both in a club with 10 members. If 3 people are chosen at random to form a committee, then
          the probability that both Jim and Anne are chosen is .

For the following exercises, use the following table of the top 15 players by number of plate appearances (PA) in the
2019 Major League Baseball season to assign empirical probabilities to the given events. A plate appearance is a
batter's opportunity to try to get a hit. The other columns are runs scored (R), hits (H), doubles (2B), triples (3B), home
runs (HR), walks (BB), and strike outs (SO).

             Name  Team PA R  H 2B 3B HR BB SO

             Marcus Semien OAK 747 123 187 43 7 33 87 102

             Whit Merrifield KCR 735 105 206 41 10 16 45 126

             Ronald Acuna Jr. ATL 715 127 175 22 2 41 76 188
762 7 · Probability

                     Name           Team PA R  H 2B 3B HR BB SO

                     Jonathan Villar BAL 714 111 176 33 5 24 61 176

                     Mookie Betts   BOS 706 135 176 40 5 29 97 101

                     Rhys Hoskins   PHI 705 86 129 33 5 29 116 173

                     Jorge Polanco  MIN 704 107 186 40 7 22 60 116

                     Rafael Devers  BOS 702 129 201 54 4 32 48 119

                     Ozzie Albies   ATL 702 102 189 43 8 24 54 112

                     Eduardo Escobar ARI 699 94 171 29 10 35 50 130

                     Xander Bogaerts BOS 698 110 190 52 0 33 76 122

                     José Abreu     CHW 693 85 180 38 1 33 36 152

                     Pete Alonso    NYM 693 103 155 30 2 53 72 183

                     Freddie Freeman ATL 692 113 176 34 2 38 87 127

                     Alex Bregman HOU 690 122 164 37 2 41 119 83

23. Mookie Betts gets a home run in his next plate appearance.
24. Xander Bogaerts strikes out in his next plate appearance.
25. Jonathan Villar gets a hit in his next plate appearance.
26. Rhys Hoskins gets a walk in his next plate appearance.
27. José Abreu scores a run in his next plate appearance.
28. Eduardo Escobar hits a triple in his next plate appearance.
29. Whit Merrifield hits a double in his next plate appearance.
30. Ronald Acuna Jr. gets an extra-base hit (double, triple, or home run) in his next plate appearance.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                7.6 · Probability with Permutations and Combinations 763

7.6 Probability with Permutations and Combinations

Figure 7.32 Bingo and many lottery games depend on selecting one or more numbers at random from a list; often this is
done by drawing numbered balls from a bin. (credit: "Redundant Bingo Balls" by Greg Clarke/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate probabilities with permutations.
 2. Calculate probabilities with combinations.

In our earlier discussion of theoretical probabilities, the first step we took was to write out the sample space for the

experiment in question. For many experiments, that method just isn't practical. For example, we might want to find the

probability of drawing a particular 5-card poker hand. Since there are 52 cards in a deck and the order of cards doesn't

matter, the sample space for this experiment has       possible 5-card hands. Even if we had the patience

and space to write them all out, sorting through the results to find the outcomes that fall in our event would be just as

tedious.

Luckily, the formula for theoretical probabilities doesn't require us to know every outcome in the sample space; we just
need to know how many outcomes there are. In this section, we'll apply the techniques we learned earlier in the chapter
(The Multiplication Rule for Counting, permutations, and combinations) to compute probabilities.

Using Permutations to Compute Probabilities

Recall that we can use permutations to count how many ways there are to put a number of items from a list in order. If
we're looking at an experiment whose sample space looks like an ordered list, then permutations can help us to find the
right probabilities.

EXAMPLE 7.23

Using Permutations to Compute Probabilities
 1. In horse racing, an exacta bet is one where the player tries to predict the top two finishers in particular race in order.

      If there are 9 horses in a race, and a player decided to make an exacta bet at random, what is the probability that
      they win?
 2. You are in a club with 10 people, 3 of whom are close friends of yours. If the officers of this club are chosen at
      random, what is the probability that you are named president and one of your friends is named vice president?
 3. A bag contains slips of paper with letters written on them as follows: A, A, B, B, B, C, C, D, D, D, D, E. If you draw 3
      slips, what is the probability that the letters will spell out (in order) the word BAD?
764 7 · Probability

Solution

1. Since order matters for this situation, we'll use permutations. How many different exacta bets can be made? Since

there are 9 horses and we must select 2 in order, we know there are              possible outcomes. That's the size of

our sample space, so it will go in the denominator of the probability. Since only one of those outcomes is a winner,

the numerator of the probability is 1. So, the probability of randomly selecting the winning exacta bet is .

2. There are 10 people in the club, and 2 will be chosen to be officers. Since the order matters, there are

different ways to select officers. Next, we must figure out how many outcomes are in our event. We'll use the

Multiplication Rule for Counting to find that number. There is only 1 choice for president in our event, and there are

3 choices for vice president. So, there are        outcomes in the event. Thus, the probability that you will serve

as president with one of your friends as vice president is    .

3. There are 12 slips of paper in the bag, and 3 will be drawn. So, there are            possible outcomes. Now, we'll

compute the number of outcomes in our event. The first letter drawn must be a B, and there are 3 of those. Next

must come an A (2 of those) and then a D (4 of those). Thus, there are                   outcomes in our event. So, the

probability that the letters drawn spell out the word BAD is            .

      YOUR TURN 7.23

1. Another bag of letters contains C, C, C, C, D, D, I, I, I, T, T, T, Y, Y, Y, Y. What is the probability that 4 letters chosen
    at random will spell, in order, CITY?

Combinations to Computer Probabilities

If the sample space of our experiment is one in which order doesn't matter, then we can use combinations to find the
number of outcomes in that sample space.

EXAMPLE 7.24

Using Combinations to Compute Probabilities
 1. Palmetto Cash 5 is a game offered by the South Carolina Education Lottery. Players choose 5 numbers from the

      whole numbers between 1 and 38 (inclusive); the player wins the jackpot of $100,000 if the randomizer selects those
      numbers in any order. If you buy one ticket for this game, what is the probability that you win the top prize by
      choosing all 5 winning numbers?
 2. There's a second prize in the Palmetto Cash 5 game that a player wins if 4 of the player's 5 numbers are among the
      5 winning numbers. What's the probability of winning the second prize?
 3. Scrabble is a word-building board game. Players make hands of 7 letters by selecting tiles with single letters printed
      on them blindly from a bag (2 tiles have nothing printed on them; these blanks can stand for any letter). Players use
      the letters in their hands to spell out words on the board. Initially, there are 100 tiles in the bag. Of those, 44 are (or
      could be) vowels (9 As, 12 Es, 9 Is, 8 Os, 4 Us, and 2 blanks; we'll treat Y as a consonant). What is the probability that
      your initial hand has no vowels?

Solution

1. There are 38 numbers to choose from, and the order of the 5 we pick doesn't matter. So, there are

outcomes in the sample space. Only one outcome is in our winning event, so the probability of winning is                          .

2. As in part 1 of this example,, there are 501,492 outcomes in the sample space. The tricky part here is figuring out

how many outcomes are in our event. To qualify, the outcome must contain 4 of the 5 winning numbers, plus one

losing number. There are         ways to choose the 4 winning numbers, and there are                         losing

numbers. So, using the Multiplication Rule for Counting, there are               outcomes in our event. Thus, the

probability of winning the second prize is                    , which is about 0.00033.

3. The number of possible starting hands is                         . There are          consonants in the
     bag, so the number of all-consonant hands is
                                                                    . Thus, the probability of drawing all consonants

is                               .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                7.6 · Probability with Permutations and Combinations 765

        YOUR TURN 7.24

      1. At a charity event with 58 people in attendance, 3 raffle winners are chosen. All receive the same prize, so
           order doesn't matter. You are attending with 4 of your friends. What is the probability that at least one of you
           or your friends wins a raffle prize? Hint: Find the probability that none of you wins, and use the formula for
           complements.

      2. If you draw a hand of 5 cards from a standard deck, what is the probability that 2 cards are and 3 cards are
             ?

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, you are drawing Scrabble tiles without replacement from a bag containing the letters A, C,
E, E, I, N, N, S, S, W.

    31. What is the probability that you draw (in order) the letters W-I-N?
    32. What is the probability that you draw (in order) the letters W-I-S-E?
    33. What is the probability that you draw (in order) the letters S-E-E-N?
    34. What is the probability that you draw (in any order) the letters W-I-N?
    35. What is the probability that you draw (in any order) the letters W-I-S-E?
    36. What is the probability that you draw (in any order) the letters S-E-E-N?

        SECTION 7.6 EXERCISES

The following exercises deal with our version of the game blackjack. In this card game, players are dealt a hand of two
cards from a standard deck. The dealer's cards are dealt with the second card face up, so the order matters; the other
players' hands are dealt entirely face down, so order doesn't matter. The goal of the game is to build a hand whose
point value is as close as possible to 21 without going over. The point values of each card are as follows: numbered
cards are worth the number on the face (for example, is worth 8 points); jacks, queens, and kings are each worth 10
points, and aces are worth either 1 or 11 points (the player can choose). Players whose hands are worth less than 21
points may ask to be dealt additional cards one at a time until they either go over 21 points or they choose to stop.

     1. What is the probability that a player (not the dealer) is dealt an initial hand worth 21 points? This can only
          happen with an ace and a card worth 10 points (10, J, Q, or K).

     2. What is the probability that the dealer is dealt an initial hand worth 21 points, with an ace showing?
     3. What is the probability that a player is dealt 2 cards worth 10 points each?
     4. What is the probability that a player is dealt an initial hand with an 8 and a 3?
     5. What is the probability that a player is dealt an initial hand with two 8s?
     6. What is the probability that a player is dealt 2 ?
     7. In some versions of the game, a player wins automatically if they draw a hand of 5 cards that doesn't go over 21

          points. One way this can happen is if they draw 5 cards, all of which are A, 2, 3, or 4. What is the probability of
          drawing 5 cards from that collection?

In horse racing, a trifecta bet is one where the player tries to predict the top three finishers in order. In the following
exercises, find the probability of choosing a winning trifecta bet at random when the field contains the given number of
horses.

     8. 6 horses
     9. 8 horses
    10. 10 horses

In the following exercises, you are about to draw Scrabble tiles from a bag without replacement; the bag contains the
letters A, A, C, E, E, E, L, L, N, O, R, S, S, S, T, X.

    11. What is the probability of drawing the letters E-A-R, in order?
    12. What is the probability of drawing the letters E-A-R, in any order?
    13. What is the probability of drawing the letters S-E-A-L, in order?
    14. What is the probability of drawing the letters S-E-A-L, in any order?
    15. What is the probability of drawing the letters L-A-S-S, in order?
    16. What is the probability of drawing the letters L-A-S-S, in any order?
    17. What is the probability of drawing 3 tiles that are all vowels?
    18. What is the probability of drawing 3 tiles that are all consonants?
    19. What is the probability of drawing 4 tiles in the pattern vowel-consonant-vowel-consonant, in order?
766 7 · Probability

           20. What is the probability of drawing 2 vowels and 2 consonants, in any order?
           21. What is the probability of drawing at least 1 vowel when drawing four tiles? (Hint: use the Formula for

                  Complements.)
           22. What is the probability of drawing at least 1 consonant when drawing four tiles?
       The following exercises involve the board game Clue, which involves a deck of 21 cards: 6 suspects, 6 weapons, and 9
       rooms. At the beginning of the game, 1 card of each of the 3 types is secretly removed from the deck (the object of the
       game is to identify those 3 cards). The remaining 18 cards are dealt out to the players. Assuming there are 3 players,
       each player gets 6 cards. Find the probabilities of a player being dealt hands with the given characteristics.
           23. All 6 cards are rooms.
           24. 5 cards are suspects (the sixth can be anything).
           25. None of the cards are rooms.
           26. None of the cards are suspects.
           27. 3 cards are suspects and 3 are weapons.
           28. There are 2 cards of each type.
           29. There are 3 rooms, 2 suspects, and 1 weapon.
           30. There are 4 rooms and 5 suspects.

    7.7 What Are the Odds?

       Figure 7.33 Scratch-off lottery tickets, as well as many other games, represent the likelihood of winning using odds.
       (credit: "My Scratch-off Winnings" by Shoshanah/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Compute odds.
        2. Determine odds from probabilities.
        3. Determine probabilities from odds.
       A particular lottery instant-win game has 2 million tickets available. Of those, 500,000 win a prize. If there are 500,000
       winners, then it follows that there are 1,500,000 losing tickets. When we evaluate the risk associated with a game like
       this, it can be useful to compare the number of ways to win the game to the number of ways to lose. In the case of this
       game, we would compare the 500,000 wins to the 1,500,000 losses. In other words, there are 3 losing tickets for every
       winning ticket. Comparisons of this type are the focus of this section.

     Computing Odds

       The ratio of the number of equally likely outcomes in an event to the number of equally likely outcomes not in the
       event is called the odds for (or odds in favor of) the event. The opposite ratio (the number of outcomes not in the
       event to the number in the event to the number in the event is called the odds against the event.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.7 · What Are the Odds? 767

Both odds and probabilities are calculated as ratios. To avoid confusion, we will always use fractions, decimals, or
percents for probabilities, and we'll use colons to indicate odds. The rules for simplifying fractions apply to odds,
too. Thus, the odds for winning a prize in the game described in the section opener are
and the odds against winning a prize are . These would often be described in words as "the odds of winning are
one to three in favor" or "the odds of winning are three to one against.".

Notice that, while probabilities must always be between zero and one inclusive, odds can be any (non-negative)
number, as we'll see in the next example.

EXAMPLE 7.25

Computing Odds
 1. If you roll a fair 6-sided die, what are the odds for rolling a 5 or higher?
 2. If you roll two fair 6-sided dice, what are the odds against rolling a sum of 7?
 3. If you draw a card at random from a standard deck, what are the odds for drawing a ?
 4. If you draw 2 cards at random from a standard deck, what are the odds against them both being ?

Solution

1. The sample space for this experiment is {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. Two of those outcomes are in the event "roll a five or

higher," while four are not. So, the odds for rolling a five or higher are  .

2. In Example 7.18, we found the sample space for this experiment using the following table (Figure 7.34):

                                            Figure 7.34

There are 6 outcomes in the event "roll a sum of 7," and there are 30 outcomes not in the event. So, the odds against

rolling a 7 are  .

3. There are 13 in a standard deck, and     others. So, the odds in favor of drawing a are                             .

4. There are     ways to draw 2 , and       ways to draw 2 cards that are not both . So, the

odds against drawing 2 are               .

      YOUR TURN 7.25

You roll a pair of 4-sided dice with faces labeled 1 through 4.
    1. What are the odds for rolling a sum greater than 3?
    2. What are the odds against both dice giving the same number?
768 7 · Probability

Odds as a Ratio of Probabilities

We can also think of odds as a ratio of probabilities. Consider again the instant-win game from the section opener, with

500,000 winning tickets out of 2,000,000 total tickets. If a player buys one ticket, the probability of winning is

                     , and the probability of losing is  . Notice that the ratio of the probability of winning to the

probability of losing is         , which matches the odds in favor of winning.

FORMULA

For an event ,

We can use these formulas to convert probabilities to odds, and vice versa.

  EXAMPLE 7.26

Converting Probabilities to Odds
Given the following probabilities of an event, find the corresponding odds for and odds against that event.
 1.
 2.

     Solution
 1. Using the formula, we have:

     (Note that in the last step, we simplified by multiplying both terms in the ratio by 5.)
     Since the odds for are , the odds against must be .
2. Again, we'll use the formula:

(In the last step, we simplified by dividing both terms in the ratio by 0.17.)

It follows that the odds against are approximately       .

      YOUR TURN 7.26
1. If the probability of an event is 80%, find the odds for and the odds against .

Now, let's convert odds to probabilities. Let's say the odds for an event are   . Then, using the formula above, we

have                             . Converting to fractions and solving for     , we get:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             7.7 · What Are the Odds? 769

Let's put this result in a formula we can use.

FORMULA

If the odds in favor of are  , then
                  .

EXAMPLE 7.27

Converting Odds to Probabilities

Find  if :

1. The odds of are        in favor
2. The odds of are        against

Solution

1. Using the formula we just found, we have                   .

2. If the odds against are , then the odds for are . Thus, using the formula,                .

      YOUR TURN 7.27

Find  if :

      1. The odds of are     against
                             in favor
      2. The odds of are

      Some places, particularly state lottery websites, will use the words "odds" and "probability" interchangeably. Never
      assume that the word "odds" is being used correctly! Compute one of the odds/probabilities yourself to make sure
      you know how the word is being used!

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, you are rolling a 6-sided die with 3 orange faces, 2 green faces, and 1 blue face.
    37. What are the odds in favor of rolling a green face?
    38. What are the odds against rolling a blue face?
    39. What are the odds in favor of rolling an orange face?

40. What are the odds in favor of an event with probability ?

41. What are the odds against an event with probability ?

42. What is the probability of an event with odds  against?
43. What is the probability of an event with odds  in favor?

        SECTION 7.7 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the probabilities of events with the given odds in favor.
770 7 · Probability

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

For the following exercises, find the probabilities of events with the given odds against.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.

In the following exercises, find the odds in favor of events with the given probabilities. Give your answer as a ratio of

whole numbers. If neither of those two numbers is 1, also give an answer as a ratio involving both 1 and a number

greater than or equal to 1 (for example, the odds and can be reduced to  and                ).

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

In the following exercises, find the odds against events with the given probabilities. Give your answer as a ratio of

whole numbers. If neither of those two numbers is 1, also give an answer as a ratio involving both 1 and a number

greater than or equal to 1 (for example, the odds and can be reduced to  and                ).

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

In the following exercises, you are drawing from a deck containing only these 10 cards:
    , , , , , , , ,,.
    33. Let be the event "draw an ace."
            a. What is the probability of ?
           b. What are the odds in favor of ?
            c. What are the odds against ?

    34. Let be the event "draw a ".
            a. What is the probability of ?
           b. What are the odds in favor of ?
            c. What are the odds against ?

    35. Let be the event "draw two (without replacement)."
            a. What is the probability of ?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               7.8 · The Addition Rule for Probability 771

           b. What are the odds in favor of ?
            c. What are the odds against ?

7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability

Figure 7.35 Students can be sorted using a variety of possible categories like class year, major, whether they are a varsity
athlete, and so forth. (credit: "Multicultural Mashup Melds Languages, Cultures at COD 36" by COD Newsroom/Flickr, CC
BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify mutually exclusive events.
 2. Apply the Addition Rule to compute probability.
 3. Use the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle to compute probability.

Up to this point, we have looked at the probabilities of simple events. Simple events are those with a single, simple
characterization. Sometimes, though, we want to investigate more complicated situations. For example, if we are
choosing a college student at random, we might want to find the probability that the chosen student is a varsity athlete
or in a Greek organization. This is a compound event: there are two possible criteria that might be met. We might
instead try to identify the probability that the chosen student is both a varsity athlete and in a Greek organization. In this
section and the next, we'll cover probabilities of two types of compound events: those build using "or" and those built
using "and." We'll deal with the former first.

Mutual Exclusivity

Before we get to the key techniques of this section, we must first introduce some new terminology. Let's say you're
drawing a card from a standard deck. We'll consider 3 events: is the event "the card is a ," is the event "the card is a
10," and is the event "the card is a ." If the card drawn is , then and didn't occur, but did. If the card drawn is
instead , then didn't occur, but both and did.

We can see from these examples that, if we are interested in several possible events, more than one of them can occur
simultaneously (both and , for example). But, if you think about all the possible outcomes, you can see that and
can never occur simultaneously; there are no cards in the deck that are both and . Pairs of events that cannot both
occur simultaneously are called mutually exclusive. Let's go through an example to help us better understand this
concept.

  EXAMPLE 7.28

Identifying Mutually Exclusive Events
Decide whether the following events are mutually exclusive. If they are not mutually exclusive, identify an outcome that
would result in both events occurring.

 1. You are about to roll a standard 6-sided die. is the event "the die shows an even number" and is the event "the
      die shows an odd number."

 2. You are about to roll a standard 6-sided die. is the event "the die shows an even number" and is the event "the
      die shows a number less than 4."

 3. You are about to flip a coin 4 times. is the event "at least 2 heads are flipped" and is the event "fewer than 3 tails
      are flipped."
772 7 · Probability

Solution

1. Let's look at the outcomes for each event:   and  . There are no outcomes in common, so

and are mutually exclusive.

2. Again, consider the outcomes in each event:  and  . Since the outcome 2 belongs to both

events, these are not mutually exclusive.

3. Suppose the results of the 4 flips are HTTH. Then at least 2 heads are flipped, and fewer than 3 tails are flipped. That

means that both and occurred, and so these events are not mutually exclusive.

        YOUR TURN 7.28

  Suppose you're about to draw one card from a deck containing only these 10 cards: , , , , , , ,
       , , . Decide whether these events are mutually exclusive:
      1. is the event "the card is an ace" and is the event "the card is a king."
      2. is the event "the card is a " and is the event "the card is an ace."
      3. is the event "the card is a " and is the event "the card is a king."

The Addition Rule for Mutually Exclusive Events

If two events are mutually exclusive, then we can use addition to find the probability that one or the other event occurs.

  FORMULA

  If and are mutually exclusive events, then
                                                                                                        .

Why does this formula work? Let's consider a basic example. Suppose we're about to draw a Scrabble tile from a bag
containing A, A, B, E, E, E, R, S, S, U. What is the probability of drawing an E or an S? Since 3 of the tiles are marked with E
and 2 are marked with S, there are 5 tiles that satisfy the criteria. There are ten tiles in the bag, so the probability is

           . Notice that the probability of drawing an E is and the probability of drawing an S is ; adding those

together, we get                 . Look at the numerators in the fractions involved in the sum: the 3 represents the

number of E tiles and the 2 is the number of S tiles. This is why the Addition Rule works: The total number of outcomes in
one event or the other is the sum of the numbers of outcomes in each of the individual events.

EXAMPLE 7.29

Using the Addition Rule
For each of the given pairs of events, decide if the Addition Rule applies. If it does, use the Addition Rule to find the
probability that one or the other occurs.

 1. You are rolling a standard 6-sided die. Event is "roll an even number" and event is "roll a 3."
 2. You are drawing a card at random from a standard 52-card deck. Event is "draw a " and event is "draw a king."
 3. You are rolling a pair of standard 6-sided dice. Event is "roll an odd sum" and event is "roll a sum of 10." The

      table we constructed in Example 7.18 might help.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   7.8 · The Addition Rule for Probability 773

                                             Figure 7.36

Solution

1. Since 3 is not an even number, these events are mutually exclusive. So, we can use the Addition Rule: since

          and      , we get                                   .

2. If the card drawn is , then both and occur. So, they aren't mutually exclusive, and the Addition Rule doesn't

apply.

3. Since 10 is not odd, these events are mutually exclusive. Since       and       , the Addition Rule gives

us                                 .

YOUR TURN 7.29

Suppose you're about to draw one card from a deck containing only these 10 cards:

,,,                , , , , , , . If appropriate, use the Addition Rule to find the probability that one or

the other of these events occurs:

1. is the event "the card is an ace" and is the event "the card is a king."

2. is the event "the card is a " and is the event "the card is an ace."

3. is the event "the card is a " and is the event "the card is a king."

Finding Probabilities When Events Aren't Mutually Exclusive

Let's return to the example we used to explore the Addition Rule: We're about to draw a Scrabble tile from a bag

containing A, A, B, E, E, E, R, S, S, U. Consider these events: is "draw a vowel" and is "draw a letter that comes after L

in the alphabet." Since there are 6 vowels,  . There are 4 tiles with letters that come after L alphabetically, so

        . What is  ? If we blindly apply the Addition Rule, we get                 , which would mean that the

compound event or  is certain. However, it's possible to draw a B, in which case neither nor  happens. Where's
the error?

The events are not mutually exclusive: the outcome U belongs to both events, and so the Addition Rule doesn't apply.
However, there's a way to extend the Addition Rule to allow us to find this probability anyway; it's called the Inclusion/
Exclusion Principle. In this example, if we just add the two probabilities together, the outcome U is included in the sum
twice: It's one of the 6 outcomes represented in the numerator of , and it's one of the 4 outcomes represented in the

numerator of . So, that particular outcome has been "double counted." Since it has been included twice, we can get a

true accounting by excluding it once:        . We can generalize this idea to a formula that we can apply to

find the probability of any compound event built using "or."
774 7 · Probability

FORMULA

Inclusion/Exclusion Principle: If and are events that contain outcomes of a single experiment, then
                                                                                                                .

It's worth noting that this formula is truly an extension of the Addition Rule. Remember that the Addition Rule requires

that the events and are mutually exclusive. In that case, the compound event  is impossible, and so

                     . So, in cases where the events in question are mutually exclusive, the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle

reduces to the Addition Rule.

EXAMPLE 7.30

Using the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle
Suppose we have events , , and , associated with these probabilities:

Compute the following:
 1.
 2.
 3.

     Solution
 1. Using the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle, we get:

 2. Again, we'll apply the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle:

 3. Applying the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle one more time:

        YOUR TURN 7.30
  You are about to roll a special 6-sided die that has both a colored letter and a colored number on each face. The
  faces are labeled with: a red 1 and a blue A, a red 1 and a green A, an orange 1 and a green B, an orange 2 and a red
  C, a purple 3 and a brown D, an orange 4 and a blue E. Find the probabilities of these events:

      1. The number is orange or even.
      2. The letter is green or an A.
      3. The number is even or the letter is green.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      7.8 · The Addition Rule for Probability 775

Check Your Understanding

You are about to draw a card at random from a deck containing only these 10 cards: , , , , , , ,
    , , . Compute the following probabilities:
    44. You draw an ace or a king.
    45. You draw a or a .
    46. You draw an ace or a .
    47. You draw a jack or a .
    48. You draw a jack or a .
    49. You draw a king or a .

        SECTION 7.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, we are considering a special 6-sided die, with faces that are labeled with a number and a
letter: 1A, 1B, 2A, 2C, 4A, and 4E. You are about to roll this die once.

     1. What is the probability of rolling a 1 or a 2?
     2. What is the probability of rolling a 4 or a B?
     3. What is the probability of rolling an even number or a consonant?
     4. What is the probability of rolling a 2 or an E?
     5. What is the probability of rolling an odd number or a vowel?
     6. What is the probability of rolling an odd number or a consonant?

In the following exercises, you are drawing a single card from a standard 52-card deck.
     7. What is the probability that you draw a or a ?
     8. What is the probability that you draw a or a 5?
     9. What is the probability that you draw a 2 or a 3?
    10. What is the probability that you draw a card with an even number on it?
    11. What is the probability that you draw a card with an even number on it or a ?
    12. What is the probability that you draw an ace or a king?
    13. What is the probability that you draw a face card (king, queen, or jack)?
    14. What is the probability that you draw a face card or a ?

For the following exercises, use the table provided here, which breaks down the enrollment at a certain liberal arts
college by class year and area of study:

                                                                                                            Class Year

                                            First-Year Sophomore Junior Senior Totals

Area Of Study  Arts                         138  121  148  132  539

               Humanities                   258  301  275  283 1117

               Social Science               142  151  130  132  555

               Natural Science/Mathematics  175  197  203  188  763

               Totals                       713  770  756  735 2974

    15. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is a first-year or sophomore?
    16. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is a junior or an arts major?
    17. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is majoring in the social sciences or the natural

          sciences/mathematics?
    18. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is a social science major or a sophomore?
    19. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is a senior or is a humanities major?
    20. What is the probability that a randomly selected student is majoring in the arts or humanities?

The following exercises are about the casino game roulette. In this game, the dealer spins a marble around a wheel
that contains 38 pockets that the marble can fall into. Each pocket has a number (each whole number from 0 to 36,
776 7 · Probability

       along with a double zero) and a color (0 and 00 are both green; the other 36 numbers are evenly divided between black
       and red). Players make bets on which number (or groups of numbers) they think the marble will land on. The figure
       shows the layout of the numbers and colors, as well as some of the bets that can be made.

                Roulette Table (credit: "American Roulette Table Layout" by Film8ker/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
       What is the probability of winning at least one of the following pairs of bets on a single spin of the wheel?

           21. First dozen (wins if any of the numbers 1-12 come up) or second dozen (wins on 13-24)
           22. Red (wins on any of the 18 red numbers) or black (wins on any of the 18 black numbers)
           23. Even (wins on any even number 2-36; 0 and 00 both lose this bet) or red
           24. Middle column (the numbers 2, 5, 8, 11, ..., 35) or black
           25. Middle column or red
           26. Right column (the numbers 3, 6, 9, ..., 36) or black
           27. Right column or red
           28. Odd or black
           29. Even or black
           30. The street bet (a bet on 3 numbers that make up a row on the table) on 1, 2, 3 or odd
           31. The street bet on 1, 2, 3 or even
           32. The corner bet (a bet on 4 numbers that form a square on the table) on 1, 2, 4, 5 or first dozen
           33. The corner bet on 1, 2, 4, 5 or second dozen
           34. The basket bet (which wins on 0, 00, 1, 2, 3) or red
           35. The basket bet or black

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 777

7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule

Figure 7.37 If you roll two dice by throwing them one at a time, the face showing on the first die will affect the possible
outcomes for the sum of the two dice. (credit: "dice" by Ciarán Archer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate conditional probabilities.
 2. Apply the Multiplication Rule for Probability to compute probabilities.
Back in Example 7.18, we constructed the following table (Figure 7.38) to help us find the probabilities associated with
rolling two standard 6-sided dice:

                                                                             Figure 7.38
For example, 3 of these 36 equally likely outcomes correspond to rolling a sum of 10, so the probability of rolling a 10 is

            . However, if you choose to roll the dice one at a time, the probability of rolling a 10 will change after the first die
comes to rest. For example, if the first die shows a 5, then the probability of rolling a sum of 10 has jumped to --the
event will occur if the second die also shows a 5, which is 1 of 6 equally likely outcomes for the second die. If instead the
first die shows a 3, then the probability of rolling a sum of 10 drops to 0--there are no outcomes for the second die that
will give us a sum of 10.
Understanding how probabilities can shift as we learn new information is critical in the analysis of our second type of
compound events: those built with "and." This section will explain how to compute probabilities of those compound
events.

Conditional Probabilities

When we analyze experiments with multiple stages, we often update the probabilities of the possible final outcomes or
the later stages of the experiment based on the results of one or more of the initial stages. These updated probabilities
are called conditional probabilities.
778 7 · Probability

In other words, if         is a possible outcome of the first stage in a multistage experiment, then the probability of an event
   conditional on
                           (denoted      , read "the probability of given ") is the updated probability of under the
assumption that
                           occurred.

In the example that opened this section, we might consider rolling two dice as a multistage experiment: rolling one, then

the other. If we define to be the event "roll a sum of 10," to be the event "first die shows 5," and to be the event

"first die shows 3," then we computed         ,                , and                               .

EXAMPLE 7.31

Computing Conditional Probabilities

1. April is playing a coin-flipping game with Ben. She will flip a coin 3 times. If the coin lands on heads more than tails,

April wins; if it lands on tails more than heads, Ben wins. Let be the event "April wins," be "first flip is heads,"

and be "first flip is tails." Compute    ,              , and            .

2. You are about to draw 2 cards without replacement from a deck containing only these 10 cards: , , , ,

, , , , , . We'll define the following events: is "both cards are the same rank," is "first card is an

ace," and is "first card is a king." Compute            and                 .

3. Jim's sock drawer contains 5 black socks and 3 blue socks. To avoid waking his partner, Jim doesn't want to turn the

lights on, so he puts on 2 socks at random. Let be the event "Jim's 2 socks match," let be the event "the sock on

Jim's left foot is black," and let be the event "the sock on Jim's left foot is blue." Compute           ,  , and

                     .

Solution

1. Step 1. The sample space is {HHH, HHT, HTH, THH, HTT, THT, TTH, TTT}. The event                    consists of the first 4 of those

outcomes: HHH, HHT, HTH, and THH. Thus,                        .

Step 2. Now, let's compute               . We are assuming the result of the first flip is heads. That leaves us with 4

possible outcomes: HHH, HHT, HTH, and HTT. Of those, April wins 3 (HHH, HHT, HTH) and loses one (HTT). So,

                        .

Step 3. If the result of the first flip is instead tails, the 4 possible outcomes are THH, THT, TTH, and TTT. Of those,

April wins 1 (THH) and loses 3 (THT, TTH, TTT). So,                   .

2. Step 1. If the event happens, then 1 of the 4 aces is drawn first; the remaining cards in the deck are 3 aces, 2

kings, 2 queens, and 2 jacks. In order for the event to occur, the second card drawn has to be an ace. Since there

are 3 aces among the remaining 9 cards,                        .

Step 2. If the event happens instead, then the first card drawn is a king. That leaves 4 aces, 1 king, 2 queens, and

2 jacks in the deck. Under the assumption that the first card is a king, the event will occur only if the second card

is also a king. Since only one of the remaining 9 cards is a king, we have                            .

3. Step 1. We can view the event as a compound event using "or": both socks are blue or both socks are black. Let's
     compute the probability that both socks are blue using combinations. We're choosing 2 socks from a group of 8; 3 of

the 8 are blue. So,                                     . Similarly,                                     . Therefore, since

these events are mutually exclusive, we can use the Addition Rule:
                                                                                                .

Step 2. If the sock on Jim's left foot is black (i.e.,  occurred), then there are 4 remaining black socks of the 7 in the

drawer. So,                           .

Step 3. If the sock on Jim's left foot is blue ( occurred), then there are 2 blue socks among the 7 remaining in the

drawer. So,                           .

      YOUR TURN 7.31

You are about to roll a special 6-sided die that has both a colored letter and a colored number on each face. The
faces are labeled with: a red 1 and a blue A, a red 1 and a green A, an orange 1 and a green B, an orange 2 and a red
C, a purple 3 and a brown D, an orange 4 and a blue E. Find the given conditional probabilities:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 779

1.
2.
3.

In Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes, we introduced the concept of dependence between stages of a multistage

experiment. We stated at the time that two stages were dependent if the result of one stage affects the other stage.

We explained that dependence in terms of the sample space, but sometimes that dependence can be a little more

subtle; it's more properly understood in terms of conditional probabilities. Two stages of an experiment are

dependent if  for some outcome of the second stage and outcome of the first stage .

      WHO KNEW?

Protecting Bombers in World War II

In his book How Not to Be Wrong, Jordan Ellenberg recounts this anecdote: During World War II, the American
military wanted to add additional armor plating to bomber aircraft, in order to reduce the chances that they get shot
down. So, they collected data on planes after returning from missions. The data showed that the fuselage, wings, and
fuel system had many more bullet holes (per unit area) than the engine compartments, so the military brass wanted
to add additional armor to the parts of the plane that were hit most often. Luckily, before they added the armor to the
planes, they asked for a second opinion. Abraham Wald, a Jewish mathematician who had fled the rising Nazi regime,
pointed out that it was far more important that the armor plating be added to areas where there were fewer bullet
holes. Why? The planes they were studying had already completed their missions, so the military was essentially
looking at conditional probabilities: the probability of suffering a bullet strike, given that the plane made it back
safely. More bullet holes in an area on the plane indicated that was a region that wasn't as important for the plane's
survival!

Compound Events Using "And" and the Multiplication Rule

For multistage experiments, the outcomes of the experiment as a whole are often stated in terms of the outcomes of the
individual stages. Commonly, those statements are joined with "and." For example, in the sock drawer example just
above, one outcome might be "the left sock is black and the right sock is blue." As with "or" compound events, these
probabilities can be computed with basic arithmetic.

FORMULA

Multiplication Rule for Probability: If and  are events associated with the first and second stages of an experiment,

then          .

In The Addition Rule for Probability, we considered probabilities of events connected with "and" in the statement of
the Inclusion/Exclusion Principle. These two scenarios are different; in the statement of the Inclusion/Exclusion
Principle, the events connected with "and" are both events associated with the same single-stage experiment (or the
same stage of a multistage experiment). In the Multiplication Rule, we're looking at events associated with different
stages of a multistage experiment.

  EXAMPLE 7.32

Using the Multiplication Rule for Probability
You are president of a club with 10 members: 4 seniors, 3 juniors, 2 sophomores, and 1 first-year. You need to choose 2
members to represent the club on 2 college committees. The first person selected will be on the Club Awards Committee
and the second will be on the New Club Orientation Committee. The same person cannot be selected for both. You
decide to select these representatives at random.
780 7 · Probability

1. What is the probability that a senior is chosen for both positions?
2. What is the probability that a junior is chosen first and a sophomore is chosen second?
3. What is the probability that a sophomore is chosen first and a senior is chosen second?

    Solution
1. We need the probability that a senior is chosen first and a senior is chosen second. These are two stages of a

     multistage experiment, so we'll apply the Multiplication Rule for Probability:

    Since there are 4 seniors among the 10 members,                                                        . Next, assuming a senior is

    chosen first, there are 3 seniors among the 9 remaining members. So,
                                                                               . Putting this all together, we get

                                                                          .

2. There are 3 juniors among the 10 members, so                                                         . Assuming a junior is chosen first, there

    are 2 sophomores among the remaining 9 members, so                                                                    . Thus,

    using the Multiplication Rule for Probability, we have
                                                                                                     .

3. The probability that a sophomore is chosen first is  , and the probability that a senior is chosen second given

    that a sophomore was chosen first is . Thus, using the Multiplication Rule for Probability, we have:

                                                                             .

      YOUR TURN 7.32                                                                                       , , , , and .

You're drawing 2 cards in order from a deck containing only the cards , , ,
Compute the following:

    1.
    2.
    3.

WORK IT OUT

The Birthday Problem
One of the most famous problems in probability theory is the Birthday Problem, which has to do with shared
birthdays in a large group. To make the analysis easier, we'll ignore leap days, and assume that the probability of
being born on any given date is . Now, if you have 366 people in a room, we're guaranteed to have at least one

pair of people who share a single birthday. Imagine filling the room by first admitting someone born on January 1,
then someone born on January 2, and so on... The 365th person admitted would be born on December 31. If you add
one more person to the room, that person's birthday would have to match someone else's.

Let's look at the other end of the spectrum. If you choose two people at random, what is the probability that they
share a birthday? As with many probability questions, this is best addressed by find out the probability that they do
not share a birthday. The first person's birthday can be anything (probability 1), and the second person's birthday can
be anything other than the first person's birthday (probability ). The probability that they have different birthdays

is                   . So, the probability that they share a birthday is                                .

What if we have three people? The probability that they all have different birthdays can be obtained by extending our
previous calculation: The probability that two people have different birthdays is , so if we add a third to the mix,

the probability that they have a different birthday from the other two is . So, the probability that all three have

different birthdays is           , and thus the probability that there's a shared birthday in the group is

                     .

The big question is this: How many people do we need in the room to have the probability of a shared birthday

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 781

  greater than ? Make a guess, then with a partner keep adding hypothetical people to the group and computing
  probabilities until you get there!

It is often useful to combine the rules we've seen so far with the techniques we used for finding sample spaces. In
particular, trees can be helpful when we want to identify the probabilities of every possible outcome in a multistage
experiment. The next example will illustrate this.

  EXAMPLE 7.33

Using Tree Diagrams to Help Find Probabilities
The board game Clue uses a deck of 21 cards: 6 suspects, 6 weapons, and 9 rooms. Suppose you are about to draw 2
cards from this deck. There are 6 possible outcomes for the draw: 2 suspects, 2 weapons, 2 rooms, 1 suspect and 1
weapon, 1 suspect and 1 room, or 1 weapon and 1 room. What are the probabilities for each of these outcomes?

     Solution
Step 1: Let's start by building a tree diagram that illustrates both stages of this experiment. Let's use S, W, and R to
indicate drawing a suspect, weapon, and room, respectively (Figure 7.39).

                 Figure 7.39

Step 2: We want to start computing probabilities, starting with the first stage. The probability that the first card is a

suspect is    . The probability that the first card is a weapon is the same: . Finally, the probability that the first card

is a room is  .
782 7 · Probability

       Step 3: Let's incorporate those probabilities into our tree: label the edges going into each of the nodes representing the
       first-stage outcomes with the corresponding probabilities (Figure 7.40).

                                      Figure 7.40

Note that the sum of the probabilities coming out of the initial node is 1; this should always be the case for the
probabilities coming out of any node!

Step 4: Let's look at the case where the first card is a suspect. There are 3 edges emanating from that node (leading to
the outcomes SS, SW, and SR). We'll label those edges with the appropriate conditional probabilities, under the
assumption that the first card is a suspect. First, there are 5 remaining suspect cards among the 20 left in the deck, so

                                                                 . Using similar reasoning, we can compute

                                 and               .

Step 5: Checking our work, we see that the sum of these 3 probabilities is again equal to 1. Let's add those to our tree
(Figure 7.41).

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 783

                                                                             Figure 7.41
Step 6: Let's continue filling in the conditional probabilities at the other nodes, always checking to make sure the sum of
the probabilities coming out of any node is equal to 1 (Figure 7.42).
784 7 · Probability

                                 Figure 7.42

Step 7: We can compute the probability of landing on any final node by multiplying the probabilities along the path we

would take to get there. For example, the probability of drawing a suspect first and a weapon second (i.e., ending up on

the node labeled "SW") is        , as illustrated in Figure 7.43.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 785

                                                                             Figure 7.43
Step 8: Let's fill in the rest of the probabilities (Figure 7.44).
786 7 · Probability

                                                                             Figure 7.44

Step 9: A helpful feature of tree diagrams is that the final outcomes are always mutually exclusive, so the Addition Rule
can be directly applied. For example, the probability of drawing one suspect and one room (in any order) would be

                                                . We can find the probabilities of the other outcomes in a similar fashion, as shown in
the following table:

                                 Outcome                 Probability

                                 2 suspects

                                 2 weapons

                                 2 rooms

                                 1 suspect and 1 weapon

                                 1 suspect and 1 room

                                 1 weapon and 1 room

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 787

Checking once again, the sum of these 6 probabilities is 1, as expected.

        YOUR TURN 7.33

  1. You are about to perform the following two-stage experiment. First, you will flip a coin. If the result is heads, roll
      a standard 6-sided die. If the result of the coin flip is tails, roll a modified 6-sided die with faces labeled 1, 1, 1, 2,
      2, 3. Use a tree diagram to find the probability of rolling each of the numbers from 1 to 6.

  WORK IT OUT

  The Monty Hall Problem
  On the original version of the game show Let's Make a Deal, originally hosted by Monty Hall and now hosted by
  Wayne Brady, one contestant was chosen to play a game for the grand prize of the day (often a car). Here's how it
  worked: On the stage were three areas concealed by numbered curtains. The car was hidden behind one of the
  curtains; the other two curtains hid worthless prizes (called "Zonks" on the show). The contestant would guess which
  curtain concealed the car. To build tension, Monty would then reveal what was behind one of the other curtains, which
  was always one of the Zonks (Since Monty knew where the car was hidden, he always had at least one Zonk curtain
  that hadn't been chosen that he could reveal). Monty then turned to the contestant and asked: "Do you want to stick
  with your original choice, or do you want to switch your choice to the other curtain?" What should the contestant do?
  Does it matter?

  With a partner or in a small group, simulate this game. You can do that with a small candy (the prize) hidden under
  one of three cups, or with three playing cards (just decide ahead of time which card represents the "Grand Prize").
  One person plays the host, who knows where the prize is hidden. Another person plays the contestant and tries to
  guess where the prize is hidden. After the guess is made, the host should reveal a losing option that wasn't chosen by
  the contestant. The contestant then has the option to stick with the original choice or switch to the other, unrevealed
  option. Play about 20 rounds, taking turns in each role and making sure that both contestant strategies (stick or
  switch) are used equally often. After each round, make a note of whether the contestant chose "stick" or "switch" and
  whether the contestant won or lost. Find the empirical probability of winning under each strategy. Then, see if you
  can use tree diagrams to verify your findings.

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, you are rolling two 6-sided dice, each of which has 3 orange faces, 2 green faces, and 1 blue
face.

    50. What is the probability of rolling 2 orange faces?
    51. What is the probability of rolling 2 green faces?
    52. What is the probability of rolling 1 orange and 1 green face (in any order)?
For the following exercises, you are about to draw 2 cards at random (without replacement) from a deck containing
only these 10 cards: , , , , , , , , , .
    53. What is the probability of drawing 2 aces?
    54. What is the probability of drawing an ace first and a king second?
    55. What is the probability of drawing a and a (in any order)?

        SECTION 7.9 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, we are considering a special 6-sided die, with faces that are labeled with a number and a
letter: 1A, 1B, 2A, 2C, 4A, and 4E. You are about to roll this die twice.

     1. What is the probability of rolling two 1s?
     2. What is the probability of rolling two vowels?
     3. What is the probability of rolling an even number first and an odd number second?
     4. What is the probability of rolling an even number and an odd number in any order?
788 7 · Probability

5. What is the probability of rolling a consonant first and a 1 second?
6. What is the probability of rolling one number less than 3 and one number greater than 3, in any order?

In the following exercises, you are about to draw Scrabble tiles from a bag; the bag contains the letters A, A, C, E, E, E, L,
L, N, O, R, S, S, S, T, X.

     7. If you draw 1 tile at random, compute
           a.
           b.

8. If you draw 1 tile at random, compute:
     a.
     b.

 9. If you draw 2 tiles with replacement, compute                .                 .
10. If you draw 2 tiles without replacement, compute                  .                 .
11. If you draw 2 tiles with replacement, compute
12. If you draw 2 tiles without replacement, compute       .                  .
13. If you draw 2 tiles with replacement, compute              .                  .
14. If you draw 2 tiles without replacement, compute
15. If you draw 2 tiles with replacement, compute
16. If you draw 2 tiles without replacement, compute

For the following exercises, use the table provided, which breaks down the enrollment at a certain liberal arts college by
class year and area of study.

                                                           Class Year

                                                      First-Year Sophomore Junior Senior Totals

Area Of Study                    Arts                 138  121           148  132          539

                                 Humanities           258  301           275  283 1117

                                 Social Science       142  151           130  132          555

                     Natural Science/Mathematics      175  197           203  188          763

                                 Totals               713  770           756  735 2974

    17. Compute the probability that a randomly selected student is a sophomore, given that they are majoring in the
          arts.

    18. Compute the probability that a randomly selected student is majoring in the arts, given that they are a
          sophomore.

    19. If two seniors are chosen at random, compute the probability that both are social science majors. Give your
          answer as a decimal, rounded to 5 decimal places.

    20. If two humanities majors are chosen at random, compute the probability that the first is a senior and the
          second is a junior. Give your answer as a decimal, rounded to 5 decimal places.

    21. If two natural science/mathematics majors are chosen at random, compute the probability that one is a
          sophomore and one is a senior (in any order). Give your answer as a decimal, rounded to 5 decimal places.

    22. If two students are chosen at random, compute the probability that one is an arts major and one is a social
          science major, in any order. Give your answer as a decimal, rounded to 5 decimal places.

In the following exercises deal with the game "Punch a Bunch," which appears on the TV game show The Price Is Right.
In this game, contestants have a chance to punch through up to 4 paper circles on a board; behind each circle is a card
with a dollar amount printed on it. There are 50 of these circles; the dollar amounts are given in this table:

Access for free at openstax.org
             7.9 · Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule 789

Dollar Amount Frequency

$25,000  1

$10,000  2

$5,000   4

$2,500   8

$1,000   10

$500     10

$250     10

$100     5

Contestants are shown their selected dollar amounts one at a time, in the order selected. After each is revealed, the
contestant is given the option of taking that amount of money or throwing it away in favor of the next amount. (You
can watch the game being played in the video Playing "Punch a Bunch." (https://openstax.org/r/
Playing_Punch_a_Bunch)) Jeremy is playing "Punch a Bunch" and gets 2 punches.

    23. What is the probability that both punches are worth less than $1,000?
    24. What is the probability that both punches are worth more than $2,500?
    25. What is the probability that the second punch is worth more than the first punch, given that the first punch was

          worth $250?
    26. What is the probability that the second punch is worth more than the first punch, given that the first punch was

          worth $1,000?
    27. What is the probability that the second punch is worth less than the first punch, given that the first punch was

          worth $250?
    28. What is the probability that the second punch is worth less than the first punch, given that the first punch was

          worth $1,000?
    29. What is the probability that both punches are worth $100?
    30. What is the probability that both punches are worth the same amount?

In the following exercises, we consider two baseball teams playing a best-of-three series (meaning the first team to win
two games wins the series). Team A is a little bit better than Team B, so we expect Team A will win 55% of the time.

    31. What is the probability that Team A wins the series given that Team B wins the first game?
    32. What is the probability that Team B wins the series given that Team B wins the first game?
    33. What is the probability that Team B wins the series given that Team A wins the first game?
    34. What is the probability that Team A wins the series given that Team A wins the first game?
    35. Build a tree diagram that shows all possible outcomes of the series. Label the edges with appropriate

          probabilities.
    36. What is the probability that Team A wins the series?
    37. If instead Team A has a 75% chance of winning each game, what is the probability that Team A wins the series?
    38. If instead Team A has a 90% chance of winning each game, what is the probability that Team A wins the series?
790 7 · Probability

    7.10 The Binomial Distribution

Figure 7.45 If one baseball team has a 65% chance of beating another in any single game, what's the likelihood that they
win a best-of-seven series? (credit: "baseball game" by Britt Reints/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify binomial experiments.
 2. Use the binomial distribution to analyze binomial experiments.

It's time for the World Series, which determines the champion for this season in Major League Baseball. The scrappy Los
Angeles Angels are facing the powerhouse Cincinnati Reds. Computer models put the chances of the Reds winning any
single game against the Angels at about 65%. The World Series, as its name implies, isn't just one game, though: it's
what's known as a "best-of-seven" contest: the teams play each other repeatedly until one team wins 4 games (which
could take up to 7 games total, if each team wins three of the first 6 matchups). If the Reds truly have a 65% chance of
winning a single game, then the probability that they win the series should be greater than 65%. Exactly how much
bigger?

If you have the patience for it, you could use a tree diagram like we used in Example 7.33 to trace out all of the possible

outcomes, find all the related probabilities, and add up the ones that result in the Reds winning the series. Such a tree

diagram would have               final nodes, though, so the calculations would be very tedious. Fortunately, we have tools

at our disposal that allow us to find these probabilities very quickly. This section will introduce those tools and explain

their use.

Binomial Experiments

The tools of this section apply to multistage experiments that satisfy some pretty specific criteria. Before we move on to
the analysis, we need to introduce and explain those criteria so that we can recognize experiments that fall into this
category. Experiments that satisfy each of these criteria are called binomial experiments. A binomial experiment is an
experiment with a fixed number of repeated independent binomial trials, where each trial has the same probability of
success.

Repeated Binomial Trials

The first criterion involves the structure of the stages. Each stage of the experiment should be a replication of every
other stage; we call these replications trials. An example of this is flipping a coin 10 times; each of the ten flips is a trial,
and they all occur under the same conditions as every other. Further, each trial must have only two possible outcomes.
These two outcomes are typically labeled "success" and "failure," even if there is not a positive or negative connotation
associated with those outcomes. Experiments with more than two outcomes in their sample spaces are sometimes
reconsidered in a way that forces just two outcomes; all we need to do is completely divide the sample space into two
parts that we can label "success" and "failure." For example, your grade on an exam might be recorded as A, B, C, D, or F,
but we could instead think of the grades A, B, C, and D as "success" and a grade of F as "failure." Trials with only two
outcomes are called binomial trials (the word binomial derives from Latin and Greek roots that mean "two parts").

Independent Trials

The next criterion that we'll be looking for is independence of trials. Back in Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes, we
said that two stages of an experiment are independent if the outcome of one stage doesn't affect the other stage.
Independence is necessary for the experiments we want to analyze in this section.

Fixed Number of Trials

Next, we require that the number of trials in the experiment be decided before the experiment begins. For example, we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                7.10 · The Binomial Distribution 791

might say "flip a coin 10 times." The number of trials there is fixed at 10. However, if we say "flip a coin until you get 5
heads," then the number of trials could be as low as 5, but theoretically it could be 50 or a 100 (or more)! We can't apply
the tools from this section in cases where the number of trials is indeterminate.

Constant Probability

The next criterion needed for binomial experiments is related to the independence of the trials. We must make sure that
the probability of success in each trial is the same as the probability of success in every other trial.

  EXAMPLE 7.34

Identifying Binomial Experiments
Decide whether each of the following is a binomial experiment. For those that aren't, identify which criterion or criteria
are violated.

 1. You roll a standard 6-sided die 10 times and write down the number that appears each time.
 2. You roll a standard 6-sided die 10 times and write down whether the die shows a 6 or not.
 3. You roll a standard 6-sided die until you get a 6.
 4. You roll a standard 6-sided die 10 times. On the first roll, we define "success" as rolling a 4 or greater. After the first

      roll, we define "success" as rolling a number greater than the result of the previous roll.

     Solution
 1. Since we're noting 1 of 6 possible outcomes, the trials are not binomial. So, this isn't a binomial experiment.
 2. We have 2 possible outcomes ("6" and "not 6"), the trials are independent, the probability of success is the same

      every time, and the number of trials is fixed. This is a binomial experiment.
 3. Since the number of trials isn't fixed (we don't know if we'll get our first 6 after 1 roll or 20 rolls or somewhere in

      between), this isn't a binomial experiment.
 4. Here, the probability of success might change with every roll (on the first roll, that probability is ; if the first roll is a

      6, the probability of success on the next roll is zero). So, this is not a binomial experiment.

      YOUR TURN 7.34

Decide whether the following experiments are binomial experiments:
    1. Draw a card from a well-shuffled deck, note its suit, and replace it. Repeat this process 5 times.
    2. Draw 5 cards from a well-shuffled deck and count the number of .
    3. Draw a card from a well-shuffled deck, note whether it is a or not, and replace it. Repeat this process 5
         times.
    4. Draw cards from a well-shuffled deck until you get a .

The Binomial Formula

If we flip a coin 100 times, you might expect the number of heads to be around 50, but you probably wouldn't be
surprised if the actual number of heads was 47 or 52. What is the probability that the number of heads is exactly 50? Or
falls between 45 and 55? It seems unlikely that we would get more than 70 heads. Exactly how unlikely is that?

Each of these questions is a question about the number of successes in a binomial experiment (flip a coin 100 times,

"success" is flipping heads). We could theoretically use the techniques we've seen in earlier sections to answer each of

these, but the number of calculations we'd have to do is astronomical; just building the tree diagram that represents this

situation is more than we could complete in a lifetime; it would have  final nodes! To put that number

in perspective, if we could draw 1,000 dots every second, and we started at the moment of the Big Bang, we'd currently

be about 0.00000003% of the way to drawing out those final nodes. Luckily, there's a shortcut called the Binomial

Formula that allows us to get around doing all those calculations!

FORMULA

Binomial Formula: Suppose we have a binomial experiment with trials and the probability of success in each trial is
 . Then:
792 7 · Probability

                                                  .

We can use this formula to answer one of our questions about 100 coin flips. What is the probability of flipping exactly 50

heads? In this case,             ,  , and   , so                        . Unfortunately,

many calculators will balk at this calculation; that first factor (  ) is an enormous number, and the other two factors

are very close to zero. Even if your calculator can handle numbers that large or small, the arithmetic can create serious

errors in rounding off.

TECH CHECK

Luckily, spreadsheet programs have alternate methods for doing this calculation. In Google Sheets, we can use the
BINOMDIST function to do this calculation for us. Open up a new sheet, click in any empty cell, and type
"=BINOMDIST(50,100,0.5,FALSE)" followed by the Enter key. The cell will display the probability we seek; it's about 8%.
Let's break down the syntax of that function in Google Sheets: enter "=BINOMDIST( , , , FALSE)" to find the
probability of successes in trials with probability of success .

EXAMPLE 7.35

Using the Binomial Formula
 1. Find the probability of rolling a standard 6-sided die 4 times and getting exactly one 6 without using technology.
 2. Find the probability of rolling a standard 6-sided die 60 times and getting exactly ten 6s using technology.
 3. Find the probability of rolling a standard 6-sided die 60 times and getting exactly eight 6s using technology.

Solution

1. We'll apply the Binomial Formula, where  ,        , and           :

2. Here,             ,   , and      . In Google Sheets, we'll enter "=BINOMDIST(10, 60, 1/6, FALSE)" to get our result:

     0.137.
3. This experiment is the same as in Exercise 2 of this example; we're simply changing the number of successes from

     10 to 8. Making that change in the formula in Google Sheets, we get the probability 0.116.

        YOUR TURN 7.35

  Compute the probabilities (rounded to 3 decimal places) of the following events related to rolling a standard 4-sided
  die (with faces labeled 1, 2, 3, and 4):

      1. You roll the die 10 times and get exactly four 2s.
      2. You roll the die 20 times and get exactly four 2s.
      3. You roll the die 30 times and get exactly four 2s.

The Binomial Distribution

If we are interested in the probability of more than just a single outcome in a binomial experiment, it's helpful to think of
the Binomial Formula as a function, whose input is the number of successes and whose output is the probability of
observing that many successes. Generally, for a small number of trials, we'll give that function in table form, with a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             7.10 · The Binomial Distribution 793

complete list of the possible outcomes in one column and the probability in the other.

For example, suppose Kristen is practicing her basketball free throws. Assume Kristen always makes 82% of those shots.
If she attempts 5 free throws, then the Binomial Formula gives us these probabilities:

   Shots Made Probability

                                                     0  0.000189

                                                     1  0.004304

                                                     2  0.0392144

                                                     3  0.1786432

                                                     4  0.4069096

                                                     5  0.3707398

A table that lists all possible outcomes of an experiment along with the probabilities of those outcomes is an example of
a probability density function (PDF). A PDF may also be a formula that you can use to find the probability of any
outcome of an experiment.

      Because they refer to the same thing, some sources will refer to the Binomial Formula as the Binomial PDF.

If we want to know the probability of a range of outcomes, we could add up the corresponding probabilities. Going back
to Kristen's free throws, we can find the probability that she makes 3 or fewer of her 5 attempts by adding up the
probabilities associated with the corresponding outcomes (in this case: 0, 1, 2, or 3):

The probability that the outcome of an experiment is less than or equal to a given number is called a cumulative
probability. A table of the cumulative probabilities of all possible outcomes of an experiment is an example of a
cumulative distribution function (CDF). A CDF may also be a formula that you can use to find those cumulative
probabilities.

      Cumulative probabilities are always associated with events that are defined using . If other inequalities are used to
      define the event, we must restate the definition so that it uses the correct inequality.

Here are the PDF and CDF for Kristen's free throws:

Shots Made Probability Cumulative

0                                                       0.000189   0.000189

1                                                       0.004304   0.004493

2                                                       0.0392144 0.0437073

3                                                       0.1786432 0.2223506

4                                                       0.4069096 0.6292602

5                                                       0.3707398  1
794 7 · Probability

        TECH CHECK

Google Sheets can also compute cumulative probabilities for us; all we need to do is change the "FALSE" in the
formulas we used before to "TRUE."

EXAMPLE 7.36

Using the Binomial CDF                                  represent the number of heads that result from those flips. Use
Suppose we are about to flip a fair coin 50 times. Let
technology to find the following:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

    Solution

1. The event here is defined by            , which is the inequality we need to have if we want to use the Binomial CDF. In

    Google Sheets, we'll enter "=BINOMDIST(22, 50, 0.5, TRUE)" to get our answer: 0.2399.

2. This event uses the wrong inequality, so we need to do some preliminary work. If        , that means

    (because has to be a whole number). So, we'll enter "=BINOMDIST(25, 50, 0.5, TRUE)" to find

                                        .

3. The inequality associated with this event is pointing in the wrong direction. If is the event  , that means

    that contains the outcomes {29, 30, 31, 32, 33, ...}. Thus, must contain the outcomes {..., 25, 26, 27, 28}. In

    other words, is defined by             . Since it uses , we can find    using "=BINOMDIST(28, 50, 0.5, TRUE)":

    0.8389 So, using the formula for probabilities of complements, we have

4. As in part 3, this inequality is pointing in the wrong direction. If is the event       , then contains the

    outcomes {20, 21, 22, 23, ...}. That means contains the outcomes {..., 16, 17, 18, 19}, and so is defined by

                     . So, we can find  using "=BINOMDIST(19, 50, 0.5, TRUE)": 0.0595. Finally, using the formula for

    probabilities of complements, we get:

5. If                , that means we are interested in the outcomes {21, 22, 23, 24}. This doesn't look like any of the

    previous situations, but there is a way to find this probability using the Binomial CDF. We need to put everything in

    terms of "less than or equal to," so we'll first note that all of our outcomes are less than or equal to 24. But we don't

    want to include values that are less than or equal to 20. So, we have three events: let be the event defined by

                     (note that we're trying to find ). Let be defined by             , and let be defined by            . Of

    these three events, contains the most outcomes. If occurs, then either or must have occurred. Moreover,

    and are mutually exclusive. Thus,                   , by the Addition Rule. Solving for the probability that we

    want, we get

        YOUR TURN 7.36
  You are about to roll a standard 6-sided die 20 times. Let denote a success, which will be rolling a number greater

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.10 · The Binomial Distribution 795

than 4. Find the probabilities of the following events, rounded to 4 decimal places:
    1.
    2.
    3.
    4.
    5.

Finally, we can answer the question posed at the beginning of this section. Remember that the Reds are facing the

Angels in the World Series, which is won by the team who is first to win 4 games. The Reds have a 65% chance to win any

game against the Angels. So, what is the probability that the Reds win the World Series? At first glance, this is not a

binomial experiment: The number of games played is not fixed, since the series ends as soon as one team wins 4 games.

However, we can extend this situation to a binomial experiment: Let's assume that 7 games are always played in the

World Series, and the winner is the team who wins more games. In a way, this is what happens in reality; it's as though

the first team to lose 4 games (and thus cannot win more than the other team) forfeits the rest of their games. So, we

can treat the actual World Series as a binomial experiment with seven trials. If is the number of games won by the

Reds, the probability that the Reds win the World Series is  . Using the techniques from the last example, we

get  .

     PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Abraham de Moivre

Abraham de Moivre was born in 1667 in France to a Protestant family. Though he was educated in Catholic schools,
he remained true to his faith; in 1687, he fled with his brother to London to escape persecution under the reign of
King Louis XIV. Once he arrived in England, he supported himself as a freelance math tutor while he conducted his
own research. Among his interests was probability; in 1711, he published the first edition of The Doctrine of Chances:
A Method of Calculating the Probabilities of Events in Play. This book was the second textbook on probability (after
Cardano's Liber de ludo aleae). De Moivre discovered an important connection between the binomial distribution and
thenormal distribution (an important concept in statistics; we'll explore that distribution and its connection to the
binomial distribution in Chapter 8). De Moivre also discovered some properties of a new probability distribution that
later became known as the Poisson distribution.

Check Your Understanding

You are rolling a 6-sided die with 3 orange faces, 2 green faces, and 1 blue face.
    56. If you roll the die 5 times and note the color showing on each roll, is this a binomial experiment?
    57. If you roll the die 5 times and count the number times you roll a green face, is this a binomial experiment?
    58. If you count how many times you roll the die until you get a blue face, is this a binomial experiment?

Suppose you're rolling the same colored 6-sided die 10 times. Let , , and represent the number of times the die
lands with an orange, green, and blue side up, respectively. Find these probabilities (round to 4 decimal places):

    59.
    60.
    61.

        SECTION 7.10 EXERCISES

In the following exercises, decide whether the described experiments are binomial experiments. For those that are not,
explain why they aren't.

     1. A golfer practices putts from 1 foot, 2 feet, 3 feet, 4 feet, and 5 feet; "success" is defined as making the putt.
     2. A game designer rolls a pair of dice 100 times and counts the number of times the sum is at least 10.
     3. A student who is completely unprepared for a multiple-choice pop quiz guesses on all 10 questions. There are 4

          choices for each of the first 5 questions and 5 choices for each of the last 5 questions. "Success" is defined as
          answering the question correctly.
     4. A baseball player is practicing pitching; he throws pitches until he gets 50 strikes.
     5. A statistician stops 20 college students at random outside a dining hall and notes their class year.
796 7 · Probability

6. An employee at a bowling alley watches each patron's first ball and counts how many are strikes over the course
    of his shift.

In the following exercises, you have an 8-sided die with 4 faces colored orange, 3 colored red, and 1 colored yellow.
You're going to roll the die 100 times: Let be the number of times a yellow face is showing, be the number of times
a red face is showing, and be the number of times an orange face is showing. Find the given probabilities, rounded
to 4 decimal places:

     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.

The following exercises are about series of games, where Team A faces Team B in a best-of series (like the World

Series). Find the probability that Team A wins the series in each of the following scenarios:

17.                              best-of-5 series

18.                              best-of-7 series

19.                              best-of-15 series

20.                              , best-of-31 series

21.                              , best-of-101 series

22.                              , best-of-5 series

23.                              , best-of-7 series

24.                              , best-of-15 series

25.                              , best-of-31 series

26.                              , best-of-101 series

27. Give the table of the PDF for flipping a fair coin 5 times and counting the heads. Do the calculations without using
      technology.

28. Give the table of the CDF for flipping a fair coin 5 times and counting the heads. Do the calculations without using
      technology.

The following exercises are about the casino game roulette. In this game, the dealer spins a marble around a wheel
that contains 38 pockets that the marble can fall into. Each pocket has a number (each whole number from 0 to 36,
along with a "double zero") and a color (0 and 00 are both green; the other 36 numbers are evenly divided between
black and red). Players make bets on which number (or groups of numbers) they think the marble will land on. The
figure shows the layout of the numbers and colors, as well as some of the bets that can be made.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                7.11 · Expected Value 797

         Roulette Table (credit: "American Roulette Table Layout" by Film8ker/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
    29. If a player bets $1 on red and wins, the player gets $2 back (the original $1 bet plus $1 winnings). What is the

          probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 5 consecutive spins?
    30. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 15 consecutive

          spins?
    31. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 30 consecutive

          spins?
    32. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 100 consecutive

          spins?
    33. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 200 consecutive

          spins?
    34. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 1,000 consecutive

          spins?
    35. What is the probability that the player wins more than they lose if the player bets on red on 5,000 consecutive

          spins?

7.11 Expected Value

Figure 7.46 The concept of expected value allows us to analyze games that involve randomness, like Roulette. (credit:
"Roulette Table and Roulette Wheel in a Casino with People betting on numbers" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate the expected value of an experiment.
 2. Interpret the expected value of an experiment.
 3. Use expected value to analyze applications.
The casino game roulette has dozens of different bets that can be made. These bets have different probabilities of
798 7 · Probability

winning but also have different payouts. In general, the lower the probability of winning a bet is, the more money a
player wins for that bet. With so many options, is there one bet that's "smarter" than the rest? What's the best play to
make at a roulette table? In this section, we'll develop the tools we need to answer these questions.

Expected Value

Many experiments have numbers associated with their outcomes. Some are easy to define; if you roll 2 dice, the sum of
the numbers showing is a good example. In some card games, cards have different point values associated with them;
for example, in some forms of the game rummy, aces are worth 15 points; 10s, jacks, queens, and kings are worth 10;
and all other cards are worth 5. The outcomes of casino and lottery games are all associated with an amount of money
won or lost. These outcome values are used to find the expected value of an experiment: the mean of the values
associated with the outcomes that we would observe over a large number of repetitions of the experiment. (See
Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule for more on means.)

That definition is a little vague; How many is "a large number?" In practice, it depends on the experiment; the number
has to be large enough that every outcome would be expected to appear at least a few times. For example, if we're
talking about rolling a standard 6-sided die and we note the number showing, a few dozen replications should be
enough that the mean would be representative. Since the probability of each outcome is , we would expect to see each

outcome about 8 times over the course of 48 replications. However, if we're talking about the Powerball lottery, where

the probability of winning the jackpot is about  , we would need several billion replications to ensure that every

outcome appears a few times. Luckily, we can find the theoretical expected value before we even run the experiment the
first time.

FORMULA

Expected Value: If represents an outcome of an experiment and     represents the value of that outcome, then
the expected value of the experiment is:

                                                               ,

where is the "sum," meaning we add up the results of the formula that follows over all possible outcomes.

  EXAMPLE 7.37

Finding Expected Values
Find the expected values of the following experiments.
 1. Roll a standard 6-sided die and note the number showing.
 2. Roll two standard 6-sided dice and note the sum of the numbers showing.
 3. Draw a card from a well-shuffled standard deck of cards and note its rummy value (15 for aces; 10 for tens, jacks,

      queens, and kings; 5 for everything else).
     Solution
 1. Step 1: Let's start by writing out the PDF table for this experiment.

                                                                          Value Probability

                                                                             1

                                                                             2

                                                                             3

                                                                             4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       7.11 · Expected Value 799

   Value Probability
      5
      6

Step 2: To find the expected value, we need to find    for each possible outcome in the table below.

Value Probability

1

2

3

4

5

6

Step 3: We add all of the values in that last column:  . So, the expected value of a
single roll of a die is 3.5.

2. Back in Example 7.18, we made this table of all of the equally likely outcomes (Figure 7.47):

                                                                          Figure 7.47
Step 1: Let's use Figure 7.47 to create the PDF for this experiment, as shown in the following table:
800 7 · Probability

                                              Value Probability
                                                 2
                                                 3
                                                 4
                                                 5
                                                 6
                                                 7
                                                 8
                                                 9
                                                10
                                                11
                                                12

Step 2: We can multiply each row to find      as shown in the following table:

                                 Value Probability

                                          2

                                          3

                                          4

                                          5

                                          6

                                          7

                                          8

                                          9

                                          10

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7.11 · Expected Value 801

                                   Value Probability
                                     11
                                     12

Step 3: We can add the last column to get the expected value:

                                                                                  .

So, the expected value is 7.

3. Step 1: Let's make a PDF table for this experiment. There are 3 events that we care about, so let's use those events in
     the table below:

                                                Event          Probability

                                                        {A}

                                                {10, J, Q, K}

                                   {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}

Step 2: Let's add a column to the following table for the values of each event:

                                     Event                     Probability Value

                                                {A}                         15

                                   {10, J, Q, K}                            10

                              {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}                      5

Step 3: We'll add the column for the product of the values and probabilities to the table below:

                              Event                     Probability Value

                              {A}                              15

                              {10, J, Q, K}                    10

                              {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}         5

Step 4: We'll find the sum of the last column:                     . Thus, the expected Rummy value of a
randomly selected card is about 7.3.
802 7 · Probability

  YOUR TURN 7.37

1. Find the expected value of the number showing when you roll a special 6-sided die with faces {1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8}.
2. Find the expected value of the number of heads showing if you flip a coin 3 times.
3. You are about to play a game, where you flip a coin 3 times. If all 3 flips result in heads, you win $20. If you get

    2 heads, you win $10. If you flip 1 or 0 heads, you win nothing. What is the expected value of your winnings?

Let's make note of some things we can learn from Example 7.37. First, as Exercises 1 and 3 demonstrate, the expected
value of an experiment might not be a value that could come up in the experiment. Remember that the expected value is
interpreted as a mean, and the mean of a collection of numbers doesn't have to actually be one of those numbers.

Second, looking at Exercise 1, the expected value (3.5) was just the mean of the numbers on the faces of the die:
                                     . This is no accident! If we break that fraction up using the addition in the numerator, we get

                     , which we can rewrite as  . That's exactly the

computation we did to find the expected value! In fact, expected values can always be treated as a special kind of mean
called a weighted mean, where the weights are the probabilities associated with each value. When the probabilities are
all equal, the weighted mean is just the regular mean.

Interpreting Expected Values

As we noted, the expected value of an experiment is the mean of the values we would observe if we repeated the
experiment a large number of times. (This interpretation is due to an important theorem in the theory of probability
called the Law of Large Numbers.) Let's use that to interpret the results of the previous example.

EXAMPLE 7.38

Interpreting Expected Values
Interpret the expected values of the following experiments.

 1. Roll a standard 6-sided die and note the number showing.
 2. Roll 2 standard 6-sided dice and note the sum of the numbers showing.
 3. Draw a card from a well-shuffled standard deck of cards and note its Rummy value (15 for aces; 10 for tens, jacks,

      queens, and kings; 5 for everything else).

     Solution
 1. If you roll a standard 6-sided die many times, the mean of the numbers you roll will be around 3.5.
 2. If you roll a pair of standard 6-sided dice many times, the mean of the sums of the numbers you roll will be about 7.
 3. If you draw a card from a well-shuffled deck many times, the mean of the Rummy values of the cards would be

      around 7.3.

      YOUR TURN 7.38

    1. Interpret the expected value of the number showing when you roll a special 6-sided die with faces {1, 1, 2, 3,
         5, 8}.

    2. Interpret the expected value of the number of heads showing if you flip a coin 3 times.
    3. You are about to play a game where you flip a coin 3 times. If all 3 flips result in heads, you win $20. If you get

         2 heads, you win $10. If you flip 1 or 0 heads, you win nothing. Interpret the expected value of your winnings.

      WHO KNEW?

Pascal's Wager
The French scholar Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) was among the earliest mathematicians to study probabilities, and was
the first to accurately describe and compute expected values. In his book Pensées (Thoughts), he turned the analysis
of expected values to his belief in the Christian God. He said that there is no way for people to establish the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          7.11 · Expected Value 803

probability that God exists, but since the "winnings" on a bet that God exists (and that you then lead your life
accordingly) are essentially infinite, the expected value of taking that bet is always positive, no matter how unlikely it
is that God exists.

Using Expected Value

Now that we know how to find and interpret expected values, we can turn our attention to using them. Suppose
someone offers to play a game with you. If you roll a die and get a 6, you get $10. However, if you get a 5 or below, you
lose $1. Is this a game you'd want to play? Let's look at the expected value: The probability of winning is and the

probability of losing is , so the expected value is                       . That means, on average, you'll

come out ahead by about 83 cents every time you play this game. It's a great deal! On the other hand, if the winnings for

rolling a 6 drop to $3, the expected value becomes                        , meaning you should expect to

lose about 33 cents on average for every time you play. Playing that game is not a good idea! In general, this is how
casinos and lottery corporations make money: Every game has a negative expected value for the player.

WHO KNEW?

Expected Values in Football

In the 21st century, data analytics tools have revolutionized the way sports are coached and played. One tool in
particular is used in football at crucial moments in the game. When a team faces a fourth down (the last possession in
a series of four possessions, a fairly common occurrence), the coach faces a decision: Run one play to try to gain a
certain number of yards, or kick the ball away to the other team. Here's the interesting part of the decision: If the
team "goes for it" and runs the play and they are successful, then they keep possession of the ball and can continue in
their quest to score more points. If they are unsuccessful, then they lose possession of the ball, giving the other team
an opportunity to score points. If, instead, the team punts, or kicks the ball away, then the other team gets possession
of the ball, but in a worse position for them than if the original team goes for it and fails. To analyze this situation,
data analysts have generated empirical probabilities for every fourth down situation, and computed the expected
value (in terms of points) for each decision. Coaches frequently use those calculations when they decide which option
to take!

PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal

In 1654, a French writer and amateur mathematician named Antoine Gombaud (who called himself the Chevalier du
Mére) reached out to his gambling buddy Blaise Pascal to answer a question that he'd read about called the "problem
of points." The question goes like this: Suppose you're playing a game that is scored using points, and the first person
to earn 5 points is the winner. The game is interrupted with the score 4 points to 2. If the winner stood to win $100,
how should the prize money be divided between the players? Certainly the person who is 1 point away from victory
should get more, but how much more?

We have developed tools in this section to answer this question. At its heart, it's a question about conditional
probabilities and expected value. At the time that Pascal first started thinking about it, though, those ideas hadn't yet
been invented. Pascal reached out to a colleague named Pierre de Fermat, and over the course of a couple of months,
their correspondence with each other would eventually solve the problem. In the process, they first described
conditional probabilities and expected values!

Apart from their work in probability, these men are famous for other work in mathematics (and, in Pascal's case,

philosophy and physics). Fermat is remembered for his work in geometry and in number theory. After his death, the

statement of what came to be called "Fermat's Last Theorem" was discovered scribbled in the margin of a book, with

the note that Fermat had discovered a "marvelous proof that this margin is too small to contain." The theorem says

that any equation of the form       has no positive integer solutions if  . No proof of that theorem was
804 7 · Probability

discovered until 1994, when Andrew Wiles used computers and new branches of geometry to finally prove the
theorem!

Pascal is remembered for the "arithmetical triangle" that is named for him (though he wasn't the first person to
discover it; see the section on the binomial distribution for more), as well as work in geometry. In physics, Pascal
worked on hydrodynamics and air pressure (the SI unit for pressure is named for him), and in philosophy, Pascal
advocated for a mathematical approach to philosophical problems.

EXAMPLE 7.39

Using Expected Values
In the casino game keno, a machine chooses at random 20 numbers between 1 and 80 (inclusive) without replacement.
Players try to predict which numbers will be chosen. Players don't try to guess all 20, though; generally, they'll try to
predict between 1 and 10 of the chosen numbers. The amount won depends on the number of guesses they made and
the number of guesses that were correct.

1. At one casino, a player can try to guess just 1 number. If that number is among the 20 selected, the player wins $2;
     otherwise, the player loses $1. What is the expected value?

2. At the same casino, if a player makes 2 guesses and they're both correct, the player wins $14; otherwise, the player
     loses $1. What is the expected value?

3. Players can also make 3 guesses. If 2 of the 3 guesses are correct, the player wins $1. If all 3 guesses are correct, the
     player wins $42. Otherwise, the player loses $1. What is the expected value?

4. Which of these games is the best for the player? Which is the best for the casino?

Solution

1. There are 20 winning numbers out of 80, so if we try to guess one of them, the probability of guessing correctly is

                     . The probability of losing is then , and so the expected value is                   .

2. There are                 winning choices out of           total ways to choose 2 numbers. So, the probability of
     winning is      and the probability of losing is                . So, the expected value of the game is

                                 .

3. Step 1: Let's start with the big prize. There are          ways to correctly guess 3 winning numbers out of

                     ways to guess three numbers total. That means the probability of winning the big prize is

                     .

Step 2: Let's find the probability of the second prize. The denominator is the same: 82,160. Let's figure out the

numerator. To win the second prize, the player must pick 2 of the 20 winning numbers and one of the 60 losing

numbers. The number of ways to do that can be found using the Multiplication Rule for Counting: there are

                     ways to pick 2 winning numbers and 60 ways to pick 1 losing number, so there are

ways to win the second prize. So, the probability of winning that second prize is                      .

Step 3: Since the overall probability of winning is                                      , the probability of losing must
                                                                                                                                .
be                               . So, the expected value is

4. The bet that's the best for the player is the one with the highest expected value for the player, which is guessing two
     numbers. The best one for the casino is the one with the lowest expected value for the player, which is guessing one
     number.

      YOUR TURN 7.39

The casino game craps involves rolling 2 standard 6-sided dice. While the main game involves repeated rolls of the
dice, players can also bet on the outcomes of single rolls. Find the expected values of the following three $1 bets.
Then decide which bet is the best for the player and which bet is the best for the casino.

    1. Players can bet on the next roll of the dice being a sum of 7. Winners get $4 and losers lose $1.
    2. Players can bet on the next roll of the dice being a sum of 12. Winners get $30 and losers lose $1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                7.11 · Expected Value 805

      3. Players can bet that the next roll of the dice will be "any craps" (a sum of 2, 3, or 12). Winners get $7 and losers
           lose $1.

  WORK IT OUT

  Make Your Own Lottery
  By yourself or with a partner, devise your own lottery scheme. Assume you would have access to one or more
  machines that choose numbers randomly. What will a lottery draw look like? How many numbers are players
  choosing from? How many will be drawn? Will they be drawn with replacement or without replacement? What
  conditions must be met for a player to win first or second (or more!) prize? Once you've decided that, decide the
  payoff structure for winners, and how much the game will cost to play. Try to make the game enticing enough that
  people will want to play it, but with enough negative expected value that the lottery will make money. Aim for the
  expected value to be about -0.25 times the cost of playing the game.

Check Your Understanding

You are about to roll a 20-sided die with faces labeled as follows: 5 faces have a 1, 6 faces have a 3, 4 faces have a 5, 3
faces have a 7, and 2 faces have a 9.

    62. What is the expected value of the number showing on the die after it's rolled?
    63. Interpret your answer.

You are about to play a game in which you draw 3 ping-pong balls without replacement from a barrel. The barrel
contains 6 green balls and 4 red balls. If all 3 of your selections are green, you win $5. If 2 of the 3 are green, you win
$1. If 2 or more of your selections are red, you lose $5.

    64. What is the expected value of this game?
    65. Interpret your answer.
    66. Is it advantageous to you to play the game? How do you know?

        SECTION 7.11 EXERCISES

You roll a standard 6-sided die and win points equal to the square of the number shown.
     1. What's the expected value of the number of points you win?
     2. Interpret your answer.

In the classic board game The Game of Life, players have the chance to play the market. A spinner with 10 equally likely
spaces is spun to choose a random number. If the result is 3 or less, the player loses $25,000. If the result is 7 or more,
the player wins $50,000. If the result is a 4, 5, or 6, the player doesn't win or lose anything.

     3. What is the expected value of playing the market?
     4. Interpret the answer.

The Game of Life players also occasionally have the opportunity to speculate. Players choose any 2 of the 10 numbers
on the spinner and then give it a spin. If one of their numbers is chosen, they win $140,000; if not, they lose $10,000.

     5. What is the expected value of this speculation?
     6. Interpret your answer.

 7. Which is better for The Game of Life players: playing the market or speculating? How do you know?

A charitable organization is selling raffle tickets as a fundraiser. They intend to sell 5,000 tickets at $10 each. One ticket
will be randomly selected to win the grand prize of a new car worth $35,000.

     8. What is the expected value of a single ticket?
     9. Interpret your answer.
    10. The organization is worried they won't be able to sell all the tickets, so they announce that, in addition to the

          grand prize, they will offer 10 second prizes of $500 in cash. What is the new expected value of a single ticket?
    11. Interpret your answer.

In the following exercises involve randomly selecting golf balls from a bucket. The bucket contains 4 yellow balls
(numbered 1-4) and 6 white balls (numbered 1-6).

    12. If you draw a single ball, what is the expected number of yellow balls selected?
806 7 · Probability

13. Suppose you draw 2 balls with replacement.
       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the number of yellow balls selected.
       b. What is the expected number of yellow balls selected?

14. Suppose you draw 2 balls without replacement.
       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the number of yellow balls selected.
       b. What is the expected number of yellow balls selected?

15. Suppose you draw 3 balls with replacement.
       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the number of yellow balls selected.
       b. What is the expected number of yellow balls selected?

16. Suppose you draw 3 balls without replacement.
       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the number of yellow balls selected.
       b. What is the expected number of yellow balls selected?

17. If you draw a single ball, what is the expected value of the number on the ball?
18. Suppose you draw 2 balls with replacement.

       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the sum of the numbers on the selected balls.
       b. What is the expected sum of the numbers on the balls?

19. Suppose you draw 2 balls without replacement.
       a. Give a PDF table for the possible outcomes for the sum of the numbers on the selected balls.
       b. What is the expected sum of the numbers on the balls?

The following exercises deal with the game "Punch a Bunch," which appears on the TV game show The Price Is Right. In
this game, contestants have a chance to punch through up to 4 paper circles on a board; behind each circle is a card
with a dollar amount printed on it. There are 50 of these circles; the dollar amounts are given in this table:

                                                               Dollar Amount Frequency

                     $25,000  1

                     $10,000  2

                     $5,000   4

                     $2,500   8

                     $1,000   10

                     $500     10

                     $250     10

                     $100     5

Contestants are shown their selected dollar amounts one at a time, in the order selected. After each is revealed, the
contestant is given the option of taking that amount of money or throwing it away in favor of the next amount. (You
can watch the game being played in the video Playing "Punch a Bunch." (https://openstax.org/r/
Playing_Punch_a_Bunch)) Anita is playing "Punch a Bunch" and gets 2 punches.

    20. If Anita got $500 on her first punch, what's the expected value of her second punch?
    21. If Anita got $500 on her first punch, should she throw out her $500 and take the results of her second punch?

          How do you know?
    22. If Anita got $1,000 on her first punch, what's the expected value of her second punch?
    23. If Anita got $1,000 on her first punch, should she throw out her $1,000 and take the results of her second

          punch? How do you know?
    24. If Anita got $2,500 on her first punch, what's the expected value of her second punch?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                7.11 · Expected Value 807

    25. If Anita got $2,500 on her first punch, should she throw out her $2,500 and take the results of her second
          punch? How do you know?

The following exercises are about the casino game roulette. In this game, the dealer spins a marble around a wheel
that contains 38 pockets that the marble can fall into. Each pocket has a number (each whole number from 0 to 36,
along with a "double zero") and a color (0 and 00 are both green; the other 36 numbers are evenly divided between
black and red). Players make bets on which number (or groups of numbers) they think the marble will land on. The
figure shows the layout of the numbers and colors, as well as some of the bets that can be made.

         Roulette Table (credit: "American Roulette Table Layout" by Film8ker/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
    26. If a player makes a $1 bet on a single number, they win $35 if that number comes up, but lose $1 if it doesn't.

          What is the expected value of this bet?
    27. Interpret your answer to the previous question.
    28. Suppose a player makes the $1 bet on a single number in 5 consecutive spins. What is the expected value of

          this series of bets? (Hint: use the Binomial Distribution.)
    29. Interpret your answer to the previous question.
    30. If a player makes a $10 bet on first dozen, they win $20 if one of the numbers 1-12 comes up but lose $10

          otherwise. What is the expected value of this bet?
    31. Interpret your answer to the previous question.
    32. Suppose a player makes the $10 bet on first dozen in 4 consecutive spins. What is the expected value of that

          series of bets?
    33. Interpret your answer to the previous question.
    34. If a player makes a $10 basket bet, they win $60 if 0, 00, 1, 2, or 3 come up but lose $10 otherwise. What is the

          expected value of this bet?
    35. Interpret your answer to previous question.
    36. Which is better for the player: a $10 first dozen bet or a $10 basket bet? How do you know?
808 7 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

7.1 The Multiplication Rule for Counting

  · combinatorics
  · Multiplication Rule for Counting (Fundamental Counting Principle)

7.2 Permutations

  · permutation
  · factorial

7.3 Combinations

  · combination

7.4 Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes

  · experiment
  · replication
  · sample space
  · independent/dependent

7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability

  · event
  · probability
  · theoretical probability
  · empirical probability
  · subjective probability

7.7 What Are the Odds?

  · odds (for/against)

7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability

  · mutually exclusive

7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule

  · conditional probability

7.10 The Binomial Distribution

  · binomial experiment
  · probability density function (PDF)
  · cumulative distribution function (CDF)

7.11 Expected Value

  · expected value

Key Concepts

7.1 The Multiplication Rule for Counting

  · The Multiplication Rule for Counting is used to count large sets.

7.2 Permutations

  · Using the Multiplication Rule for Counting to enumerate permutations.
  · Simplifying and computing expressions involving factorials.
  · Using factorials to count permutations.

7.3 Combinations

  · Permutations are used to count subsets when order matters; combinations work when order doesn't matter.
  · Combinations can also be computed using factorials.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      7 · Chapter Summary 809

7.4 Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes

  · We identify the sample space of an experiment by identifying all of its possible outcomes.
  · Tables can help us find a sample space by keeping the possible outcomes organized.
  · Tree diagrams provide a visualization of the sample space of an experiment that involves multiple stages.

7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability

  · The theoretical probability of an event is the ratio of the number of equally likely outcomes in the event to the
      number of equally likely outcomes in the sample space.

  · Empirical probabilities are computed by repeating the experiment many times, and then dividing the number of
      replications that result in the event of interest by the total number of replications.

  · Subjective probabilities are assigned based on subjective criteria, usually because the experiment can't be repeated
      and the outcomes in the sample space are not equally likely.

  · The probability of the complement of an event is found by subtracting the probability of the event from one.

7.6 Probability with Permutations and Combinations

  · We use permutations and combinations to count the number of equally likely outcomes in an event and in a sample
      space, which allows us to compute theoretical probabilities.

7.7 What Are the Odds?

  · Odds are computed as the ratio of the probability of an event to the probability of its compliment.

7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability

  · The Addition Rule is used to find the probability that one event or another will occur when those events are mutually
      exclusive.

  · The Inclusion/Exclusion Principle is used to find probabilities when events are not mutually exclusive.

7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule

  · Conditional probabilities are computed under the assumption that the condition has already occurred.
  · The Multiplication Rule for Probability is used to find the probability that two events occur in sequence.

7.10 The Binomial Distribution

  · Binomial experiments result when we count the number of successful outcomes in a fixed number of repeated,
      independent trials with a constant probability of success.

  · The binomial distribution is used to find probabilities associated with binomial experiments.
  · Probability density functions (PDFs) describe the probabilities of individual outcomes in an experiment; cumulative

      distribution functions (CDFs) give the probabilities of ranges of outcomes.

7.11 Expected Value

  · The expected value of an experiment is the sum of the products of the numerical outcomes of an experiment with
      their corresponding probabilities.

  · The expected value of an experiment is the most likely value of the average of a large number of replications of the
      experiment.

Formula Review

7.2 Permutations

  ·

7.3 Combinations

  · The formula for counting combinations is:

7.5 Basic Concepts of Probability

· For an experiment whose sample space  consists of equally likely outcomes, the theoretical probability of the

event is the ratio  where               and  denote the number of outcomes in the event and in the
810 7 · Chapter Summary

      sample space, respectively.
  ·

7.7 What Are the Odds?

  · For an event ,

· If the odds in favor of are      , then          .

7.8 The Addition Rule for Probability

  · If and are mutually exclusive events, then
                                                                                                           .

  · If and are events that contain outcomes of a single experiment, then
                                                                                                                      .

7.9 Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule

  · If and are events associated with the first and second stages of an experiment, then
                                                  .

7.10 The Binomial Distribution

  · Suppose we have a binomial experiment with trials and the probability of success in each trial is . Then:

7.11 Expected Value                                   represents the value of that outcome, then the expected

  · If represents an outcome of an experiment and
      value of the experiment is:

where stands for the sum, meaning we add up the results of the formula that follows over all possible outcomes.

Projects

1. The Binomial Distribution is one of many examples of a discrete probability distribution. Other examples include the

Geometric, Hypergeometric, Multinomial, Poisson, and Negative Binomial Distributions. Choose one of these

distributions, and find out what makes it different from the Binomial Distribution. In what situations can it be

applied? How is it used? Once you have an idea of how it's used, write a series of five questions like the ones in this

chapter that can be answered with that distribution, and find the answers.

2. Binomial is a word that also comes up in algebra; the word describes polynomials with two terms. At first glance,

there isn't much to indicate that these two uses of the word are related, but it turns out there is a connection.

Explore the connection between the Binomial Distribution and the algebraic concept of binomial expansion, (the

process of multiplying out expressions like        for a positive whole number ). Search for a connection with the

mathematical object known as Pascal's Triangle.

3. Hazard is a dice game that was mentioned in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. It was a popular game of chance played in

taverns and coffee houses well into the 18th century; its popularity at the time of the foundation of probability

theory means that it was a common example in early texts on finding expected values and probabilities. Find the

rules of the game, and get some practice playing it. Then, analyze the choices that the caster gets to make, and

decide which is most advantageous, using the language of expected values.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7 · Chapter Summary 811

Chapter Review

The Multiplication Rule for Counting
 1. You are booking a round trip flight for vacation. If there are 4 outbound flight options and 7 return flight options,
      how many different options do you have?

2. You are putting together a social committee for your club. You'd like broad representation, so you will choose one
    person from each class. If there are 8 seniors, 12 juniors, 10 sophomores, and 6 first-years, how many committees
    are possible?

3. The Big Breakfast Platter at Jimbo's Sausage Haus gives you your choice of 4 flavors of sausage, 5 preparations for
    eggs, 3 different potato options, and 4 different breads. If you choose one of each, how many different Big
    Breakfast Platters can be selected?

4. The multiple-choice quiz you're about to take has 10 questions with 4 choices for each. How many ways are there
    to fill out the quiz?

Permutations

5. Compute        .

6. Compute .

7. Compute

8. Compute .

9. Compute     .

10. Compute    .

11. As you plan your day, you see that you have 6 tasks on your to-do list. You'll only have time for 5 of those. How
      many schedules are possible for you today?

12. As captain of your intramural softball team, you are responsible for setting the 10-person batting order for the
      team. If there are 12 people on the team, how many batting orders are possible?

Combinations
13. If you're trying to decide which 4 of your 12 friends to invite to your apartment for a dinner party, are you using

      permutations or combinations?

14. If you're trying to decide which of your guests sits where at your table, are you using permutations or
      combinations?

15. Compute .

16. Compute    .

17. How many ways are there to draw a hand of 8 cards from a deck of 16 cards?

18. In a card game with 4 players and a deck of 12 cards, how many ways are there to deal out the four 3-card hands?

Tree Diagrams, Tables, and Outcomes
19. If you draw a card at random from a standard 52-card deck and note its suit, what is the sample space?

20. If you draw 2 cards at random from a standard 52-card deck and note the 2 suits (without paying attention to the
      order), what is the sample space?

21. If you draw 2 Scrabble tiles in order without replacement from a bag containing E, E, L, S, what is the sample
      space?

22. If you draw 2 Scrabble tiles without replacement and ignoring order from a bag containing E, E, L, S, what is the
      sample space?

23. If you draw 2 Scrabble tiles without replacement and ignoring order from a bag containing E, E, L, S, what is the
      sample space?

24. If you draw 2 Scrabble tiles with replacement and ignoring order from a bag containing E, E, L, S, what is the
      sample space?
812 7 · Chapter Summary

Basic Concepts of Probability                                          , is that probability most likely theoretical,
25. If you read that the probability of flipping 10 heads in a row is

      empirical, or subjective?

26. If someone tells you that there is a 40% chance that a Democrat wins the U.S. Presidential election in 2132, is that
      probability most likely theoretical, empirical, or subjective?

27. If your professor says that you have a 20% chance of getting an A in her class because 20% of her students
      historically have earned As, is that probability most likely theoretical, empirical, or subjective?

In the following exercises, you are about to roll a standard 12-sided die (with faces labeled 1-12).
    28. What is the probability of rolling a negative number?
    29. What is the probability of rolling a number less than 20?
    30. What is the probability of rolling an 11?
    31. What is the probability of rolling a number less than 7?
    32. What is the probability of not rolling an 11?
    33. What is the probability of rolling a multiple of 4?
    34. Over the last 30 years, it has rained 12 times on May 1. What empirical probability would you assign to the
          event "it rains next May 1"?

Probability with Permutations and Combinations
In the following exercises, you're drawing cards from a special deck of cards containing , , , , , , , ,

    ,.
    35. If you draw 4 cards without replacement, what is the probability of drawing a 2, 3, 4, and 5 in order?
    36. If you draw 4 cards without replacement, what is the probability of drawing a 2, 3, 4, and 5 in any order?
    37. If you draw 3 cards without replacement, what is the probability that you draw a , a , and a , in order?
    38. If you draw 3 cards without replacement, what is the probability that you draw 2 and 1 , in any order?

What Are the Odds?
39. If you roll a standard 20-sided die (with faces numbered 1-20), what are the odds against rolling a number less

      than 5?

40. If you roll a standard 20-sided die (with faces numbered 1-20), what are the odds in favor of rolling greater than a
      5?

41. If  , what are the odds in favor of ?

42. If  , what are the odds against ?

The Addition Rule for Probability
In the following exercises, you're drawing a single card from a special deck of cards containing , , , , , ,

    ,,,.
    43. What is the probability of drawing a 2 or a 3?
    44. What is the probability of drawing a or a ?
    45. What is the probability of drawing a 2 or a ?
    46. What is the probability of drawing an even number or a ?

Conditional Probability and the Multiplication Rule
In the following exercises, you're drawing from a special deck of cards containing , , , , , , , , ,

    .
    47. If you draw a single card, what is:

            a.
           b.
            c.

    48. If you draw a single card, what is:

            a.
           b.
            c.

In the following exercises, you are playing the following game that involves rolling 2 dice, one at a time. First, you roll a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       7 · Chapter Summary 813

standard 6-sided die. If the result is a 4 or less, your second roll uses a standard 4-sided die. If the result of the first roll
is a 5 or 6, your second roll uses a standard 6-sided die. Find these probabilities:

    49.
    50.
    51.
    52.

The Binomial Distribution
In the following exercises, decide whether the described experiment is a binomial experiment. If it is, identify the
number of trials and the probability of success in each trial. If it isn't, explain why it isn't.

    53. Draw 5 cards with replacement from a standard deck and count the number of .
    54. Draw 5 cards without replacement from a standard deck and count the number of .
    55. Draw cards from a standard deck and count how many cards are chosen before the first appears.

In the following exercises, you are about to roll a standard 20-sided die. Round answers to 4 decimal places.
    56. Suppose you are going to roll the die 4 times. Give a full PDF table for the number of times a number greater
          than 16 appears.
    57. If you roll the die 10 times, what is the probability that a number between 1 and 5 (inclusive) comes up exactly
          once?
    58. If you roll the die 40 times, what is the probability that 20 comes up fewer than 2 times?
    59. If you roll the die 40 times, what is the probability that 20 comes up 4 or more times?
    60. If you roll the die 100 times, what is the probability that the number of times the die lands on something less
          than or equal to 7 is between 30 and 35 (inclusive)?
    61. If you roll the die 100 times, what is the probability that the number of times the die lands on something less
          than or equal to 7 is exactly 36?
    62. If you roll the die 100 times, what is the probability that the die lands on 20 between 5 and 8 times, inclusive?

Expected Value
    63. You are playing a game where you roll a pair of standard 6-sided dice. You win $32 if you get a sum of 12, and
          lose $1 otherwise. What is the expected value of this game?
    64. Interpret your answer.

You are playing a game where you roll a standard 12-sided die 4 times. If you roll 12 four times, you win $1,000. If you
roll 12 three times, you win $100. If you roll 12 twice, you win $10. If you roll 12 one time, you don't win or lose
anything. If you roll don't roll a single 12, you lose $1.

    65. What is the expected value of this game?
    66. Interpret your answer.

67. Which game would be better to play? Why?

Chapter Test

Each of the following exercises involve drawing a Scrabble tile from a bag. These tiles are labeled with a letter and a
point value, as follows: A(1), C(3), D(2), E(1), E(1), J(8), K(5), O(1), R(1), R(1).

     1. How many ways are there to draw a vowel and then a consonant from the bag?
     2. How many ways are there to draw a tile worth an even number of points and then a tile worth an odd number

          of points from the bag?
     3. How many ways are there to draw 4 tiles from the bag without replacement, if order matters?
     4. How many ways are there to draw 4 consonants from the bag without replacement, if order matter?
     5. How many ways are there to draw 4 tiles from the bag with replacement, if order does not matter?
     6. How many ways are there to draw 4 consonants from the bag with replacement, if order does not matter?
     7. Give the sample space of the experiment that asks you to draw 2 tiles from the bag with replacement and note

          their point values, where order doesn't matter. Give the outcomes as ordered pairs.
     8. Give the sample space of the experiment that asks you to draw 2 tiles from the bag with replacement and note

          their point values, where order doesn't matter. Give the outcomes as ordered pairs.
     9. If you draw a single tile from the bag, what is the probability that it's an E?
    10. If you draw a single tile from the bag, what is the probability that it's not an A?
    11. If you draw 3 tiles from the bag without replacement, what is the probability that they spell RED, in order?
    12. If you draw 3 tiles from the bag without replacement, what is the probability that they spell RED, in any order?
    13. What are the odds against drawing a vowel?
    14. Use your answer to question 12 to find the odds against drawing three tiles without replacement and being
814 7 · Chapter Summary

able to spell RED.

15. If you draw one tile, what is the probability of drawing a J or a K?

16. If you draw one tile, what is the probability that it's a vowel or that it's worth more than 4 points?

17. Suppose you're about to draw one tile from the bag. Find                   and

                                 .

18. If you draw 2 tiles with replacement, what is the probability of drawing a consonant first and then a vowel?

19. If you draw 2 tiles without replacement, what is the probability of drawing a consonant first and then a vowel?

20. If you draw 10 tiles with replacement, what is the probability that you draw exactly 3 vowels? Round to 3

decimal places.

21. If you draw 100 tiles with replacement, what is the probability that you draw fewer than 35 vowels? Round to 4

decimal places.

22. Find and interpret the expected number of points on the tile, assuming you draw 1 tile from the bag.

23. Find the expected sum of points on 2 tiles, selected without replacement.

24. If your friend offers you a bet where they pay you $10 if you draw a vowel from the bag, but you owe them $5 if

you draw a consonant, should you take it? How do you know?

Access for free at openstax.org
               8 · Introduction 815

8  STATISTICS

Figure 8.1 Statistics can be used to decide on a fair salary for sports stars. (credit: "Jasmine Powell goes up for a shot in a
game against Jacksonville" by Lorie Shaull/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Gathering and Organizing Data
  8.2 Visualizing Data
  8.3 Mean, Median and Mode
  8.4 Range and Standard Deviation
  8.5 Percentiles
  8.6 The Normal Distribution
  8.7 Applications of the Normal Distribution
  8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

      Introduction

Before the 2021 WNBA season, professional basketball player Candace Parker signed a contract with the Chicago Sky,
which entitled her to a salary of $190,000. This amount was the 23rd highest in the league at the time. How did the
team's management decide on her salary? They likely considered some intangible qualities, like her leadership skills.
However, much of their deliberations probably took into account her performance on the court. For example, Parker led
the league in rebounds in the 2020 season (214 of them) and scored 14.7 points per game (which ranked her 18th
among all WNBA players). Further, Parker brought 13 seasons of experience to the team. All of these factors played a
role in deciding the terms of her contract.

Estimating the value of one variable (like salary) based on other, measurable variables (points per game, experience,
rebounds, etc.) is among the most important applications of statistics, which is the mathematical field devoted to
gathering, organizing, summarizing, and making decisions based on data.
816 8 · Statistics

    8.1 Gathering and Organizing Data

         Figure 8.2 Surveys are commonly used to gather data. (credit: "survey" by Donnell King/Flickr, CC0 1.0 Public Domain)

    Learning Objectives

      After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Distinguish among sampling techniques.
        2. Organize data using an appropriate method.
        3. Create frequency distributions.
      When a polling organization wants to try to establish which candidate will win an upcoming election, the first steps are
      to write questions for the survey and to choose which people will be asked to respond to the survey. These can seem like
      simple steps, but they have far-reaching implications in the analysis the pollsters will later carry out. The process by
      which samples (or groups of units from which we collect data) are chosen can strongly affect the data that are collected.
      Units are anything that can be measured or surveyed (such as people, animals, objectives, or experiments) and data are
      observations made on units.
      One of the most famous failures of good sampling occurred in the first half of the twentieth century. The Literary Digest
      was among the most respected magazines of the early twentieth century. Despite the name, the Digest was a weekly
      newsmagazine. Starting in 1916, the Digest conducted a poll to try to predict the winner of each US Presidential election.
      For the most part, their results were good; they correctly predicted the outcome of all five elections between 1916 and
      1932. In 1936, the incumbent President Franklin Delano Roosevelt faced Kansas governor Alf Landon, and once again the
      Digest ran their famous poll, with results published the week before the election. Their conclusion? Landon would win in
      a landslide, 57% to 43%. Once the actual votes had been counted, though, Roosevelt ended up with 61% of the popular
      vote, 18% more than the poll predicted. What went wrong?
      The short answer is that the people who were chosen to receive the survey (over ten million of them!) were not a good
      representation of the population of voting adults. The sample was chosen using the Digest's own base of subscribers as
      well as publicly available lists of people that were likely adults (and therefore eligible to vote), mostly phone books and
      vehicle registration records. The pollsters then mailed every single person on these lists a survey. Around a quarter of
      those surveys were returned; this constituted the sample that was used to make the Digest's disastrously incorrect
      prediction. However, the Digest made an error in failing to consider that the election was happening during the Great
      Depression, and only the wealthy had disposable income to spend on telephone lines, automobiles, and magazine
      subscriptions. Thus, only the wealthy were sent the Digest's survey. Since Roosevelt was extremely popular among
      poorer voters, many of Roosevelt's supporters were excluded from the Digest's sample.
      Another more complicated factor was the low response rate; only around 25% of the surveys were returned. This created
      what's called a non-response bias.

    Sampling and Gathering Data

      The Digest's failure highlights the need for what is now considered the most important criterion for sampling:
      randomness. This randomness can be achieved in several ways. Here we cover some of the most common.
      A simple random sample is chosen in a way that every unit in the population has an equal chance of being selected,
      and the chances of a unit being selected do not depend on the units already chosen. An example of this is choosing a
      group of people by drawing names out of a hat (assuming the names are well-mixed in the hat).

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               8.1 · Gathering and Organizing Data 817

A systematic random sample is selected from an ordered list of the population (for example, names sorted
alphabetically or students listed by student ID). First, we decide what proportion of the population will be in our sample.
We want to express that proportion as a fraction with 1 in the numerator. Let's call that number D. Next, we'll choose a
random number between one and D. The unit at that position will go into our sample. We'll find the rest of our sample by
choosing every Dth unit in the list, starting with our random number.

To walk through an example, let's say we want to sample 2% of the population:  . (Note: If the number in

the denominator isn't a whole number, we can just round it off. This part of the process doesn't have to be precise.) We
can then use a random number generator to find a random number between 1 and 50; let's use 31. In our example, our
sample would then be the units in the list at positions 31, 81 (31 + 50), 131 (81 + 50), and so forth.

A stratified sample is one chosen so that particular groups in the population are certain to be represented. Let's say you
are studying the population of students in a large high school (where the grades run from 9th to 12th), and you want to
choose a sample of 12 students. If you use a simple or systematic random sample, there's a pretty good chance that
you'll miss one grade completely. In a stratified sample, you would first divide the population into groups (the strata),
then take a random sample within each stratum (that's the singular form of "strata"). In the high school example, we
could divide the population into grades, then take a random sample of three students within each grade. That would get
us to the 12 students we need while ensuring coverage of each grade.

A cluster sample is a sample where clusters of units are chosen at random, instead of choosing individual units. For
example, if we need a sample of college students, we may take a list of all the course sections being offered at the
college, choose three of them at random (the sections are the clusters), and then survey all the students in those
sections. A sample like this one has the advantage of convenience: If the survey needs to be administered in person,
many of your sample units will be located in one place at the same time.

EXAMPLE 8.1

Random Sampling
For each of the following situations, identify whether the sample is a simple random sample, a systematic random
sample, a stratified random sample, a cluster random sample, or none of these.

 1. A postal inspector wants to check on the performance of a new mail carrier, so she chooses four streets at random
      among those that the carrier serves. Each household on the selected streets receives a survey.

 2. A hospital wants to survey past patients to see if they were satisfied with the care they received. The administrator
      sorts the patients into groups based on the department of the hospital where they were treated (ICU, pediatrics, or
      general), and selects patients at random from each of those groups.

 3. A quality control engineer at a factory that makes smartphones wants to figure out the proportion of devices that
      are faulty before they are shipped out. The phones are currently packed in boxes for shipping, each of which holds
      20 devices. The engineer wants to sample 100 phones, so he selects five crates at random and tests every phone in
      those five crates.

 4. A newspaper reporter wants to write a story on public perceptions on a project that will widen a congested street.
      She stands on the side of the street in question and interviews the first five people she sees there.

 5. An executive at a streaming video service wants to know if her subscribers would support a second season of a new
      show. She gets a list of all the subscribers who have watched at least one episode of the show, and uses a random
      number generator to select a sample of 50 people from the list.

 6. An agent for a state's Department of Revenue is in charge of selecting 100 tax returns for audit. He has a list of all of
      the returns eligible for audit (about 12,000 in all), sorted by the taxpayer's ID number. He asks a computer to give
      him a random number between 1 and 120; it gives him 15. The agent chooses the 15th, 135th, 255th, 375th, and
      every 120th return after that to be audited.

     Solution
To decide which type of random sample is being used in each of these, we need to focus on how the randomization is
being incorporated.

 1. The surveys are being given to households, so households are the units in this case. But households aren't being
      chosen randomly; instead, streets are being chosen at random. These form clusters of units, so this is a cluster
      random sample.

 2. In this case, the administrator isn't selecting patients at random from the entire list of patients. Instead, she is
      choosing at random from the patients who were in each of the departments (ICU, pediatrics, general) separately.
      The departments form strata, so this is a stratified random sample.
818 8 · Statistics

        3. The engineer is testing whether the phones are faulty, so those are the units. But the random process is being used
             to select the crates of phones. Those crates form clusters, so this is a cluster random sample.

        4. The reporter isn't using a random process at all, so this sample doesn't belong to any of the types we have been
             talking about. A sample like this one is sometimes described as a convenience sample, and shouldn't be used in a
             statistical setting.

        5. The executive is choosing her sample completely at random from the full population, so this is a simple random
             sample.

        6. The agent is choosing from the full population, but is only choosing the first unit for the sample at random; the rest
             are chosen by skipping down the list systematically. Thus, this is a systematic random sample.

               YOUR TURN 8.1
         For each of the following situations, identify whether the sample is a simple random sample, a systematic random
         sample, a stratified random sample, a cluster random sample, or none of these.

             1. The chairperson of the University Chess Club is trying to decide on a time for the club's regular meetings, so
                  she emails all of the members of the club to find their preferences.

             2. The registrar at a small college wants to use a survey to determine if their office could do a better job of
                  serving students. They choose three students at random from each major to take the survey.

             3. A civic club is organizing a raffle as a fundraiser. To determine the three winners, each of the tickets is put into
                  a large drum, then the tickets are thoroughly mixed. A blindfolded club member pulls three tickets out of the
                  drum.

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

         George Gallup

         Figure 8.3 George Gallup was a founder of survey sampling techniques, and his legacy lives on to this day. (credit:
         "George Gallup at the National Press Club, Washington, D.C., 1969" by Bernard Gotfryd/Library of Congress Prints &
         Photographs Division, public domain)
         George Gallup (1901-1984) rose to fame in 1936 when his prediction of the percentage of the vote going to each
        candidate in that year's U.S. Presidential election was more accurate than the one published in Literary Digest, and he
        did so using a sample that was much smaller than the Digest. He even took it one step farther, predicting with high
        accuracy the erroneous results of the poll that the Literary Digest would end up publishing! Gallup's theories on public
         opinion polling essentially created that field. In 1948, Gallup's reputation took a bit of a hit, when he famously, but
         incorrectly, predicted that Thomas Dewey would beat incumbent Harry Truman in that year's Presidential election.
         Over the following decades, however, public trust in Gallup's polls recovered and even steadily increased. The
         company Gallup founded (https://openstax.org/r/Gallup) continues to conduct daily public opinion polls, as well as
         provides consulting services for businesses.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.1 · Gathering and Organizing Data 819

Organizing Data

Once data have been collected, we turn our attention to analysis. Before we analyze, though, it's useful to reorganize the
data into a format that makes the analysis easier. For example, if our data were collected using a paper survey, our raw
data are all broken down by respondent (represented by an individual response sheet). To perform an analysis on all the
responses to an individual question, we need to first group all the responses to each question together. The way we
organize the data depends on the type of data we've collected.

There are two broad types of data: categorical and quantitative. Categorical data classifies the unit into a group (or
category). Examples of categorical data include a response to a yes-or-no question, or the color of a person's eyes.
Quantitative data is a numerical measure of a property of a unit. Examples of quantitative data include the time it takes
for a rat to run through a maze or a person's daily calorie intake. We'll look at each type of data in turn when considering
how best to organize.

Categorical Data Organization

The best way to organize categorical data is using a categorical frequency distribution. A categorical frequency
distribution is a table with two columns. The first contains all the categories present in the data, each listed once. The
second contains the frequencies of each category, which are just a count of how often each category appears in the data.

  EXAMPLE 8.2

Creating a Categorical Frequency Distribution
A teacher records the responses of the class (28 students) on the first question of a multiple choice quiz, with five
possible responses (A, B, C, D, and E):

                                         AACABBAEACAAAC

                                         E ABAACAB E EAACC

Create a categorical frequency distribution that organizes the responses.

     Solution
Step 1: For each possible response, count the number of times that response appears in the data. In the responses for
this class, "A" appears 14 times, "B" 4 times, "C" 6 times, "D" 0 times, and "E" 4 times.

Step 2: Make a table with two columns. The first column should be labeled so that the reader knows what the responses
mean, and the second should be labeled "Frequency."

Response to First Question Frequency

A                                                                   14

B                                                                   4

C                                                                   6

D                                                                   0

E                                                                   4

Step 3: Check your work. If you add up your frequencies, you should get the same number as the total number of

responses. Twenty-eight students answered that first question, and      .
820 8 · Statistics

YOUR TURN 8.2

1. Students in a statistics class who were asked to provide their majors provided the data below:

                                 Undecided  Biology           Biology    Sociology

                                 Political Science Sociology  Undecided  Undecided

                                 Undecided  Biology           Biology    Education

                                 Biology    Biology Political Science Political Science

      Create a categorical frequency distribution to organize these responses.

Quantitative Data

We have a couple of options available for organizing quantitative data. If there are just a few possible responses, we can
create a frequency distribution just like the ones we made for categorical data above. For example, if we're surveying a
group of high school students and we ask for each student's age, we'll likely only get whole-number responses between
13 and 19. Since there are only around seven (and likely fewer) possible responses, we can treat the data as if they're
categorical and create a frequency distribution as before.

  EXAMPLE 8.3

Creating a Quantitative Frequency Distribution
Attendees of a conflict resolution workshop are asked how many siblings they have. The responses are as follows:

                                       101120311412013

                                       121241013012215

Create a frequency distribution to organize the responses.

     Solution
Step 1: Count the number of times you see each unique response: "0" appears 5 times, "1" appears 13 times, "2" appears
6 times, "3" appears 3 times, "4" appears twice, and "5" appears once.

Step 2: Make a table with two columns. The first column should be labeled so that the reader knows what the responses
mean, and the second should be labeled "Frequency." Then fill in the results of our count.

                    Number of Siblings Frequency Number of Siblings Frequency

                                 0          5                 3             3

                                 1          13                4             2

                                 2          6                 5             1

Step 3: Check your work. If you add up your counts, you should get the same number as the total number of responses.

Looking back at the raw data, there were 30 responses, and               .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           8.1 · Gathering and Organizing Data 821

        YOUR TURN 8.3

  1. A question on a community survey asked each respondent to give the number of people who shared their
      residence, and the data from the responses was as follows:

                        13221334222411231152

                        14321221313341422214

      Create a frequency distribution to organize the responses.

If there are many possible responses, a frequency distribution table like the ones we've seen so far isn't really useful;
there will likely be many responses with a frequency of one, which means the table will be no better than looking at the
raw data. In these cases, we can create a binned frequency distribution. A binned frequency distribution groups the
data into ranges of values called bins, then records the number of responses in each bin.
For example, if we have height data for individuals measured in centimeters, we might create bins like 150-155 cm,
155-160 cm, and so forth (making sure that every data value falls into a bin). We must be careful, though; in this
scenario, it's not clear which bin would contain a response of 155 cm. Usually, responses on the edge of a bin are placed
in the higher bin, but it's good practice to make that clear. In cases where responses are rounded off, you can avoid this
issue by leaving a gap between the bins that couldn't contain any responses. In our example, if the measurements were
all rounded off to the nearest centimeter, we could make bins like 150-154 cm, 155-159 cm, etc. (since a response like
154.2 isn't possible). We'll use this method going forward. How do we decide what the boundaries of our bins should be?
There's no one right way to do that, but there are some guidelines that can be helpful.
 1. Every data value should fall into exactly one bin. For example, if the lowest value in our data is 42, the lowest bin

      should not be 45-49.
 2. Every bin should have the same width. Note that if we shift the upper limits of our bins down a bit to avoid

      ambiguity (like described above), we can't simply subtract the lower limit from the upper limit to get the bin width;
      instead, we subtract the lower limit of the bin from the lower limit of the next bin. For example, if we're looking at
      GPAs rounded to the nearest hundredth, we might choose bins like 2.00-2.24, 2.25-2.49, 2.50-2.74, etc. These bins
      all have a width of 0.25.
 3. If the minimum or maximum value of the data falls right on the boundary between two bins, then it's OK to bend
      the rule just a little in order to avoid having an additional bin containing just that one value. We'll see an example of
      this in just a moment.
 4. If we have too many or too few bins, it can be difficult to get a good sense of the distribution. Seven or eight bins is
      ideal, but that's not a firm rule; anything between five and twelve is fine. We often choose the number of bins so
      that the widths are round numbers.

  EXAMPLE 8.4

Creating a Binned Frequency Distribution
The GPAs of students enrolled in an advanced sociology class are listed in the following table. At this institution, 4.00 is
the maximum possible GPA.

            3.93 3.43 2.87 2.51 2.70 1.91 2.32 2.85 3.06 3.03 3.49 1.84 3.72 2.56

            1.99 3.40 3.74 3.23 1.98 3.05 1.43 2.90 1.20 3.72 3.56 3.07 2.58 4.00

            2.79 3.81 2.60 3.69 2.88 3.34 1.51 3.63 3.45 1.89 2.30 2.98 3.04 2.70

Create a binned frequency distribution for the data.
     Solution

Step 1: Identify the max and min values in your bins. Looking at the dataset, you can see that the lowest value is 1.20,
822 8 · Statistics

       and the highest is 4.00.
       Step 2: Get a rough idea of bin widths. Aim for seven or eight bins, give or take a couple. For eight bins, the minimum
       width can be found by taking the difference between the largest and smallest data values and dividing by the number of
       bins:

If we use 0.35 for our widths, starting at our minimum value of 1.20, we'll get bins with these boundaries: 1.20, 1.55,
1.90, 2.25, 2.60, 2.95, 3.30, 3.65, 4.00.

Step 3: Consider the context of the values. Because these are GPAs, there are natural breaks at 2.00 and 3.00 that are
important. (People like whole numbers!) Since 0.35 is very close to , let's use that for our bin width instead, and make
sure that whole numbers fall on the boundaries. That means our first bin needs to start at 1.00 and go up to 1.33 to
make sure our minimum value is included. The next bin will run from 1.34 to 1.66, and so forth.

Step 4: Create the distribution table. We start our distribution table by filling in the bins:

GPA Range Frequency GPA Range Frequency GPA Range Frequency

1.00-1.33                           2.00-2.33        3.00-3.33

1.34-1.66                           2.34-2.66        3.34-3.66

1.67-1.99                           2.67-2.99        3.67-4.00

Notice that the last bin doesn't follow the pattern; since our maximum data value is right on the upper boundary of that
last bin, this is a case where we can bend that rule just a little to avoid creating a bin for 4.00-4.33 (which wouldn't really
make sense in the context of these GPAs anyway, since 4.00 is the maximum possible GPA).

Step 5: Complete the table with the frequencies. Finish the table by counting the number of data values that fall in
each bin, and recording them in the frequency column:

GPA Range Frequency GPA Range Frequency GPA Range Frequency

1.00-1.33                        1  2.00-2.33     2  3.00-3.33  6

1.34-1.66                        2  2.34-2.66     4  3.34-3.66  7

1.67-1.99                        5  2.67-2.99     8  3.67-4.00  7

Step 6: Check your work. Add up the frequencies to make sure all the data values are included. We started with forty-

two data values, and                           .

      YOUR TURN 8.4
1. The following table displays the ages of a sample of customers who have shopped at a new boutique.

                                              56 39 35 32 26 53 55 47 70 43
                                              33 33 43 41 26 40 31 34 33 53

    Create a binned frequency distribution to summarize these data.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           8.1 · Gathering and Organizing Data 823

Check Your Understanding

For the following problems, decide whether randomization is being used in the selection of these samples. If it is,
identify the type of random sample (simple, systematic, cluster, or stratified).

     1. High school guidance counselors want to know the proportion of the school's seniors who intend to apply for
          college. They choose four senior homerooms at random, then visit each one and ask every student in those
          homerooms whether they intend to apply.

     2. A quality control technician wants to ensure that the sandals being made in his factory are up to specifications,
          so they check the first five pairs they see coming off the line.

     3. A college athletic department wants to check up on the mental wellness of its student-athletes. The department
          wants to ensure every varsity sport is represented, so they survey three randomly selected members of each
          team.

 4. The purchasing manager for a chain of bookstores wants to make sure they're buying the right types of books to
      put on the shelves, so they take a sample of 20 books that customers bought in the last five days and record the
      genres. Use the raw data below to create a categorical frequency distribution.

Nonfiction Young Adult Romance                    Cooking  Young Adult

Young Adult  Thriller    Young Adult Nonfiction True Crime

Romance      Nonfiction        Thriller  True Crime        Romance

True Crime   Thriller    Romance Young Adult Young Adult

5. A survey of college students asked how many courses those students were currently taking. Create a quantitative
    frequency distribution to summarize the raw data given below:
                                    3443544323553343

                                    2433435333231343

6. The World Bank provides data on every country in the world. The following is a sample of twenty-five countries,
    along with the number of cell phone subscriptions registered in that country per hundred residents. Create a
    binned frequency distribution for the cell phone data.

             Country     Cell   Country             Cell

             Cameroon 83.7               Benin      78.5

             Vanuatu     82.5            Eritrea    13.7

             Georgia     140.7  Mauritania          92.2

             Kazakhstan 146.6 Czech Republic 119

             Bermuda 105.9               Qatar      151.1

             Russia      157.9  Pakistan            73.4

             Hungary 113.5               Egypt      105.5

            (source (https://data.worldbank.org/))
824 8 · Statistics

                                 Country  Cell      Country               Cell
                                                                         123.2
                                 Costa Rica 180.2   Nepal                96.4
                                                                         43.5
                                 Algeria  111       Turkey               78.5
                                                                         133.6
                                 Somalia  48.3      Congo

                                 Fiji     114.2     Venezuela

                                 El Salvador 156.5  Germany

                                 Angola   44.7

                                 (source (https://data.worldbank.org/))

        SECTION 8.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, data are collected on a sample of items found in a grocery store. Classify each of these
datasets obtained from that sample as being categorical or quantitative.

     1. Price
     2. Calories per serving
     3. Whether the product is gluten-free
     4. Package weight
     5. Country of origin

For the following exercises, decide whether random samples are being selected. If they are, decide whether they are
simple, systematic, cluster, or stratified.

     6. A newspaper asks its readers to answer an online poll about proposed zoning changes in their city.
     7. An electronics retailer uses a computer to randomly select customers in its rewards club to take a survey about

          their interest in a new product.
     8. The student affairs office at a university wants to make sure students who live on campus are satisfied with

          their access to laundry facilities. They select five students at random from each residence hall to take the survey.
     9. A professor wants to gauge how much time her students spend on homework, so she asks that question of

          each student who comes to her office hours that day.
    10. The management at a restaurant wants feedback about its new menu. They choose ten tables at random, and

          survey each person seated at that table.
    11. The transit authority in a large city wants to know about usage on a particular train route. They choose a

          number between 1 and 5 at random, and get 4. They then count the number of people on the fourth train to
          pass through the station, and then count every fifth train after that.
    12. A candidate for a seat in the U.S. Congress wants to learn which issues are most important to her potential
          constituents. She chooses 50 people at random from each zip code in her district to survey.

For the following exercises, you have been tasked with surveying a sample of 100 registered voters who live in your
town. You have access to a spreadsheet containing the following data on every registered voter: name, address, age,
phone number. The spreadsheet also can generate a unique random number for each person.

    13. Describe how you might choose a simple random sample from this population.
    14. Describe how you might choose a stratified random sample from this population to ensure that all age groups

          are represented.
    15. Assume that there are 50,000 registered votes on your list. Describe how you might choose a systematic

          random sample from this population.

16. A sample of students was asked, "Which social media platform, if any, do you use most frequently?" The raw
      responses are given in this table:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              8.1 · Gathering and Organizing Data 825

None           Twitter    Snapchat Snapchat Twitter Facebook

Instagram Snapchat        Twitter                       None    Snapchat Instagram

Instagram Facebook        None                          Instagram Snapchat Twitter

Snapchat Instagram Instagram Twitter Snapchat Twitter

Facebook       None       Instagram Instagram Twitter Instagram

      Create a categorical frequency distribution to summarize these data.

17. A sample of students at a large university were asked whether they were full-time students living on campus (Full-
      Time Residential, FTR), full-time students who commuted (FTC), or part-time students (PT). The raw data are in the
      table below:
             FTR FTR FTC PT FTR PT FTR FTC FTC PT FTC FTC PT FTR FTC PT

             FTR FTC FTC FTR FTR PT FTC FTC FTC PT FTR PT FTC FTC FTR PT

      Give the categorical frequency distribution for these data.
18. A survey of students in a math class asked for the respondents' birth months. The table below lists the responses:

                  Dec Feb Apr Sep Nov Dec Aug Feb Feb Sep Oct Feb Jun Jan
                   Jul May May Jan Mar Feb Nov Oct Apr Oct Aug Jan May Jan

      Give the categorical frequency distribution of the birth months.

19. Students in a statistics class were asked how many countries (besides their home countries) they had visited. The
      table below gives the raw responses:
                                         021132000211011

                                         020101020110010

Create a frequency distribution to summarize the data.

20. The following table contains the top 25 receivers (by number of receptions) in the NFL during the 2020 season,
      along with their teams and the number of fumbles each made over the course of the season:

Player         Team Fumbles                             Player         Team Fumbles

Stefon Diggs         BUF  0                             Calvin Ridley  ATL    1

Davante Adams        GNB  1                             Robert Woods   LAR    2

DeAndre Hopkins ARI       3                             Justin Jefferson MIN  1

Darren Waller        LVR  2                             Diontae Johnson PIT   2

(source (http://www.pro-football-reference.com))
826 8 · Statistics

                                 Player  Team Fumbles                 Player         Team Fumbles

                    Travis Kelce              KAN      1              Tyreek Hill         KAN   1

                    Allen Robinson            CHI      0              Terry McLaurin WAS        1

                    Keenan Allen              LAC      3              Alvin Kamara        NOR   1

                    Tyler Lockett             SEA      1              D.K. Metcalf         SEA  1

                    JuJu Smith-Schuster PIT            3              Cole Beasley        BUF   0

                    Robby Anderson            CAR      1              Brandin Cooks HOU         0

                    Amari Cooper              DAL      0              J.D. McKissic       WAS   3

                    Cooper Kupp               LAR      1              Tyler Boyd           CIN  1

                    Curtis Samuel             CAR      1

                    (source (http://www.pro-football-reference.com))

      Create a frequency distribution for the number of fumbles made by these players.
21. A public opinion poll about an upcoming election asked respondents, "How many political advertisements do you

      recall seeing on television in the last 24 hours?" The responses were as follows

                                         625522413012162

                                 524863342534223

Create a frequency distribution for these data.

For the following exercises, use the following table of data on the top 15 receivers (by number of receptions) in the NFL
during the 2020 season:

                    Player               Team Age Receptions Yards Yds/Rec TD Long

                    Stefon Diggs         BUF 27           127         1535           12.1       8 55

                    Davante Adams        GNB 28           115         1374           11.9       18 56

                    DeAndre Hopkins      ARI       28     115         1407           12.2       6 60

                    Darren Waller        LVR 28           107         1196           11.2       9 38

                    Travis Kelce         KAN 31           105         1416           13.5       11 45

                    Allen Robinson       CHI 27           102         1250           12.3       6 42

                    Keenan Allen         LAC 28           100         992            9.9        8 28

                    Tyler Lockett        SEA 28           100         1054           10.5       10 47

                    (source (http://www.pro-football-reference.com))

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    8.2 · Visualizing Data 827

Player            Team Age Receptions Yards Yds/Rec TD Long

JuJu Smith-Schuster PIT 24  97                    831   8.6   9 31

Robby Anderson    CAR 27    95                    1096  11.5  3 75

Amari Cooper      DAL 26    92                    1114  12.1  5 69

Cooper Kupp       LAR 27    92                    974   10.6  3 55

Calvin Ridley     ATL 26    90                    1374  15.3  9 63

Robert Woods      LAR 28    90                    936   10.4  6 56

Justin Jefferson  MIN 21    88                    1400  15.9  7 71

(source (http://www.pro-football-reference.com))

    22. Make a binned frequency distribution for receiving yards ("Yards") using bins of width 200.
    23. Make another binned frequency distribution for receiving yards ("Yards"), but this time use bins of width 250.
    24. Make a binned frequency distribution for number of yards per reception ("Yds/Rec"), using bins of width 1.
    25. Make a binned frequency distribution for longest reception ("Long"), using bins of width 10.

8.2 Visualizing Data

Figure 8.4 Data visualizations can help people quickly understand important features of a dataset. (credit: "Group of
diverse people having a business meeting" by Rawpixel Ltd/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Create charts and graphs to appropriately represent data.
 2. Interpret visual representations of data.
 3. Determine misleading components in data displayed visually.

Summarizing raw data is the first step we must take when we want to communicate the results of a study or experiment
to a broad audience. However, even organized data can be difficult to read; for example, if a frequency table is large, it
can be tough to compare the first row to the last row. As the old saying goes: a picture is worth a thousand words (or, in
this case, summary statistics)! Just as our techniques for organizing data depended on the type of data we were looking
828 8 · Statistics

       at, the methods we'll use for creating visualizations will vary. Let's start by considering categorical data.

     Visualizing Categorical Data

       If the data we're visualizing is categorical, then we want a quick way to represent graphically the relative numbers of
       units that fall in each category. When we created the frequency distributions in the last section, all we did was count the
       number of units in each category and record that number (this was the frequency of that category). Frequencies are nice
       when we're organizing and summarizing data; they're easy to compute, and they're always whole numbers. But they can
       be difficult to understand for an outsider who's being introduced to your data.

       Let's consider a quick example. Suppose you surveyed some people and asked for their favorite color. You communicated
       your results using a frequency distribution. Jerry is interested in data on favorite colors, so he reads your frequency
       distribution. The first row shows that twelve people indicated green was their favorite color. However, Jerry has no way of
       knowing if that's a lot of people without knowing how many people total took your survey. Twelve is a pretty significant
       number if only twenty-five people took the survey, but it's next to nothing if you recorded a thousand responses. For that
       reason, we will often summarize categorical data not with frequencies, but with proportions. The proportion of data
       that fall into a particular category is computed by dividing the frequency for that category by the total number of units in
       the data.

Proportions can be expressed as fractions, decimals, or percentages.

  EXAMPLE 8.5
Finding Proportions
Recall Example 8.2, in which a teacher recorded the responses on the first question of a multiple choice quiz, with five
possible responses (A, B, C, D, and E). The raw data was as follows:

                                         AACABBAEACAAAC

                                         E ABAACAB E EAACC

We computed a frequency distribution that looked like this:

                                 Response to First Question Frequency

                                 A                           14

                                 B                           4

                                 C                           6

                                 D                           0

                                 E                           4

Now, let's compute the proportions for each category.

     Solution
Step 1: In order to compute a proportion, we need the frequency (which we have in the table above) and the total
number of units that are represented in our data. We can find that by adding up the frequencies from all the categories:

                                  .

Step 2: To find the proportions, we divide the frequency by the total. For the first category ("A"), the proportion is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  8.2 · Visualizing Data 829

               We can compute the other proportions similarly, filling in the rest of the table:

               Response to First Question Frequency Proportion

                                       A                     14

                                       B                     4

                                       C                     6

                                       D                     0

                                       E                     4

Step 3: Check your work: If you add up your proportions, you should get 1 (if you're using fractions or decimals) or 100%
(if you're using percentages). In this case,

      If you need to round off the results of the computations to get your percentages or decimals, then the sum might
      not be exactly equal to 1 or 100% in the end due to that rounding error.

YOUR TURN 8.5

1. In Your Turn 8.2, students in a statistics class were asked to provide their majors. Those results are again listed
    below:

               Undecided                  Biology            Biology    Sociology

               Political Science Sociology                   Undecided  Undecided

               Undecided                  Biology            Biology    Education

               Biology                    Biology Political Science Political Science

You created a frequency distribution:

                                          Major              Frequency

                                          Biology                6

                                          Education              1

                                          Political Science      3
830 8 · Statistics

                          Major   Frequency
                       Sociology         2
                       Undecided         4

Now, find the proportions associated with each category. Express your answers as percentages.

Now that we can compute proportions, let's turn to visualizations. There are two primary visualizations that we'll use for
categorical data: bar charts and pie charts. Both of these data representations work on the same principle: If proportions
are represented as areas, then it's easy to compare two proportions by assessing the corresponding areas. Let's look at
bar charts first.

Bar Charts

A bar chart is a visualization of categorical data that consists of a series of rectangles arranged side-by-side (but not
touching). Each rectangle corresponds to one of the categories. All of the rectangles have the same width. The height of
each rectangle corresponds to either the number of units in the corresponding category or the proportion of the total
units that fall into the category.

  EXAMPLE 8.6

Building a Bar Chart
In Example 8.5, we computed the following proportions:

                    Response to First Question Frequency Proportion

                    A             14         50%

                    B             4          14.3%

                    C             6          21.4%

                    D             0          0%

                    E             4          14.3%

Draw a bar chart to visualize this frequency distribution.

     Solution
Step 1: To start, we'll draw axes with the origin (the point where the axes meet) at the bottom left:

                                                                              Figure 8.5
Step 2: Next, we'll place our categories evenly spaced along the bottom of the horizontal axis. The order doesn't really
matter, but if the categories have some sort of natural order (like in this case, where the responses are labeled A to E), it's
best to maintain that order. We'll also label the horizontal axis:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               8.2 · Visualizing Data 831

                                                                              Figure 8.6
Step 3: Now, we have a decision to make: Will we use frequencies to define the height of our rectangles, or will we use
proportions? Let's try it both ways. First, let's use frequencies. Notice that our frequencies run from zero to 14; this will
correspond to the scale we put on the vertical axis. If we put a tick mark for every whole number between 0 and 14, the
result will be pretty crowded; let's instead put a mark on the multiples of 3 or 5:

                                                                              Figure 8.7
Step 4: Now, let's draw in the first rectangle. The frequency associated with "A" is 14. So we'll go to 14 on the vertical axis,
and place a mark at that height above the "A" label:

                                                                              Figure 8.8
Step 5: Then, draw vertical lines straight down from the edges of your mark to make a rectangle:

                                                                              Figure 8.9
832 8 · Statistics

       Step 6: Finally, we can build the rest of the rectangles, making sure that the bases all have the same length of the base =
       width of the rectangle, and the rectangles don't touch. Notice that, since the frequency for "D" is zero, that category has
       no rectangle (but we'll leave a space there so the reader can see that there is a category with frequency zero). Here's the
       result:

                                                                             Figure 8.10

Step 7: That's it! Now, let's use proportions instead of frequencies. We'll label the vertical axis with evenly spaced
numbers that run the full range of the percentages in our table: 0% to 50%. We can divide that into five equal parts (so
that each has width 10%), and use that to label our vertical axis:

                                                                             Figure 8.11

Step 8: Then, we can fill in the rectangles just as we did before. The height of the "A" rectangle is 50%, the "B" rectangle
goes up to 14.3%, "C" goes to 21.4%, there is no rectangle for "D" (since its proportion is 0%), and the "E" rectangle also
goes up to 14.3%:

                                                    Figure 8.12

Step 9: Notice that the rectangles are basically identical in our two final bar charts. That's no coincidence! Bar charts that

use proportions and those that use frequencies will always look identical (which is why it doesn't really matter much

which option you choose). Here's why: look at the bars for "B" and "C". The frequencies for these are 4 and 6 respectively.

Notice that 6 is 50% bigger than 4 (since           ), which means that the "C" bar will be 50% higher than the "B" bar.

Now look at the same bars using proportions: since               , the bar for "C" will be 50% higher than the bar

for "B." The same relationships hold for the other bars, too.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        8.2 · Visualizing Data 833

                          Figure 8.13

YOUR TURN 8.6

1. The students in a statistics class were asked to provide their majors. The computed proportions for each of the
    categories are as follows:

               Major              Frequency Proportion

               Biology            6    37.5%

               Education          1    6.3%

               Political Science  3    18.8%

               Sociology          2    12.5%

               Undecided          4    25%

      Create a bar graph to visualize these data. Use percentages to label the vertical axis.

In practice, most graphs are now made with computers. You can use Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/
spreadsheet), which is available for free from any web browser.

       VIDEO
      Make a Simple Bar Graph in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Google_Sheet)

Now that we've explored how bar graphs are made, let's get some practice reading bar graphs.

  EXAMPLE 8.7

Reading Bar Graphs
The bar graph shown gives data on 2020 model year cars available in the United States. Analyze the graph to answer the
following questions.
834 8 · Statistics

                                                       Figure 8.14 (data source: consumerreports.org/cars)
        1. What proportion of available cars were sports cars?
        2. What proportion of available cars were sedans?
        3. Which categories of cars each made up less than 5% of the models available?

            Solution
        1. The bar for sports cars goes up to 10%, so the proportion of models that are considered sports cars is 10%.
        2. The bar corresponding to sedan goes up past 30% but not quite to 35%. It looks like the proportion we want is

             between 33% and 34%.
        3. We're looking for the bars that don't make it all the way to the 5% line. Those categories are hatchback and wagon.

               YOUR TURN 8.7
         The bar graph shows the region of every institution of higher learning in the United States (except for the service
         academies, like West Point).

         Analyze the bar chart to answer the following questions.
             1. Which region contains the largest number of institutions of higher learning?
             2. What proportion of all institutions of higher learning can be found in the Southwest?
             3. Which regions each have under 5% of the total number of institutions of higher learning?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                        8.2 · Visualizing Data 835

WORK IT OUT

Candy Color: Frequency and Distribution
M&Ms, Skittles, and Reese's Pieces are all candies that have pieces that are uniformly shaped, but which have
different colors. Do the colors in each bag appear with the same frequency? Get a bag of one of these candies and
make a bar chart to visualize the color distribution.

Pie Charts

A pie chart consists of a circle divided into wedges, with each wedge corresponding to a category. The proportion of the
area of the entire circle that each wedge represents corresponds to the proportion of the data in that category. Pie
charts are difficult to make without technology because they require careful measurements of angles and precise circles,
both of which are tasks better left to computers.

       VIDEO

      Create Pie Charts Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Creating_Pie_Chart)

Pie charts are sometimes embellished with features like labels in the slices (which might be the categories, the
frequencies in each category, or the proportions in each category) or a legend that explains which colors correspond to
which categories. When making your own pie chart, you can decide which of those to include. The only rule is that there
has to be some way to connect the slices to the categories (either through labels or a legend).

  EXAMPLE 8.8

Making Pie Charts
Use the data that follows to generate a pie chart.

Type Percent  Type             Percent

SUV  43.6%    Minivan          5.5%

Sedan 33.6% Hatchback 3.6%

Sports 10.0%  Wagon            3.6%

Table 8.1 (data source:
www.consumerreports.org/cars)

     Solution
First, enter the chart above into a new sheet in Google Sheets. Next, click and drag to select the full table (including the
header row). Click on the "Insert" menu, then select "Chart." The result may be a pie chart by default; if it isn't, you can
change it to a pie chart using the "Chart type" drop-down menu in the Chart Editor.
836 8 · Statistics

                                                Figure 8.15 (data source: consumerreports.org/cars)
You can choose to use a legend to identify the categories, as well as label the slices with the relevant percentages.

YOUR TURN 8.8

1. In Your Turn 8.6, you created a bar chart using data on reported majors from students in a class. Here are those
    proportions again (sorted from largest to smallest):

                                      Major              Proportion

                                      Biology            37.5%

                                      Undecided          25.0%

                                      Political Science  18.8%

                                      Sociology          12.5%

                                      Education          6.3%

Create a pie graph using those data.

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Florence Nightingale
Florence Nightingale (1820-1910) is best remembered today for her contributions in the medical field; after
witnessing the horrors of field hospitals that tended to the wounded during the Crimean War, she championed
reforms that encouraged sanitary conditions in hospitals. For those efforts, she is today considered the founder of
modern nursing.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               8.2 · Visualizing Data 837

  Figure 8.16 Florence Nightingale's significant contribution to the field of statistical graphics cannot be understated.
  (credit: "Florence Nightingale" by Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division/http://hdl.loc.gov/loc.pnp/
  pp.print, public domain)
  Nightingale is also remembered for her contributions in statistics, especially in the ways we visualize data. She
  developed a version of the pie chart that is today known as a polar area diagram, which she used to visualize the
  causes of death among the soldiers in the war, highlighting the number of preventable deaths the British Army
  suffered in that conflict.
  In 1859, the Royal Statistical Society honored her for her contributions to the discipline by electing her to join the
  organization. She was the first woman to be so honored. She was later named an honorary member of the American
  Statistical Association. Nightingale's status as a revered pioneer in both nursing and statistics is a complex one,
  because some of her writings and opinions demonstrate a colonialist mindset and disregard for those who lost their
  lives and lands at the hands of the British. Her core statistical writings indicated that she felt superior to the
  Indigenous people she was treating. Members of both fields continue to debate her near-iconic role.

Visualizing Quantitative Data

There are several good ways to visualize quantitative data. In this section, we'll talk about two types: stem-and-leaf plots
and histograms.

Stem-and-Leaf Plots

Stem-and-leaf plots are visualization tools that fall somewhere between a list of all the raw data and a graph. A stem-
and-leaf plot consists of a list of stems on the left and the corresponding leaves on the right, separated by a line. The
stems are the numbers that make up the data only up to the next-to-last digit, and the leaves are the final digits. There is
one leaf for every data value (which means that leaves may be repeated), and the leaves should be evenly spaced across
all stems. These plots are really nothing more than a fancy way of listing out all the raw data; as a result, they shouldn't
be used to visualize large datasets.
This concept can be difficult to understand without referencing an example, so let's first look at how to read a stem-and-
leaf plot.

  EXAMPLE 8.9
Reading a Stem-and-Leaf Plot
A collector of trading cards records the sale prices (in dollars) of a particular card on an online auction site, and puts the
results in a stem-and-leaf plot:

                                                                  0 589

                                                                  1 0003445555699
                                                                Table 8.2
838 8 · Statistics

                                   2 00005599

                                   3 00055

                                   4 005

                                   5

                                   60

                                   Table 8.2

Answer the following questions about the data:

1. How many prices are represented?
2. What prices represent the five most expensive cards? The five least expensive?
3. What is the full set of data?

Solution

1. Each leaf (the numbers on the right side of the bar) represents one data value. So, on the first row (which looks like

0 | 5 8 9), there are three data values (one for each leaf: 5, 8, and 9). The next row has thirteen leaves, then eight,

five, three, zero, and one. Adding those up, we get                                data points or prices.

2. The most expensive card is the last one listed. Its stem is 6 and its leaf is 0, so the price is $60. There are no leaves

associated with the 5 stem, so there were no cards sold for $50 to $59. The next most expensive cards are then on

the 4 stem: $45, $40, and $40 (remember, repeated leaves mean repeated values in the dataset). So, we have our

four most expensive cards. The fifth would be on the next stem up. The biggest leaf on the 3 stem is a 5, so the fifth-

most expensive card sold for $35.

As for the five least-expensive cards, the smallest stem is 0, with leaves 5, 8, and 9. So, the three least expensive

cards sold for $5, $8, and $9 (notice that we don't write down that leading 0 from the stem in the tens place). The

next two least-expensive cards will be the two smallest leaves on the next stem: $10 and $10.

3. The full list of data is: 5, 8, 9, 10, 10, 10, 13, 14, 14, 15, 15, 15, 15, 16, 19, 19, 20, 20, 20, 24, 25, 25, 29, 29, 30, 30, 30,

35, 35, 40, 40, 45, 60.

      YOUR TURN 8.9
The stem-and-leaf plot below shows data collected from a sample of employed people who were asked how far (in
miles) they commute each day:

                                                                   0 467
                                                                   1 0002224588
                                                                   2 0555
                                                                   3 00556
                                                                   4
                                                                   50
                                                                   60

    1. How many data points are represented?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               8.2 · Visualizing Data 839

      2. What are the three longest and shortest commutes?
      3. What is the full list of data?
Stem-and-leaf plots are useful in that they give us a sense of the shape of the data. Are the data evenly spread out over
the stems, or are some stems "heavier" with leaves? Are the heavy stems on the low side, the high side, or somewhere in
the middle? These are questions about the distribution of the data, or how the data are spread out over the range of
possible values.
Some words we use to describe distributions are uniform (data are equally distributed across the range), symmetric
(data are bunched up in the middle, then taper off in the same way above and below the middle), left-skewed (data are
bunched up at the high end or larger values, and taper off toward the low end or smaller values), and right-skewed (data
are bunched up at the low end, and taper off toward the high end). See below figures.

Looking back at the stem-and-leaf plot in the previous example, we can see that the data are bunched up at the low end
and taper off toward the high end; that set of data is right-skewed. Knowing the distribution of a set of data gives us
useful information about the property that the data are measuring.
Now that we have a better idea of how to read a stem-and-leaf plot, we're ready to create our own.

  EXAMPLE 8.10
Constructing a Stem-and-Leaf Plot
An entomologist studying crickets recorded the number of times different crickets (of differing species, genders, etc.)
chirped in a one-minute span. The raw data are as follows:

                                        89 97 82 102 84 99 93 103 120 91
                                       115 105 89 109 107 89 104 82 106 92
                                       101 109 116 103 100 91 85 104 104 106

Construct a stem-and-leaf plot to visualize these results.
     Solution

Step 1: Before we can create the plot, we need to sort the data in order from smallest to largest:
840 8 · Statistics

                                       82 82 84 85 89 89 89 91 91 92
                                       93 97 99 100 101 102 103 103 104 104
                                      104 105 106 106 107 109 109 115 116 120

Step 2: Next, we identify the stems. To do that, we cut off the final digit of each number, which leaves us with stems of 8,
9, 10, 11, and 12. Arrange the stems vertically, and add the bar to separate these from the leaves:

                                                                                    8
                                                                                    9
                                                                                    10
                                                                                    11
                                                                                    12

Step 3: Write down the leaves on the right side of the bar, giving just the final digit (that we cut off to make the stems) of
each data value. List these in order, and make sure they line up vertically:

                                                                 8 2245999
                                                                 9 112379
                                                                 10 0 1 3 3 4 4 4 5 6 6 7 9 9
                                                                 11 5 6
                                                                 12 0
                                                               Table 8.3

YOUR TURN 8.10

1. This table gives the records of the Major League Baseball teams at the end of the 2019 season:
                                                 Team Wins Losses Team Wins Losses

                                 HOU 107  55  PHI  81                    81

                                 LAD 106  56  TEX  78                    84

                                 NYY 103  59  SFG 77                     85

                                 MIN 101  61  CIN  75                    87

                                 Table 8.4 (source: http://www.mlb.com)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   8.2 · Visualizing Data 841

Team Wins Losses Team Wins Losses

ATL  97  65                                          CHW 72   89

OAK 97   65                                          LAA 72   90

TBR 96   66                                          COL 71   91

CLE  93  69                                          SDP 70   92

WSN 93   69                                          PIT  69  93

STL  91  71                                          SEA  68  94

MIL 89   73                                          TOR 67   95

NYM 86   76                                          KCR 59   103

ARI  85  77                                          MIA 57   105

BOS 84   78                                          BAL 54   108

CHC 84   78                                          DET 47   114

Table 8.4 (source: http://www.mlb.com)

Create a stem-and-leaf plot for the number of wins.

As we mentioned above, stem-and-leaf plots aren't always going to be useful. For example, if all the data in your dataset
are between 20 and 29, then you'll just have one stem, which isn't terribly useful. (Although there are methods like stem
splitting for addressing that particular problem, we won't go into those at this time.) On the other end of the spectrum,
the data may be so spread out that every stem has only one leaf. (This problem can sometimes be addressed by
rounding off the data values to the tens, hundreds, or some other place value, then using that place for the leaves.)
Finally, if you have dozens or hundreds (or more) of data values, then a stem-and-leaf plot becomes too unwieldy to be
useful. Fortunately, we have other tools we can use.

Histograms

Histograms are visualizations that can be used for any set of quantitative data, no matter how big or spread out. They
differ from a categorical bar chart in that the horizontal axis is labeled with numbers (not ranges of numbers), and the
bars are drawn so that they touch each other. The heights of the bars reflect the frequencies in each bin. Unlike with
stem-and-leaf plots, we cannot recreate the original dataset from a histogram. However, histograms are easy to make
with technology and are great for identifying the distribution of our data. Let's first create one histogram without
technology to help us better understand how histograms work.

  EXAMPLE 8.11

Constructing a Histogram
In Example 8.10, we built a stem-and-leaf plot for the number of chirps made by crickets in one minute. Here are the raw
data that we used then:
842 8 · Statistics

                                 89 97 82 102 84 99
                                 115 105 89 109 107 89
                                 101 109 116 103 100 91
                                 93 103 120 91 85 104
                                 104 82 106 92 104 106

Construct a histogram to visualize these results.
     Solution

Step 1: Add data to bins. Histograms are built on binned frequency distributions, so we'll make that first. Luckily, the
stem-and-leaf plot we made earlier can help us do this much more quickly:

                                                                8 2245999

                                                                9 112379

                                                                10 0 1 2 3 3 4 4 4 5 6 6 7 9 9

                                                                11 5 6

                                                                12 0

If we're using bins of width 10, we can compute the frequencies by counting the numbers of leaves associated with the
corresponding stem:

                                 Bin      Frequency

                                 80-89    7

                                 90-99    6

                                 100-109  14

                                 110-119  2

                                 120-129  1

(Note that, when we made binned frequency diagrams in the last module, we noted that if the biggest data value was
right on the border between two bins, it was OK to lump it in with the lower bin. That's not recommended when building
histograms, so the data value 120 is all alone in the 120-129 bin.)

Step 2: Create the axes. On the horizontal axis, start labeling with the lower end of the first bin (in this case, 80), and go
up to the higher end of the last bin (120). Mark off the other bin boundaries, making sure they're all evenly spaced. On
the vertical axis, start with zero and go up at least to the greatest frequency you see in your bins (14 in this example),
making sure that the labels you make are evenly spaced and that the difference between those numbers is the same.
Let's count off our vertical axis by threes:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                8.2 · Visualizing Data 843

                                                                             Figure 8.17

Step 3: Draw in the bars. Remember that the bars of a histogram touch, and that the heights are determined by the
frequency. So, the first bar will cover 80 to 90 on the horizontal axis, and have a height of 7:

                                 Figure 8.18

Now, we can fill in the others:

                                                                             Figure 8.19
Step 4: Let's compare the histogram we just created to the stem-and-leaf plot we made earlier:

                                                                             Figure 8.20

Notice that the leaves on the rotated stem-and-leaf plot match the bars on our histogram! We can view stem-and-leaf
plots as sideways histograms. But, as we'll see soon, we can do much more with histograms.
844 8 · Statistics

YOUR TURN 8.11

1. In Your Turn 10, you made a stem-and-leaf plot of the number of wins for each MLB team in 2019, using this set
    of data:

                                                                    Team Wins Losses

                                 HOU 107        55

                                 LAD 106        56

                                 NYY 103        59

                                 MIN 101        61

                                 ATL        97  65

                                 OAK 97         65

                                 TBR 96         66

                                 CLE        93  69

                                 WSN 93         69

                                 STL        91  71

                                 MIL 89         73

                                 NYM 86         76

                                 ARI        85  77

                                 BOS 84         78

                                 CHC 84         78

                                 PHI        81  81

                                 TEX        78  84

                                 SFG 77         85

                                 CIN        75  87

                                 CHW 72         89

                                 LAA 72         90

                                 COL 71         91

                                 Table 8.5

Access for free at openstax.org
                    8.2 · Visualizing Data 845

Team Wins Losses

SDP 70         92

PIT        69  93

SEA        68  94

TOR 67         95

KCR 59         103

MIA 57         105

BAL 54         108

DET 47         114

Table 8.5

Create a histogram for the number of wins. Use bins of width 10, starting with a bin for 40-49 (so that your
histogram reflects the stem-and-leaf plot you made earlier).

Now that we've seen the connection between stem-and-leaf plots and histograms, we are ready to look at how we can
use Google Sheets to build histograms.

       VIDEO
      Make a Histogram Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/CreatingHistograms)

Let's use Google Sheets to create a histogram for a large dataset.

  EXAMPLE 8.12

Creating a Histogram in Google Sheets
The data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the average SAT score for students attending
every institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available. Create a histogram in Google Sheets of the
average SAT scores. Use bins of width 50. Are the data uniformly distributed, symmetric, left-skewed, or right-skewed?

     Solution
Using the procedure described in the video above, we get this:
846 8 · Statistics

                                                     Figure 8.21 (data source: https://data.ed.gov)
The data are fairly symmetric, but slightly right-skewed.

      YOUR TURN 8.12

1. The file "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains in-state tuition costs (in dollars) for every
    institution of higher learning in the United States for which data is available (data from data.ed.gov). Create a
    histogram in Google Sheets of in-state tuition costs. Choose a bin size that you think works well. Are the data
    uniformly distributed, symmetric, left-skewed, or right-skewed?

Bar Charts for Labeled Data

Sometimes we have quantitative data where each value is labeled according to the source of the data. For example, in
the Your Turn above, you looked at in-state tuition data. Every value you used to create that histogram was associated
with a school; the schools are the labels. In YOUR TURN 8.11, you found a histogram of the wins of every Major League
Baseball team in 2019. Each of those win totals had a label: the team. If we're interested in visualizing differences among
the different teams, or schools, or whatever the labels are, we create a different version of the bar graph known as a bar
chart for labeled data.

These graphs are made in Google Sheets in exactly the same way as regular bar graphs. The only change is that the
vertical axis will be labeled with the units for your quantitative data instead of just "Frequency."

  EXAMPLE 8.13

Building a Bar Chart for Labeled Data
The following table shows the gross domestic product (GDP) for the United States for the years 2010 to 2019:

                                 Year GDP (in $ trillions) Year GDP (in $ trillions)

                                 2010  14.992  2015                              18.225

                                 2011  15.543  2016                              18.715

                                 2012  16.197  2017                              19.519

                                 Table 8.6 (source: https://data.worldbank.org)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    8.2 · Visualizing Data 847

                Year GDP (in $ trillions) Year GDP (in $ trillions)

                2013       16.785   2018                             20.580

                2014       17.527   2019                             21.433

                Table 8.6 (source: https://data.worldbank.org)

Construct a histogram that represents these data.

     Solution
In this case, the years are the labels, and the data we are interested in are the GDP numbers. Once you have the table
above (including the labels) entered into a spreadsheet, click and drag to select the full table. Then, in the "Insert" menu,
click "Chart." The result may not be a bar chart; if it's not, select "Column chart" in the drop-down menu "Chart type" in
the Chart Editor. If you want, you can edit things like the chart title in the "Customize" tab in the Chart Editor.

                Figure 8.22 (data source: https://data.worldbank.org)

YOUR TURN 8.13

1. The following table shows the world record times (as of February 2020) of the various 100m women's swimming
    events in international competition:

                Event      Time     Name                             Nationality

                Freestyle 51.71 Sarah Sjöström                       Sweden

                Backstroke 57.57 Regan Smith United States

                Breaststroke 64.10  Lilly King                       United States

                Butterfly  55.48 Sarah Sjöström                      Sweden

                Table 8.7 (source: https://swimswam.com/records/womens-
                world-records-lcm/)

Make a visualization of these times using the events as the labels.
848 8 · Statistics

Misleading Graphs

Graphical representations of data can be manipulated in ways that intentionally mislead the reader. There are two
primary ways this can be done: by manipulating the scales on the axes and by manipulating or misrepresenting areas of
bars. Let's look at some examples of these.

  EXAMPLE 8.14

Misleading Graphs
The table below shows the teams, and their payrolls, in the English Premier League, the top soccer organization in the
United Kingdom.

                    Team            Salary (£1,000,000s)  Team                          Salary (£1,000,000s)

Manchester United F.C.              175.7                 Newcastle United F.C.         56.9

Manchester City F.C.                136.5                 Aston Villa F.C.              52.3

                    Chelsea F.C.    132.8                 Fulham F.C.                   52.1

                    Arsenal F.C.    130.7                 Southampton F.C.              49.6

Tottenham Hotspur F.C.              129.2                 Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.  49.5

                    Liverpool F.C.  118.6                 Brighton & Hove Albion        43.7

                    Crystal Palace  85.0                  Burnley F.C.                  35.5

                    Everton F.C.    82.5                  West Bromwich Albion F.C.     23.8

                    Leicester City  73.7                  Leeds United F.C.             22.5

West Ham United F.C.                69.2                  Sheffield United F.C.         19.7

Table 8.8 (source: www.spotrac.com)

How might someone present this data in a misleading way?

     Solution
Step 1: Let's focus on the top five teams. Here's a bar chart of their payrolls:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               8.2 · Visualizing Data 849

                                                      Figure 8.23 (data source: www.spotrac.com)
Step 2: Now, here's another bar chart visualizing exactly the same data:

                                                      Figure 8.24 (data source: www.spotrac.com)
Step 3: You should notice that despite using the same data, these two graphs look strikingly different. In the second
graph, the gap between Manchester United and the other four teams looks significantly larger than in the first graph.
The scale on the vertical axis has been manipulated here. The first graph's axis starts at zero, while the lowest value on
the second graph's axis is 120. This trick has a strong impact on the viewer's perception of the data.

      Beware of vertical axes that don't start at zero! They overemphasize differences in heights.
Step 4: To further emphasize the difference this creates in our perception, let's look at that data again, but this time
using graphics instead of colored areas on our bar graph.
850 8 · Statistics

                                                             Figure 8.25 (data source: www.spotrac.com)
       This graph uses an image of a £10 banknote in place of the bars. Using an image that evokes the context of the data in
       place of a standard, "boring" bar is a common tool that people use when creating infographics. However, this is generally
       not a good practice because it distorts the data. Notice that our "bars" (the banknotes) are just as tall here as they were
       in the previous figure. But, to maintain the right proportions, the widths had to be adjusted as well, which changes the
       area (height × width) of each bar. A key point is that when looking at rectangles, the human eye tends to process areas
       more easily than heights.

             Beware of infographics! Areas overemphasize a difference that should be measured with a height!
       Step 5: Now, let's look at all 20 teams. This histogram indicates that the data are right-skewed, with the highest number
       of teams having a payroll between £40 million and £80 million:

                                                             Figure 8.26 (data source: www.spotrac.com)

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.2 · Visualizing Data 851

Step 6: Now let's view this same data in another chart:

                                                      Figure 8.27 (data source: www.spotrac.com)

Step 7: Even though this chart uses the same data, the skew seems to be reversed. Why? Well, even though this graph
looks like a histogram, it isn't. Look closely at the labels on the horizontal axis; they don't correspond to spots on the axis,
but instead provide a range, meaning this is a bar graph based on a binned frequency distribution.
When we review these ranges, we can see that the last range is misleading as it consists of all data "over 80." If the bins
all had the same width, that last bin would run from 80 to 120. However, we can see from the histogram that the
maximum value for this data is between 160 and 200. If the last bin in this bar graph were labeled honestly, it would read
"80-200," which would drive home the fact that the width of that bar is misleading.

Always check the horizontal axis on histograms! The widths of all the bars should be equal.

YOUR TURN 8.14

1. Take a look again at the win totals for teams in Major League Baseball in 2019 :
                                                               Team Wins Team Wins

                HOU 107 PHI                              81

                LAD 106 TEX                              78

                NYY 103 SFG 77

                MIN 101 CIN                              75

                ATL                                      97 CHW 72

                Table 8.9 (source:
                https://www.espn.com/mlb/
                standings/_/season/2019/view)
852 8 · Statistics

                                 Team Wins Team Wins

                                 OAK 97 LAA 72

                                 TBR 96 COL 71

                                 CLE  93  SDP  70

                                 WSN 93   PIT  69

                                 STL  91  SEA  68

                                 MIL 89 TOR 67

                                 NYM 86 KCR 59

                                 ARI  85  MIA  57

                                 BOS 84 BAL 54

                                 CHC 84 DET 47

                                 Table 8.9 (source:
                                 https://www.espn.com/mlb/
                                 standings/_/season/2019/view)

Make one good and one misleading chart showing the number of wins by the top ten teams. Then, looking at all
the teams, make one good and one misleading histogram for the win totals.

VIDEO
How to Spot a Misleading Graph (https://openstax.org/r/MisleadingGraphs)

      WHO KNEW?

Napoleon's Failed Invasion
One of the most famous data visualizations ever created is the cartographic depiction by Charles Joseph Minard of
Napoleon's disastrous attempted invasion of Russia.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     8.2 · Visualizing Data 853

               Figure 8.28 Minard's Napoleon Map (credit: Carte de Charles Minard/Wikimedia, public domain)

Minard's chart is remarkable in that it shows not just how the size of Napoleon's army shrank drastically over time, but
also the location on the map, the direction the army was traveling at the time, and the temperature during the
retreat.

Check Your Understanding

The medical office at a zoo tracks the animals it treats each week. The table shows the classifications for a particular
week:

Mammal Mammal  Reptile                                    Bird     Mammal Amphibian

Mammal Mammal Mammal                                      Reptile  Mammal  Bird

Mammal  Bird   Reptile                                    Reptile Amphibian Mammal

Bird    Mammal Amphibian Mammal Mammal                                     Bird

     7. Create a bar graph of the data without technology.
     8. Create a pie chart of the data using technology.
Employees at a college help desk track the number of people who request assistance each week. The table gives a
sample of the results :

                                                         142 153 158 156 141 143

                                                         139 158 156 146 137 153

                                                         136 127 157 148 132 139

                                                         155 167 143 168 133 157

                                                         138 156 164 130 148 136

 9. Make a stem-and-leaf plot of the data.
10. Create a histogram of the data. Use bins of width 5.
854 8 · Statistics

The following are data on the admission rates of the different branch campuses in the University of California system,
along with the out-of-state tuition and fee cost:

                                 Campus         Admission Rate Cost ($)

                                 Berkeley            0.1484           43,176

                                 Davis               0.4107           43,394

                                 Irvine              0.2876           42,692

                                 Los Angeles         0.1404           42,218

                                 Merced              0.6617           42,530

                                 Riverside           0.5057           42,819

                                 San Diego           0.3006           43,159

                                 Santa Barbara       0.322            43,383

                                 Santa Cruz          0.4737           42,952

                                 (source: https://data.ed.gov)

11. Create a bar graph that illustrates the differences in admission rates among the different campuses.
12. Create two bar graphs for the out-of-state tuition. One should give an unbiased perception of the differences

      among them, and the other should overemphasize those differences.

        SECTION 8.2 EXERCISES

The table below shows the answers to the question, "Which social media platform, if any, do you use most frequently?"

                    None         Twitter  Snapchat Snapchat Twitter Facebook

                    Instagram Snapchat      Twitter             None  Snapchat Instagram

                    Instagram Facebook        None   Instagram Snapchat Twitter

                    Snapchat Instagram Instagram Twitter Snapchat Twitter

                    Facebook     None     Instagram Instagram Twitter Instagram

     1. Make a bar chart to visualize these responses.
     2. Make a pie chart to visualize these responses.
A sample of students at a large university were asked whether they were full-time students living on campus (Full-Time
Residential, FTR), full-time students who commuted (FTC), or part-time students (PT). The raw data are in the table
below:

                                               FTR FTR FTC PT FTR PT FTR FTC

                                               FTR FTC FTC FTR FTR PT FTC FTC

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       8.2 · Visualizing Data 855

         FTC PT FTC FTC PT FTR FTC PT
         FTC PT FTR PT FTC FTC FTR PT

     3. Make a bar chart to visualize these responses.
     4. Make a pie chart to visualize these responses.
Students in a statistics class were asked how many countries (besides their home countries) they had visited; the table
below gives the raw responses:

                                                      0211320201

                                                      0201011010

                                                      0002110110

5. Create a bar graph visualizing these data (treating the responses as categorical).
6. Create a pie chart visualizing these data.

The purchasing department for a chain of bookstores wants to make sure they're buying the right types of books to put
on the shelves, so they take a sample of 20 books that customers bought in the last five days and record the genres:

Nonfiction Young Adult Romance     Cooking     Young Adult

Young Adult  Thriller    Young Adult Nonfiction True Crime

Romance      Nonfiction  Thriller  True Crime  Romance

True Crime   Thriller    Romance Young Adult Young Adult

     7. Create a bar graph to visualize these data.
     8. Create a pie chart to visualize these data.
An elementary school class is administered a standardized test for which scores range from 0 to 100, as shown below:

                                                                  60 54 71 80 63

                                                                  72 70 88 88 67

                                                                  74 79 50 99 64

                                                                  98 55 64 86 92

                                                                  72 65 88 80 65

                                                                (source:
                                                                http://www.nwslsoccer.com)

     9. Make a stem-and-leaf plot to visualize these results.
    10. Make a histogram to visualize these results. Use bins of width 10.
The following table gives the final results for the 2021 National Women's Soccer League season. The columns are
standings points (PTS; teams earn three points for a win and one point for a tie), wins (W), losses (L), ties (T), goals
scored by that team (GF), and goals scored against that team (GA).
856 8 · Statistics

                                 Team                  PTS W L T GF GA

                                 Portland Thorns FC    44 13 6 5 33 17

                                 OL Reign              42 13 8 3 37 24

                                 Washington Spirit     39 11 7 6 29 26

                                 Chicago Red Stars     38 11 8 5 28 28

                                 NJ/NY Gotham FC       35 8 5 11 29 21

                                 North Carolina Courage 33 9 9 6 28 23

                                 Houston Dash          32 9 10 5 31 31

                                 Orlando Pride         28 7 10 7 27 32

                                 Racing Louisville FC  22 5 12 7 21 40

                                 Kansas City Current   16 3 14 7 15 36

                                 (source: http://www.nwslsoccer.com)

    11. Make a stem-and-leaf plot for PTS.
    12. Make a histogram for PTS, using bins of width 5.
    13. Make a histogram for GF, using bins of width 5.
    14. Make a histogram for GA, using bins of width 5.

For the following exercises, use the "CUNY" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) dataset-which gives the
location (borough) of each college in the City University of New York (CUNY) system, the highest degree offered, and
the proportions of total degrees awarded in a partial list of disciplines-to identify the right visualization to address each
question. Then, create those visualizations.

    15. What is the highest degree offered in colleges across the CUNY system?
    16. What is the distribution of the proportion of degrees awarded in Information Science across the CUNY system?
    17. In which boroughs are the CUNY colleges located?
    18. What are the proportions of degrees awarded across the listed humanities fields (Foreign Language, English,

          Humanities, Philosophy & Religion, History) at City College?
    19. What proportions of degrees are awarded in Social Service at the different institutions located in Manhattan?

For the following exercises, use the data found in the "Receivers" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) dataset
on the top 25 receivers (by number of receptions; data collected from pro-football-reference.com) in the NFL during the
2020 season.

    20. Make a stem-and-leaf plot for the longest receptions ("Long").
    21. Make a stem-and-leaf plot for receptions.
    22. Make a histogram for yards.
    23. Make a histogram for yards per reception ("Yds/Rec").
    24. Make a histogram for the longest receptions ("Long").
    25. Make a histogram for receptions.
    26. Make a histogram for age.
    27. Describe the distribution of age as left-skewed, symmetric, or right-skewed.
    28. Describe the distribution of receptions as left-skewed, symmetric, or right-skewed.
    29. Describe the distribution of yards as left-skewed, symmetric, or right-skewed.
    30. Describe the distribution of touchdowns ("TD") as left-skewed, symmetric, or right-skewed.
    31. Describe the distribution of longest receptions as left-skewed, symmetric, or right-skewed.

Access for free at openstax.org
                           8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 857

8.3 Mean, Median and Mode

Figure 8.29 What does it mean to say someone has average height? (credit: modification of work "I'm the tallest" by Jenn
Durfey/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate the mode of a dataset.
 2. Calculate the median of a dataset.
 3. Calculate the mean of a dataset.
 4. Contrast measures of central tendency to identify the most representative average.
 5. Solve application problems involving mean, median, and mode.

What exactly do we mean when we describe something as "average"? Is the height of an average person the height that
more people share than any other? What if we line up every person in the world, in order from shortest to tallest, and
find the person right in the middle: Is that person's height the average? Or maybe it's something more complicated.

Imagine a game where you and a friend are trying to guess the typical person's height. Once the guesses are made, you
bring in every person and measure their height. You and your friend figure out how far off each of your guesses were
from the actual value, then square that number. The result is the number of points you earn for that person. After we
check every height and award points accordingly, the person with the lower score wins (because a lower score means
that person's guess was, overall, closer to the actual values). Could we define the average height to be the number that
you should guess to give you the smallest possible score?

Each of these three methods of determining the "average" is commonly used. They are all methods of measuring
centrality (or central tendency). Centrality is just a word that describes the middle of a set of data. All give potentially
different results, and all are useful for different reasons. In this section, we'll explore each of these methods of finding
the "average."

The Mode

In our discussion of average heights, the first possible definition we offered was the height that more people share than
any other. This is the mode, or the value that appears most often. If there are two modes, the data are bimodal.

Let's look at some examples.

  EXAMPLE 8.15

Finding the Mode Using a Stem-and-Leaf Plot
In Example 8.9, we looked at a stem-and-leaf plot of the sale prices (in dollars) of a particular collectible trading card:
858 8 · Statistics

                                                                         0 589
                                                                         1 0003445555699
                                                                         2 00005599
                                                                         3 00055
                                                                         4 005
                                                                         5
                                                                         60

       What is the mode price?
            Solution

       The mode is the price that appears most often. Both 15 and 20 appear 4 times, more than any other values. So, they are
       the modes (and we can conclude that this set of data is bimodal).

               YOUR TURN 8.15
         1. In Example 8.10, we constructed a stem-and-leaf plot for the number of times in one minute that different

              crickets chirped:
                                                                         8 2245999
                                                                         9 112379
                                                                         10 0 1 2 3 3 4 4 4 5 6 6 7 9 9
                                                                         11 5 6
                                                                         12 0

              What is the mode of the number of chirps in a minute?
       When we have a complete list of the data or a stem-and-leaf plot, it's pretty straightforward to find the mode; we just
       need to find the number that appears most often. If we're given a frequency distribution instead, the technique is
       different (but just as straightforward): we're looking for the number with the highest frequency.

         EXAMPLE 8.16
       Finding the Mode Using a Frequency Distribution
       In Example 8.3, we created a frequency distribution of the number of siblings of conflict resolution class attendees.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 859

                Number of Siblings Frequency

                0  5

                1  13

                2  6

                3  3

                4  2

                5  1

What is the mode of the number of siblings?

     Solution
The mode is the value that appears the most often, which means it has the greatest frequency. Thirteen of the
respondents have one sibling, more than any other number. So, the mode is 1.

YOUR TURN 8.16

1. In Your Turn 8.3, you found a frequency distribution for the number of people who shared a residence with
    people in a sample.

                                                Number of People in the Residence Frequency

                1                             12

                2                             13

                3                             8

                4                             6

                5                             1

      What's the mode of the number of people in these residences?

What happens if there is no number in the data that appears more than once? In that case, by our definition, every data
value is a mode. But according to some other definitions, the data would have no mode. In practice, though, it doesn't
really matter; if no data value appears more than once, then the mode is not helpful at all as a measure of centrality.

The Median

Let's revisit our example of trying to identify the height of the "average" person. If we lined everyone up in order by
height and found the person right in the middle, that person's height is called the median, or the value that is greater
than no more than half and less than no more than half of the values.

Let's look at a really simple example. Consider the following list of numbers: 11, 12, 13, 13, 14. Is the first number on the
list, 11, the median? There are no values less than 11 (that's 0%), and there are four values greater than 11 (that's 80%).
Since more than 50% of the data are greater than 11, the definition is violated; it's not the median. Here's a chart with the
rest of the data, with red shading to show where the definition is violated:
860 8 · Statistics

Data                Number of Values  Percentage of Values  Number of Values     Percentage of Values
Value                       Below                Below              Above                   Above

11                  0                 0%                    4                    80%

12                  1                 20%                   3                    60%

13                  2                 40%                   1                    20%

14                  4                 80%                   0                    0%

Table 8.10

Only 13 has no violations, so it's the median according to the definition. In practice, we find the median just like we
described in the average height example: by lining up all the data values in order from smallest to largest and picking
the value in the middle. For our easy example (with data values 11, 12, 13, 13, 14), that first 13 is right in the middle;
there are two values to the left and two values to the right. If there's not one value right in the middle, we pick the two
closest, then choose the number exactly between them. For example, let's say we have the data 41, 44, 46, 53. Since
there are an even number of data values in our list, we can't pick the one right in the middle. The two closest to the
middle are 44 and 46, so we'll choose the number halfway between those to be the median: 45. As this example shows,
the median (unlike the mode) doesn't have to be a number in our original set of data.

In the examples we've looked at so far, it's been pretty easy to identify which number is right in the middle. If we had a
very large dataset, though, it might be harder. Fortunately, we have some formulas to help us with that.

FORMULA

Suppose we have a set of data with values, ordered from smallest to largest. If  is odd, then the median is the data
value at position . If is even, then we find the values at positions and          . If those values are named and

 , then the median is defined to be .

Let's put those formulas to work in an example.
  EXAMPLE 8.17

Finding the Median Using a Stem-and-Leaf Plot
In Example 8.9, we looked at a stem-and-leaf plot that contained 33 sale prices (in dollars) of a particular collectible
trading card:

                                                                  0 589
                                                                  1 0003445555699
                                                                  2 00005599
                                                                  3 00055
                                                                  4 005
                                                                  5
                                                                  60

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 861

What is the median price?

Solution

Step 1: Since 33 is odd, the median is the data value at position , where is the number of values in the dataset.

There are 33 total values, so our formula becomes   . That means we want to look for the 17th number in the

dataset.

Step 2: We'll want to count from the lowest value to the 17th number. We can use our stem and leaf plot to do this.

                              1 2 3

                           0 589

                              4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

                           1 0003445555699

                              17

                           2 00005599

                           3 00055

                           4 005

                           5

                           60

The seventeenth number is 20, so the median is 20.

        YOUR TURN 8.17
  1. Consider the data given in this stem-and-leaf plot (there are 17 data values):

                                                                           12 1 2 2 5
                                                                           13 0 3 4 4 6 8
                                                                           14 2 5 9 9
                                                                           15 0 3
                                                                           16
                                                                           17 0

      What is the median of this data?
Now, let's tackle an example with an even number of values.
862 8 · Statistics

  EXAMPLE 8.18
Finding the Median
In Example 8.10, we looked at the number of times different crickets (of differing species, genders, etc.) chirped in a one-
minute span. That data is again provided below:

                                                           89 97 82 102 84 99

                                                          115 105 89 109 107 89

                                                          101 109 116 103 100 91

                                                           93 103 120 91 85 104

                                                          104 82 106 92 104 106

Find the median.
     Solution

Step 1: In order to find the median, we first need to sort the data so that they're in order, smallest to largest:
                                                           82 82 84 85 89 89
                                                           89 91 91 92 93 97
                                                           99 100 101 102 103 103
                                                          104 104 104 105 106 106
                                                          107 109 109 115 116 120

Step 2: Next, we figure out how many data values we have. Counting them up, we see there are 30, which is even.

Step 3: Since we have an even number of data values, we need to find the values in positions       and              .

These are 101 and 102.

Step 4: We use the formula to compute the median:                 .

YOUR TURN 8.18

1. This table gives the records of the Major League Baseball teams at the end of the 2019 season:
                                                 Team Wins Losses Team Wins Losses

                                 HOU 107           55  PHI           81  81

                                 LAD 106           56  TEX           78  84

                                 NYY 103           59  SFG 77            85

                                 Table 8.11 (source: www.mlb.com
                                 (http://www.mlb.com))

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 863

Team Wins Losses Team Wins Losses

MIN 101                                    61  CIN     75         87

ATL                                 97     65  CHW 72             89

OAK 97                                     65  LAA 72             90

TBR 96                                     66  COL 71             91

CLE                                 93     69  SDP 70             92

WSN 93                                     69  PIT     69         93

STL                                 91     71  SEA     68         94

MIL 89                                     73  TOR 67             95

NYM 86                                     76  KCR 59             103

ARI                                 85     77  MIA 57             105

BOS 84                                     78  BAL 54             108

CHC 84                                     78  DET 47             114

Table 8.11 (source: www.mlb.com
(http://www.mlb.com))

What is the median number of wins?

  EXAMPLE 8.19

Finding the Median Using a Frequency Distribution
In Example 8.3, we created a frequency distribution of the number of siblings of the people who attended a conflict
resolution class. Let's review that data again:

                                    Number of Siblings Frequency

                                        0           5

                                        1           13

                                        2           6

                                        3           3

                                        4           2

                                        5           1
864 8 · Statistics

What is the median of the number of siblings?

     Solution
There are 30 data values total, so the median is between the 15th and 16th values in the ordered list. There are five 0s
and thirteen 1s according to the frequency distribution, so items one through five are all 0s and items six through
eighteen are all 1s. Since both items fifteen and sixteen are 1s, the median is 1.

YOUR TURN 8.19

1. In Your Turn 8.3, you found a frequency distribution for the number of people who shared a residence with
    people in a sample. Let's review that data again:

                                                Number of People in the Residence Frequency

                    1  12

                    2  13

                    3  8

                    4  6

                    5  1

      What's the median of the number of people in these residences?

The Mean

Recall our example of ways we could identify the "average" height of an individual. The last method we discussed was
also the most complicated. It involved a game where the player guesses a height, then figures out how far off that guess
is from every single person's height. Those differences get squared and added together to get a score. Our next measure
of centrality gives the lowest possible score: No other guess would beat it in the game. Given a dataset containing n total
values, the mean of the dataset is the sum of all the data values, divided by n.

This is a computation you have likely done before. In many places, including spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel
and Google Sheets, this number is called the average. For statisticians, though, the word average has too many possible
meanings, so they prefer the one we'll use: mean.

  EXAMPLE 8.20

Finding the Mean
Compute the mean of the numbers 12, 15, 17, 18, 18, and 19.

     Solution
The mean is the sum of the values, divided by the number of values on the list. So, we get:

        YOUR TURN 8.20
  1. Compute the mean of the numbers 5, 8, 11, 12, 12, 12, 15, 18, and 20. Round your answer to three decimal

      places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 865

  EXAMPLE 8.21

Finding the Mean Using a Frequency Distribution
Refer again to the frequency distribution of the number of siblings people who attended a conflict resolution class
reported:

                                               Number of Siblings Frequency

                                                  0                 5

                                                  1                 13

                                                  2                 6

                                                  3                 3

                                                  4                 2

                                                  5                 1

What is the mean of the number of siblings?

     Solution
Step 1: We compute the mean by adding up all the data values and then dividing by the number of data values on the
list.

Step 2: Adding up the frequencies, we get                           data values in our list.

Step 3: Now, to find the sum of all the data values, we could simply reconstruct the raw data and add up all the numbers

there. But, there's an easier way: Remember that repeatedly adding a number to itself is the definition of multiplication.

So, for example, since there are six 2s in our data, the sum of all those 2s must be  .

Step 4: Let's add a column to our distribution for these products:

Number of Siblings Frequency (Number of Siblings) (Frequency)

0                                              5                             0

1                                              13                            13

2                                              6                             12

3                                              3                             9

4                                              2                             8

5                                              1                             5

Step 5: So, the sum of all our data values is                          . The mean is          .

      YOUR TURN 8.21

1. Refer again to the frequency distribution of the number of people who shared a residence with people in a
    sample:
866 8 · Statistics

                    Number of People in the Residence Frequency

                    1  12

                    2  13

                    3  8

      What's the mean of the number of people in these residences?

As the number of data values we are considering grows, the computation for the mean gets more and more
complicated. That's why people generally trust technology to perform that computation.

       VIDEO

      Compute Measures of Centrality Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Google-sheet)

Note that a recent update to Google Sheets introduced a new function called "MODE.MULT," which will find every mode
(not just the first one on the list).

  EXAMPLE 8.22

Using Google Sheets to Compute Measures of Centrality
The dataset "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the in-state tuitions of every college and
university in the country that reported that data to the Department of Education. Find the mode, median, and mean of
those in-state tuition values.

     Solution
Step 1: To find the mode, we select an empty cell type "=MODE(", click on the header of the column to insert a reference
to the column into our formula, and then close the parentheses. When we hit the enter key, our formula is replaced with
the mode: $13,380.
Step 2: We can find the median and mean using the same process, except using the functions "MEDIAN" and "AVERAGE"
in place of "MODE". We find that the median is $11,207 and the mean is $15,476.79.

        YOUR TURN 8.22

  1. The dataset "MLB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) gives the number of wins for every Major
      League Baseball team in the 2019 season. Use Google Sheets to find the mode(s), median, and mean.

Which Is Better: Mode, Median, or Mean?

If the mode, median, and mean all purport to measure the same thing (centrality), why do we need all three? The answer
is complicated, as each measure has its own strengths and weaknesses. The mode is simple to compute, but there may
be more than one. Further, if no data value appears more than once, the mode is entirely unhelpful. As for the mean and
median, the main difference between these two measures is how each is affected by extreme values.
Consider this example: the mean and median of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are both 3. But what if the dataset is instead 1, 2, 3, 4, 10?
The median is still 3, but the mean is now 4. What this example shows is that the mean is sensitive to extreme values,
while the median isn't. This knowledge can help us decide which of the two is more relevant for a given dataset. If it is
important that the really high or really low values are reflected in the measure of centrality, then the mean is the better
option. If very high or low values are not important, however, then we should stick with the median.
The decision between mean and median only really matters if the data are skewed. If the data are symmetric, then the
mean and median are going to be approximately equal, and the distinction between them is irrelevant. If the data are
skewed, the mean gets pulled in the direction of the skew (i.e., if the data are right-skewed, then the mean will be bigger

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 867

than the median; if the data are left-skewed, the opposite relation is true).

EXAMPLE 8.23

Choosing Which Measure of Centrality to Use
For the following situations, decide which measure(s) of centrality would be best:

1. You found a used car that you like, and you want to know if the price is too high or too low. You find a list of sale
     prices for that make and model, and you see that the distribution of those prices is skewed to the right. Some of the
     prices at the high end are close to the original sale price of the car, so you guess that those cars might have really
     low mileage, or have other enhancements added on that increased the value (but which don't apply to the car you
     found).

2. You are asked to analyze the responses to a survey. One of the questions asked, "How strongly do you agree with
     the statement, `I believe my elected representatives have my best interests in mind when they vote'?" Responses are
     a number between 1 and 5, with 1 representing "strongly disagree" and 5 representing "strongly agree."

3. You are asked to find the "average" household income for a zip code. Those values are skewed right.
4. Thinking back to the situation at the beginning of this section: you want to find "average" height. The data you've

     collected seem to be distributed symmetrically.

Solution

1. In this situation, the high values are not comparable to the value of the car you found and we don't want them to

affect the results. Also, we're unlikely to find many repeated values, so the mode is probably not useful. Median is

best.

2. Here, we want to know what a typical result is. The mean doesn't really make sense; it involves adding the numbers

together, so it would treat two "strongly disagree" and two "strongly agree" responses (those add to

              ) as exactly the same as four "neutral" responses (                   ). But those are really

different situations; the first shows a strong polarization in the responses, while the second represents strong

indifference. The mode is probably the best choice (because the data are actually categorical), but the median would

be good too.

3. The mode isn't going to be useful in this situation because it's unlikely you will find many households that have

exactly the same income. The mean and median will be different because of the skew, so the choice comes down to

the extreme values. Remember that the data are skewed right, so high values are prevalent. Because these high

values are important for our analysis, we want them to be reflected in the results. Thus, the mean is best. That being

said, the median is also useful; it allows us to say something like "50% of the households surveyed make more than"

the median.

4. Because we aren't likely to find many people with exactly the same height, the mode won't be useful. Since the data

are symmetric, the mean and the median will be about the same. So, it doesn't really matter which of those two we

choose.

        YOUR TURN 8.23

  For the following situations, decide which measure(s) of centrality would be best:
      1. The data come from a survey question where the responses range from 1 ("not interested") to 10 ("very
           interested").
      2. The data are fuel efficiency measures (in miles per gallon) for various vehicles. The data are right-skewed.
      3. The data are scores on an exam, and they are left-skewed.

Check Your Understanding

13. Use the given stem-and-leaf plot to determine the mode, median, and mean:
                                                                         8 89

                                                                         9 007
868 8 · Statistics

                                              10 2 5 6 7 8
                                              11 1 2 2 2 4 5 7 9 9
                                              12 0 0 3 5 7
                                              13 0 1 1 4

A survey of college students asked how many courses those students were currently taking. The results are
summarized in this frequency distribution:

                                 Number of Classes Frequency

                                              1                 1

                                              2                 3

                                              3                 16

                                              4                 8

                                              5                 4

    14. Find the mode of the number of classes.
    15. Find the median of the number of classes.
    16. Find the mean of the number of classes.
Employees at a college help desk track the number of people who request assistance each week, as recorded below:

                                     142 153 158 156 141 143 155 167 143 168

                                     139 158 156 146 137 153 138 156 164 130

                                     136 127 157 148 132 139 133 157 148 136

17. Compute the mode.
18. Compute the median.
19. Compute the mean.

The following table provides admission rates of the different branch campuses in the University of California system,
along with the out-of-state tuition and fee cost:

                                 Campus          Admission Rate Cost ($)

                                 Berkeley        0.1484             43,176

                                 Davis           0.4107             43,394

                                 Irvine          0.2876             42,692

                                 Los Angeles     0.1404             42,218

                                 (source: https://data.ed.gov)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 869

Campus         Admission Rate Cost ($)

Merced         0.6617          42,530

Riverside      0.5057          42,819

San Diego      0.3006          43,159

Santa Barbara  0.322           43,383

Santa Cruz     0.4737          42,952

(source: https://data.ed.gov)

    20. Compute the mode, median, and mean admission rate.
    21. Compute the mode, median, and mean cost.

22. Consider the data in "InState," (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), which shows in-state tuition and fees
      for most institutions of higher learning in the United States. Compute the mode, median, and mean.

23. Workers for a particular company have complained that their wages are too low, while the management says
      wages are plenty high. If the company's salaries are right-skewed, which measure of centrality will the workers
      choose to represent salary? Which will management choose?

        SECTION 8.3 EXERCISES

Use the steam-and-leaf plot below to answer the questions. Round all answers to three decimal places.
                                                                       0 1112667
                                                                       1 00002559
                                                                       2 0059
                                                                       3 05
                                                                       40

     1. Find the mode.
     2. Find the median.
     3. Find the mean.
Use the stem-and-leaf plot below to answer the following questions. Round all answers to three decimal places.

                                                                       78

                                                                       8 06

                                                                       9 1148

                                                                       10 0 0 3 5 9

                                                                       11 0 0 1 1 1 2 6 8

                                                                       12 0 1 5
870 8 · Statistics

     4. Find the mode.
     5. Find the median.
     6. Find the mean.

The following table shows the frequency distribution for a number of countries visited by students. Use this table to
answer the questions, rounding all answers to three decimal places.

                                                          Number of Countries Frequency

                                 0  13

                                 1  11

                                 2  5

                                 3  1

     7. Find the mode of the number of countries visited.
     8. Find the median of the number of countries visited.
     9. Find the mean of the number of countries visited.

The following table shows the frequency distribution for the number of fumbles by a selection of football players. Use
this table to answer the questions, rounding all answers to three decimal places.

                                                           Number of Fumbles Frequency

                                 0  5

                                 1  13

                                 2  3

                                 3  4

    10. Find the mode of the number of fumbles.
    11. Find the median of the number of fumbles.
    12. Find the mean of the number of fumbles.

A public opinion poll about an upcoming election asked respondents, "How many political advertisements do you recall
seeing on television in the last 24 hours?" Use this data to answer the questions, rounding all answers to three decimal
places.

                                      625522413012162

                                      524863342534223

    13. Compute the mode.
    14. Compute the median.
    15. Compute the mean.

For the following exercises, use the data found in "TNSchools" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), which has
data on many institutions of higher education in the state of Tennessee. Here are what the columns represent:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  8.3 · Mean, Median and Mode 871

Column Name                    Description

AdmRate            Proportion of applicants that are admitted

UGEnr               Number of undergraduate students

PTUG         Proportion of undergraduates who attend part-time

InState             Tuition and fees for in-state students

OutState           Tuition and fees for out-of-state students

FacSal                         Mean monthly faculty salary

Pell               Proportion of students receiving Pell Grants

MedDebt            Median student loan debt at degree completion

StartAge                       Mean age at the time of entry

Female             Proportion of students who identify as female

(source: https://data.ed.gov)

    16. What is the mean undergraduate enrollment at these schools?
    17. What is the median undergraduate enrollment at these schools?
    18. Generate a histogram for undergraduate enrollment, and use it to describe the effect of the distribution on the

          mean and the median as measures of centrality.
    19. What is the mean proportion of part-time undergraduates at these schools?
    20. What is the median proportion of part-time undergraduates at these schools?
    21. Generate a histogram for proportion of part-time undergraduates, and use it to describe the effect of the

          distribution on the mean and the median as measures of centrality.
    22. What is the mean of the monthly faculty salaries at these schools?
    23. What is the median of the monthly faculty salaries at these schools?
    24. Generate a histogram for the monthly faculty salaries, and use it to describe the effect of the distribution on the

          mean and the median as measures of centrality.

The dataset "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) gives the average SAT score for incoming students
(the use of "average" here stands in for "mean" to avoid confusion in the following problems) for every institution in the
United States that reported the data (from data.ed.gov). Use that dataset to answer the following questions.

    25. What is the mean of the average SAT scores?
    26. What is the median of the average SAT scores?
    27. Construct a histogram of average SAT scores, and describe how the distribution affects the mean and the

          median.

For the following exercises, use the table, which gives the final results for the 2021 National Women's Soccer League
season. The columns are standings points (PTS; teams earn three points for a win and one point for a tie), wins (W),
losses (L), ties (T), goals scored by that team (GF), and goals scored against that team (GA).

          Team                 Points W L   T GF GA
                                            5 33 17
Portland Thorns FC             44 13 6      3 37 24

         OL Reign              42 13 8

(source: http://www.nwslsoccer.com)
872 8 · Statistics

                                 Team                  Points W L T GF GA

                                 Washington Spirit     39 11 7 6 29 26

                                 Chicago Red Stars     38 11 8 5 28 28

                                 NJ/NY Gotham FC       35             8 5 11 29 21

                                 North Carolina Courage 33            9 9 6 28 23

                                 Houston Dash          32             9 10 5 31 31

                                 Orlando Pride         28             7 10 7 27 32

                                 Racing Louisville FC  22             5 12 7 21 40

                                 Kansas City Current   16             3 14 7 15 36

                                 (source: http://www.nwslsoccer.com)

    28. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of points.
    29. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of wins.
    30. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of losses.
    31. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of ties.
    32. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of goals scored (GF).
    33. Compute the mode(s), median, and mean of goals against (GA).

For the following exercises, use the data in "CUNY" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) (taken from
data.ed.gov, which gives proportions of degrees awarded in various disciplines) to answer the given questions:

    34. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Information Science.
    35. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Education.
    36. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Humanities.
    37. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Biology.
    38. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Physical Science.
    39. Compute the median and mean proportions of degrees awarded in Social Science.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             8.4 · Range and Standard Deviation 873

8.4 Range and Standard Deviation

Figure 8.30 Measures of spread help us get a better understanding of test scores. (credit: "Standardized test exams form
with answers bubbled" by Marco Verch Professional Photographer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate the range of a dataset
 2. Calculate the standard deviation of a dataset

Measures of centrality like the mean can give us only part of the picture that a dataset paints. For example, let's say
you've just gotten the results of a standardized test back, and your score was 138. The mean score on the test is 120. So,
your score is above average! But how good is it really? If all the scores were between 100 and 140, then you know your
score must be among the best. But if the scores ranged from 0 to 200, then maybe 140 is good, but not great (though
still above average). Knowing information about how the data are spread out can help us put a particular data value in
better context. In this section, we'll look at two numbers that help us describe the spread in the data: the range and the
standard deviation. These numbers are called measures of dispersion.

The Range

Our first measure of dispersion is the range, or the difference between the maximum and minimum values in the set.
It's the measure we used in the standardized test example above.

Let's look at a couple of examples.

EXAMPLE 8.24

Finding the Range
You survey some of your friends to find out how many hours they work each week. Their responses are: 5, 20, 8, 10, 35,
12. What is the range?

Solution

The maximum value in the set is 35 and the minimum is 5, so the range is  .

        YOUR TURN 8.24

  1. On your morning commute, you decide to record how long you have to wait each time you get caught at a red
      light. Here are the times in seconds: 12, 58, 35, 79, 21. What is the range?

For large datasets, finding the maximum and minimum values can be daunting. There are two ways to do it in a
spreadsheet. First, you can ask the spreadsheet program to sort the data from smallest to largest, then find the first and
last numbers on the sorted list. The second method uses built-in functions to find the minimum and maximum.
874 8 · Statistics

VIDEO
Find the Minimum and Maximum Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/min-max_Google-Sheet)

In either method, once you've found the maximum and minimum, all you have to do is subtract to find the range.

EXAMPLE 8.25

Finding the Range with Google Sheets
The data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the average SAT score for students attending
every institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available. What is the range of these average SAT scores?

Solution

Step 1: To find the maximum, click on an empty cell in the spreadsheet, type "=MAX(", and then click on the letter that

marks the top of the column containing the AvgSAT data. That inserts a reference to the column into our function. Then

we close the parentheses and hit the enter key. The formula is replaced with the maximum value in our data: 1566.

Step 2: Using the same process (but with "MIN" instead of "MAX"), we find the minimum value is 785.

Step 3: So, the range is         .

        YOUR TURN 8.25

  1. The file "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains in-state tuition costs (in dollars) for every
      institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available. What is the range of these costs?

The range is very easy to compute, but it depends only on two of the data values in the entire set. If there happens to be
just one unusually high or low data value, then the range might give a distorted measure of dispersion. Our next
measure takes every single data value into account, making it more reliable.

The Standard Deviation

The standard deviation is a measure of dispersion that can be interpreted as approximately the average distance of
every data value from the mean. (This distance from the mean is the "deviation" in "standard deviation.")

  FORMULA

  The standard deviation is computed as follows:

  Here, represents each data value, is the mean of the data values, is the number of data values, and the capital
  sigma ( ) indicates that we take a sum.

To compute the standard deviation using the formula, we follow the steps below:
 1. Compute the mean of all the data values.
 2. Subtract the mean from each data value.
 3. Square those differences.
 4. Add up the results in step 3.
 5. Divide the result in step 4 by
 6. Take the square root of the result in step 5.
Let's see that process in action.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.4 · Range and Standard Deviation 875

EXAMPLE 8.26

Computing the Standard Deviation
You surveyed some of your friends to find out how many hours they work each week. Their responses were: 5, 20, 8, 10,
35, 12. What is the standard deviation?

     Solution
Let's follow the six steps mentioned previously to compute the standard deviation.

Step 1: Find the mean:                          .

Step 2: Subtract the mean from each data value. To help keep track, let's do this in a table. In the first row, we'll list each

of our data values (and we'll label the row ); in the second, we'll subtract   from each data value.

                                                5 20 8 10 35 12

                                                -10 5 -7 -5 20 -3

Step 3: Square the differences. Let's add a row to our table for those values:
                                                                        5 20 8 10 35 12

                                                                      -10 5 -7 -5 20 -3
                                                                      100 25 49 25 400 9

Step 4: Add up those squares:                         .

Step 5: Divide the sum by        . Since we have 6 data values, that gives us             .

Step 6: Take the square root of the result:        .

Thus, the standard deviation is              .

        YOUR TURN 8.26

  1. On your morning commute, you decide to record how long you have to wait each time you get caught at a red
      light. Here are the times in seconds: 12, 58, 35, 79, 21.
      What is the standard deviation?

The computation for the standard deviation is complicated, even for just a small dataset. We'd never want to compute it
without technology for a large dataset! Luckily, technology makes this calculation easy.

       VIDEO
      Find the Standard Deviation Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/StanDev_Google-Sheet)

  EXAMPLE 8.27

Finding the Standard Deviation with Google Sheets
The data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the average SAT score for students attending
every institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available. What is the standard deviation of these average
SAT scores?
876 8 · Statistics

     Solution
To find the standard deviation, we click in an empty cell in our spreadsheet and then type "=STDEV(". Next, click on the
letter at the top of the column containing our data; this will put a reference to that column into our formula. Then close
the parentheses with and hit the enter key. The formula is replaced with the result: 125.517.

        YOUR TURN 8.27
  1. The file "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains in-state tuition costs (in dollars) for every

      institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available. What is the standard deviation of these costs?

Check Your Understanding

24. Given the data 1, 4, 5, 5, and 10, find the range.
25. Given the data 1, 4, 5, 5, and 10, find the standard deviation using the process outlined in the definition.
Employees at a college help desk track the number of people who request assistance each week, as listed below:

                                                         142 153 158 156 141 143
                                                         139 158 156 146 137 153
                                                         136 127 157 148 132 139
                                                         155 167 143 168 133 157
                                                         138 156 164 130 148 136

    26. Compute the range.
    27. Compute the standard deviation.

The following are data on the admission rates of the different branch campuses in the University of California system,
along with the out-of-state tuition and fee cost.

                                 Campus       Admission Rate Cost ($)

                                 Berkeley     0.1484            43,176

                                 Davis        0.4107            43,394

                                 Irvine       0.2876            42,692

                                 Los Angeles  0.1404            42,218

                                 Merced       0.6617            42,530

                                 Riverside    0.5057            42,819

                                 San Diego    0.3006            43,159

                                 (source: https://data.ed.gov)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             8.4 · Range and Standard Deviation 877

             Campus            Admission Rate Cost ($)

          Santa Barbara        0.322                           43,383

          Santa Cruz           0.4737                          42,952

         (source: https://data.ed.gov)

    28. Compute the range of the admission rate.
    29. Compute the standard deviation of the admission rate.

Using the data from Table 8.21, find the:
    30. Range of the cost.
    31. Standard deviation of the cost.

        SECTION 8.4 EXERCISES

Given the data 81, 84, 89, 85, 86, 84:
     1. Compute the range.
     2. Compute the standard deviation using the formula.

Given the data 127, 167, 156, 158, 156, 157:
     3. Compute the range.
     4. Compute the standard deviation using the formula.

For the following exercises, use the data found in "TNSchools" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), which has
data on many institutions of higher education in the state of Tennessee. Here are what the columns represent:

Column Name                                                    Description

AdmRate      Proportion of applicants that are admitted

UGEnr                 Number of undergraduate students

PTUG         Proportion of undergraduates who attend part-time

InState               Tuition and fees for in-state students

OutState     Tuition and fees for out-of-state students

FacSal                         Mean monthly faculty salary

Pell         Proportion of students receiving Pell Grants

MedDebt      Median student loan debt at degree completion

StartAge                       Mean age at the time of entry

Female       Proportion of students who identify as female

(source: https://data.ed.gov)

5. Find the range of admissions rates.
6. Find the standard deviation of admissions rates.
7. Find the range of undergraduate enrollments.
8. Find the standard deviation of undergraduate enrollments.
9. Find the range of the proportions of undergraduates attending part-time.
878 8 · Statistics

    10. Find the standard deviation of the proportions of undergraduates attending part-time.
    11. Find the range of in-state tuition costs.
    12. Find the standard deviation of in-state tuition costs.
    13. Find the range of median debt.
    14. Find the standard deviation of median debt.

For the following exercises, use the table below, which gives the final results for the 2021 National Women's Soccer
League season. The columns are standings points (PTS; teams earn three points for a win and one point for a tie), wins
(W), losses (L), ties (T), goals scored by that team (GF), and goals scored against that team (GA).

                                 Team                  PTS W L T GF GA

                                 Portland Thorns FC    44 13 6 5 33 17

                                 OL Reign              42 13 8 3 37 24

                                 Washington Spirit     39 11 7 6 29 26

                                 Chicago Red Stars     38 11 8 5 28 28

                                 NJ/NY Gotham FC       35 8 5 11 29 21

                                 North Carolina Courage 33 9 9 6 28 23

                                 Houston Dash          32 9 10 5 31 31

                                 Orlando Pride         28 7 10 7 27 32

                                 Racing Louisville FC  22 5 12 7 21 40

                                 Kansas City Current   16 3 14 7 15 36

15. Compute the standard deviation and range of points.
16. Compute the standard deviation and range of wins.
17. Compute the standard deviation and range of losses.
18. Compute the standard deviation and range of ties.
19. Compute the standard deviation and range of goals scored (GF).
20. Compute the standard deviation and range of goals against (GA).

Access for free at openstax.org
                 8.5 · Percentiles 879

8.5 Percentiles

Figure 8.31 Two students graduating with the same class rank could be in different percentiles depending on the school
population. (credit: "graduation caps" by John Walker/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Compute percentiles.
 2. Solve application problems involving percentiles.

A college admissions officer is comparing two students. The first, Anna, finished 12th in her class of 235 people. The
second, Brian, finished 10th in his class of 170 people. Which of these outcomes is better? Certainly 10 is less than 12,
which favors Brian, but Anna's class was much bigger. In fact, Anna beat out 223 of her classmates, which is
of her classmates, while Brian bested 160 out of 170 people, or 94%. Comparing the proportions of the data values that
are below a given number can help us evaluate differences between individuals in separate populations. These
proportions are called percentiles. If of the values in a dataset are less than a number , then we say that is at the

 th percentile.

Finding Percentiles

There are some other terms that are related to "percentile" with meanings you may infer from their roots. Remember
that the word percent means "per hundred." This reflects that percentiles divide our data into 100 pieces. The word
quartile has a root that means "four." So, if a data value is at the first quantile of a dataset, that means that if you break
the data into four parts (because of the quart-), this data value comes after the first of those four parts. In other words,
it's greater than 25% of the data, placing it at the 25th percentile. Quintile has a root meaning "five," so a data value at
the third quintile is greater than three-fifths of the data in the set. That would put it at the 60th percentile. The general
term for these is quantiles (the root quant- means "number").

In Mean, Median, and Mode, we defined the median as a number that is greater than no more than half of the data in a
dataset and is less than no more than half of the data in the dataset. With our new term, we can more easily define it:
The median is the value at the 50th percentile (or second quartile).

Let's look at some examples.

  EXAMPLE 8.28

Finding Percentiles
Consider the dataset 5, 8, 12, 1, 2, 16, 2, 15, 20, 22.

 1. At what percentile is the value 5?
880 8 · Statistics

        2. What value is at the 60th percentile?
            Solution

       Before we can answer these two questions, we must put the data in increasing order: 1, 2, 2, 5, 8, 12, 15, 16, 20, 22.
        1. There are three values (1, 2, and 2) in the set that are less than 5, and there are ten values in the set. Thus, 5 is at the

                                      percentile.
        2. To find the value at the 60th percentile, we note that there are ten data values, and 60% of ten is six. Thus, the

             number we want is greater than exactly six of the data values. Thus, the 60th percentile is 15.

               YOUR TURN 8.28

         Consider the dataset 2, 5, 8, 16, 12, 1, 8, 6, 15, 4.
             1. What value is at the 80th percentile?
             2. At what percentile is the value 12?

       In each of the examples above, the computations were made easier by the fact that the we were looking for percentiles
       that "came out evenly" with respect to the number of values in our dataset. Things don't always work out so cleanly.
       Further, different sources will define the term percentile in different ways. In fact, Google Sheets has three built-in
       functions for finding percentiles, none of which uses our definition. Some of the definitions you'll see differ in the
       inequality that is used. Ours uses "less than or equal to," while others use "less than" (these correspond roughly to
       Google Sheets' `PERCENTILE.INC' and `PERCENTILE.EXC'). Some of them use different methods for interpolating values.
       (This is what we did when we first computed medians without technology; if there were an even number of data values
       in our dataset, found the mean of the two values in the middle. This is an example of interpolation. Most computerized
       methods use this technique.) Other definitions don't interpolate at all, but instead choose the closest actual data value to
       the theoretical value. Fortunately, for large datasets, the differences among the different techniques become very small.
       So, with all these different possible definitions in play, what will we use? For small datasets, if you're asked to compute
       something involving percentiles without technology , use the technique we used in the previous example. In all other
       cases, we'll keep things simple by using the built-in `PERCENTILE' and `PERCENTRANK' functions in Google Sheets (which
       do the same thing as the `PERCENTILE.INC' and `PERCENTRANK.INC' functions; they're "inclusive, interpolating"
       definitions).

              VIDEO

             Using RANK, PERCENTRANK, and PERCENTILE in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Using-RANK-PERCENTRANK-
             and-PERCENTILE)

         EXAMPLE 8.29

       Using Google Sheets to Compute Percentiles: Average SAT Scores
       The data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the average SAT score for students attending
       every institution of higher learning in the US for which data is available.
        1. What score is at the 3rd quartile?
        2. What score is at the 40th percentile?
        3. At what percentile is Albion College in Michigan (average SAT: 1132)?
        4. At what percentile is Oregon State University (average SAT: 1205)?

            Solution
        1. The 3rd quartile is the 75th percentile, so we'll use the PERCENTILE function. Click on an empty cell, and type

             "=PERCENTILE(". Next, enter the data: click on the letter at the top of the column containing the average SAT scores.
             Then, tell the function which percentile we want; it needs to be entered as a decimal. So, type a comma (to separate
             the two pieces of information we're giving this function), then type "0.75" and close the parentheses with ")". The
             result should look like this (assuming the data are in column C): "=PERCENTILE(C:C, 0.75)". When you hit the enter
             key, the formula will be replaced with the average SAT score at the 75th percentile: 1199.
        2. Using the PERCENTILE function, we find that an average SAT of 1100 is at the 40th percentile.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                       8.5 · Percentiles 881

 3. Since we want to know the percentile for a particular score, we'll use the PERCENTRANK function. Like the
      PERCENTILE function, we need to give PERCENTRANK two pieces of information: the data, and the value we care
      about. So, click on an empty cell, type "=PERCENTRANK(", and then click on the letter at the top of the column
      containing the data. Next, type a comma and then the value we want to find the percentile for; in this case, we'll
      type ", 1132". Finally, close the parentheses with ")" and hit the enter key. The formula will be replaced with the
      information we want: an average SAT of 1132 is at the 54th percentile.

 4. Using the PERCENTRANK function, an average SAT of 1205 is at the 76.1th percentile.

        YOUR TURN 8.29

  Looking again at the "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) dataset:
      1. What score is at the 15th percentile?
      2. What score is at the 90th percentile?
      3. At what percentile is the University of Missouri (Columbia campus), whose average SAT score is 1244?
      4. At what percentile is Rice University in Texas, whose average SAT score is 1513?

  EXAMPLE 8.30

Using Google Sheets to Compute Percentiles: In-State Tuition
The dataset "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the in-state tuitions of every college and
university in the country that reported that data to the Department of Education. Use that dataset to answer these
questions.
 1. What tuition is at the second quintile?
 2. What tuition is at the 95th percentile?
 3. At what percentile is Walla Walla University in Washington (in-state tuition: $28,035)?
 4. At what percentile is the College of Saint Mary in Nebraska (in-state tuition: $20,350)?

     Solution
 1. The second quintile is the 40th percentile; using PERCENTILE in Google Sheets, we get $8,400.
 2. Using PERCENTILE again, we get $44,866.
 3. Using PERCENTRANK, we get the 81.6th percentile.
 4. Using PERCENTRANK, we get the 74.8th percentile.

        YOUR TURN 8.30

  Looking again at the "InState" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) dataset, answer these questions.
      1. What tuition is at the 10th percentile?
      2. What tuition is at the fourth quintile?
      3. At what percentile is the main campus of New Mexico State University (in-state tuition: $6,686)?
      4. At what percentile is Bowdoin College in Maine (in-state tuition: $53,922)?

Check Your Understanding

Given the data 10, 12, 14, 18, 21, 23, 24, 25, 29, and 30, compute the following without technology:
    32. The value at the 30th percentile
    33. The value at the first quintile
    34. At what percentile 29 falls
    35. At what percentile 24 falls

For the remainder of these problems, use the dataset "MLB2019," (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) which
gives the number of wins for each Major League Baseball team in the 2019 season. Use Google Sheets to compute your
answers.
882 8 · Statistics

36. How many wins is at the 30th percentile?
37. How many wins is at the 90th percentile?
38. How many wins is at the first quartile?
39. At what percentile are the Chicago Cubs (CHC, 84 wins)?
40. At what percentile are the Tampa Bay Rays (TBR, 96 wins)?
41. At what percentile are the Toronto Blue Jays (TOR, 67 wins)?

        SECTION 8.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the following twenty data values to answer the questions without technology: 1, 4, 6, 7,
12, 15, 21, 25, 29, 30, 31, 33, 39, 43, 44, 45, 51, 55, 60, 63

     1. What data value is at the 10th percentile?
     2. What data value is at the 55th percentile?
     3. What data value is at the 90th percentile?
     4. What data value is at the 30th percentile?
     5. What data value is at the first quartile?
     6. What data value is at the third quintile?
     7. At what percentile is 29?
     8. At what percentile is 55?
     9. At what percentile is 4?
    10. At what percentile is 51?

For the following exercises, use the data in "TNSchools" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), which has data on
many institutions of higher education in the state of Tennessee. Here are what the columns represent:

                    Column Name                    Description

                                 AdmRate   Proportion of applicants that are admitted

                                 UGEnr     Number of undergraduate students

                                 PTUG      Proportion of undergraduates who attend part-time

                                 InState   Tuition and fees for in-state students

                                 OutState  Tuition and fees for out-of-state students

                                 FacSal            Mean monthly faculty salary

                                 Pell      Proportion of students receiving Pell Grants

                                 MedDebt   Median student loan debt at degree completion

                                 StartAge          Mean age at the time of entry

                                 Female    Proportion of students who identify as female

                    (source: https://data.ed.gov)

11. What admission rate is at the second quintile?
12. What admission rate is at the 80th percentile?
13. What admission rate is at the 90th percentile?
14. At what percentile is East Tennessee State University for admission rate?
15. At what percentile is Rhodes College for admission rate?
16. At what percentile is Freed-Hardeman University for admission rate?
17. What proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment is at the third quartile?
18. What proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment is at the 15th percentile?
19. What proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment is at the 40th percentile?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · The Normal Distribution 883

    20. At what percentile is Lee University for proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment?
    21. At what percentile is Fisk University for proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment?
    22. At what percentile is Middle Tennessee State University for proportion of part-time undergraduate enrollment?
    23. What median student loan debt is at the 10th percentile?
    24. What median student loan debt is at the fourth quintile?
    25. What median student loan debt is at the 85th percentile?
    26. At what percentile is Carson-Newman College for median student loan debt?
    27. At what percentile is Austin Peay State University for median student loan debt?
    28. At what percentile is Belmont University for median student loan debt?
    29. What mean starting age is at the first quartile?
    30. What mean starting age is at the 67th percentile?
    31. What mean starting age is at the 35th percentile?
    32. At what percentile is the University of the South for mean starting age?
    33. At what percentile is Lincoln Memorial University for mean starting age?
    34. At what percentile is the University of Tennessee-Chattanooga for mean starting age?
    35. What proportion of students who identify as female is at the third quintile?
    36. What proportion of students who identify as female is at the 12th percentile?
    37. What proportion of students who identify as female is at the 85th percentile?
    38. At what percentile is Martin Methodist College for proportion of students who identify as female?
    39. At what percentile is Tennessee Technological University for proportion of students who identify as female?
    40. At what percentile is Maryville College for proportion of students who identify as female?

8.6 The Normal Distribution

      Figure 8.32 Symmetric, bell-shaped distributions arise naturally in many different situations, including coin flips.

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe the characteristics of the normal distribution.
 2. Apply the 68-95-99.7 percent groups to normal distribution datasets.
 3. Use the normal distribution to calculate a -score.
 4. Find and interpret percentiles and quartiles.
Many datasets that result from natural phenomena tend to have histograms that are symmetric and bell-shaped.
Imagine finding yourself with a whole lot of time on your hands, and nothing to keep you entertained but a coin, a
pencil, and paper. You decide to flip that coin 100 times and record the number of heads. With nothing else to do, you
repeat the experiment ten times total. Using a computer to simulate this series of experiments, here's a sample for the
number of heads in each trial:
54, 51, 40, 42, 53, 50, 52, 52, 47, 54
It makes sense that we'd get somewhere around 50 heads when we flip the coin 100 times, and it makes sense that the
result won't always be exactly 50 heads. In our results, we can see numbers that were generally near 50 and not always
50, like we thought.
884 8 · Statistics

     Moving Toward Normality

       Let's take a look at a histogram for the dataset in our section opener:

                                                                                    Figure 8.33
       This is interesting, but the data seem pretty sparse. There were no trials where you saw between 43 and 47 heads, for
       example. Those results don't seem impossible; we just didn't flip enough times to give them a chance to pop up. So, let's
       do it again, but this time we'll perform 100 coin flips 100 times. Rather than review all 100 results, which could be
       overwhelming, let's instead visualize the resulting histogram.

                                                                                    Figure 8.34
       From the histogram, we see that most of the trials resulted in between, say, 44 and 56 heads. There were some more
       unusual results: one trial resulted in 70 heads, which seems really unlikely (though still possible!). But we're starting to
       maybe get a sense of the distribution. More data would help, though. Let's simulate another 900 trials and add them to
       the histogram!

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · The Normal Distribution 885

                                                                             Figure 8.35
We can still see that 70 is a really unusual observation, though we came close in another trial (one that had 68 heads).
Now, the distribution is coming more into focus: It looks quite symmetric and bell-shaped. Let's just go ahead and take
this thought experiment to an extreme conclusion: 10,000 trials.

                                                                             Figure 8.36
The distribution is pretty clear now. Distributions that are symmetric and bell-shaped like this pop up in all sorts of
natural phenomena, such as the heights of people in a population, the circumferences of eggs of a particular bird
species, and the numbers of leaves on mature trees of a particular species. All of these have bell-shaped distributions.
Additionally, the results of many types of repeated experiments generally follow this same pattern, as we saw with the
coin-flipping example; this fact is the basis for much of the work done by statisticians. It's a fact that's important enough
to have its own name: the Central Limit Theorem.
886 8 · Statistics

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
         John Kerrich
         Having enough time on your hands to actually perform this coin-flipping experiment may sound far-fetched, but the
         English mathematician John Kerrich found himself in just such a situation. While he was studying abroad in Denmark
         in 1940, that country was invaded by the Germans. Kerrich was captured and placed in an internment camp, where he
         remained for the duration of the war. Kerrich knew that he had all kinds of time on his hands. He also studied
         statistics, so he knew what should happen theoretically if he flipped a coin many, many times. He also knew of nobody
         who had ever tested that theory with an actual, large-scale experiment. So, he did it: While he was incarcerated,
         Kerrich flipped a regular coin 10,000 times and recorded the results. Sure enough, the theory held up!

     The Normal Distribution

       In the coin flipping example above, the distribution of the number of heads for 10,000 trials was close to perfectly
       symmetric and bell-shaped:

                                                                                    Figure 8.37
       Because distributions with this shape appear so often, we have a special name for them: normal distributions. Normal
       distributions can be completely described using two numbers we've seen before: the mean of the data and the standard
       deviation of the data. You may remember that we described the mean as a measure of centrality; for a normal
       distribution, the mean tells us exactly where the center of the distribution falls. The peak of the distribution happens at
       the mean (and, because the distribution is symmetric, it's also the median). The standard deviation is a measure of
       dispersion; for a normal distribution, it tells us how spread out the histogram looks. To illustrate these points, let's look at
       some examples.

         EXAMPLE 8.31
       Identifying the Mean of a Normal Distribution
       This graph shows three normal distributions. What are their means?

                                                                                    Figure 8.38
            Solution
       Step 1: Take a look at the three curves on the graph. Since the mean of a normal distribution occurs at the peak, we

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · The Normal Distribution 887

should look for the highest point on each distribution. Let's draw a line from each curve's peak down to the axis, so we
can see where these peaks occur:

                                                                             Figure 8.39
Step 2: The peak of the red (leftmost) distribution occurs over the number 1 on the horizontal axis. Thus, the mean of
the red distribution is 1. Similarly, the mean of the blue (middle) distribution is 2, and the mean of the yellow (rightmost)
distribution is 3.

        YOUR TURN 8.31
  1. Identify the means of these three distributions:

  EXAMPLE 8.32
Identifying the Standard Deviation of a Normal Distribution
This graph shows three distributions, all with mean 2. What are their standard deviations?

                                                                             Figure 8.40
     Solution
Step 1: Identifying the standard deviation from a graph can be a little bit tricky. Let's focus in on the yellow (lowest
peaked) curve:
888 8 · Statistics

                                                                             Figure 8.41

Step 2: Notice that the graph curves downward in the middle, and curves upwards on the ends. Highlighted in red is the
part that curves downward and in green, the part that curves upward:

                                                                             Figure 8.42

Step 3: The places where the graph changes from curving up to curving down (or vice versa) are called inflection points.
Let's identify where those occur by dropping a line straight down from each:

                                 Figure 8.43

Step 4: We can estimate that the inflection points occur at  and  ; the mean is at         (as shown by the

middle dotted line). The difference between the mean and the location of either inflection point is the standard

deviation; since                 , we conclude that the standard deviation of the green distribution is 3.

Step 5: Now, looking at the other two graphs, let's first identify the inflection points:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          8.6 · The Normal Distribution 889

                                      Figure 8.44

Step 6: The red (tallest peaked) distribution has inflection points at 1 and 3, and the mean is 2. Thus, the standard

deviation of the red distribution is  . The blue (lower peaked) distribution has inflection points at 0 and

4, and its mean is also 2. So, the standard deviation of the blue distribution is 2.

      YOUR TURN 8.32
1. Estimate the standard deviations of this normal distribution, centered at 5:

Let's put it all together to identify a completely unknown normal distribution.
  EXAMPLE 8.33

Identifying the Mean and Standard Deviation of a Normal Distribution
Using the graph, identify the mean and standard deviation of the normal distribution.

                                                                             Figure 8.45
890 8 · Statistics

            Solution
       Step 1: Let's start by putting dots on the graph at the peak and at the inflection points, then drop lines from those points
       straight down to the axis:

                                                                                     Figure 8.46
       Step 2: From the red (middle) line, we can see that the mean of this distribution is 55. The blue (outermost) lines are each
       3 units away from the mean (at 52 and 58), so the standard deviation is 3.

               YOUR TURN 8.33
         1. Identify the mean and standard deviation of this distribution. Anything within 5 on the standard deviation is

              acceptable.

Properties of Normal Distributions: The 68-95-99.7 Rule

The most important property of normal distributions is tied to its standard deviation. If a dataset is perfectly normally

distributed, then 68% of the data values will fall within one standard deviation of the mean. For example, suppose we

have a set of data that follows the normal distribution with mean 400 and standard deviation 100. This means 68% of the

data would fall between the values of 300 (one standard deviation below the mean:  ) and 500 (one

standard deviation above the mean:                     ). Looking at the histogram below, the shaded area represents 68%

of the total area under the graph and above the axis:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.6 · The Normal Distribution 891

                                  Figure 8.47

Since 68% of the area is in the shaded region, this means that          of the area is found in the unshaded

regions. We know that the distribution is symmetric, so that 32% must be divided evenly into the two unshaded tails:

16% in each.

Of course, datasets in the real world are never perfect; when dealing with actual data that seem to follow a symmetric,
bell-shaped distribution, we'll give ourselves a little bit of wiggle room and say that approximately 68% of the data fall
within one standard deviation of the mean.

The rule for one standard deviation can be extended to two standard deviations. Approximately 95% of a normally

distributed dataset will fall within 2 standard deviations of the mean. If the mean is 400 and the standard deviation is

100, that means 95% calculation describes the way we compute standardized scores. (two standard deviations below the

mean:               ) and 600 (two standard deviations above the mean:  ). We can visualize

this in the following histogram:

                                  Figure 8.48

As before, since 95% of the data are in the shaded area, that leaves 5% of the data to go into the unshaded tails. Since
the histogram is symmetric, half of the 5% (that's 2.5%) is in each.

We can even take this one step further: 99.7% of normally distributed data fall within 3 standard deviations of the mean.

In this example, we'd see 99.7% of the data between 100 (calculated as  ) and 700 (calculated as

                    ). We can see this in the histogram below, although you may need to squint to find the unshaded

bits in the tails!
892 8 · Statistics

                                                                             Figure 8.49

This observation is formally known as the 68-95-99.7 Rule.

  EXAMPLE 8.34

Using the 68-95-99.7 Rule to Find Percentages
 1. If data are normally distributed with mean 8 and standard deviation 2, what percent of the data falls between 4 and

      12?
 2. If data are normally distributed with mean 25 and standard deviation 5, what percent of the data falls between 20

      and 30?
 3. If data are normally distributed with mean 200 and standard deviation 15, what percent of the data falls between

      155 and 245?

     Solution
 1. Let's look at a table that sets out the data values that are even multiples of the standard deviation (SD) above and

      below the mean:

                                           Mean

                    2            4    6    8     10   12   14

     Since 4 and 12 represent two standard deviations above and below the mean, we conclude that 95% of the data will
     fall between them.

2. Let's build another table:

                                           Mean

                    10           15   20   25    30   35   40

     We can see that 20 and 30 represent one standard deviation above and below the mean, so 68% of the data fall in
     that range.

3. Let's make one more table:

                                           Mean

                    155          170  185  200   215  230  245

Since 155 and 245 are three standard deviations above and below the mean, we know that 99.7% of the data will fall
between them.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   8.6 · The Normal Distribution 893

  YOUR TURN 8.34

1. If data are distributed normally with mean 0 and standard deviation 3, what percent of the data fall between
    -9 and 9?

2. If data are distributed normally with mean 50 and standard deviation 10, what percent of the data fall
    between 30 and 70?

3. If data are distributed normally with mean 60 and standard deviation 5, what percent of the data fall between
    55 and 65?

EXAMPLE 8.35

Using the 68-95-99.7 Rule to Find Data Values
 1. If data are distributed normally with mean 100 and standard deviation 20, between what two values will 68% of the

      data fall?
 2. If data are distributed normally with mean 0 and standard deviation 15, between what two values will 95% of the

      data fall?
 3. If data are distributed normally with mean 14 and standard deviation 2, between what two values will 99.7% of the

      data fall?

Solution

1. The 68-95-99.7 Rule tells us that 68% of the data will fall within one standard deviation of the mean. So, to find the

values we seek, we'll add and subtract one standard deviation from the mean:       and

              . Thus, we know that 68% of the data fall between 80 and 120.

2. Using the 68-95-99.7 Rule again, we know that 95% of the data will fall within 2 standard deviations of the mean.

Let's add and subtract two standard deviations from that mean:                and       . So, 95% of

the data will fall between -30 and 30.

3. Once again, the 68-95-99.7 Rule tells us that 99.7% of the data will fall within three standard deviations of the mean.

So, let's add and subtract three standard deviations from the mean: and            . Thus, we conclude that

99.7% of the data will fall between 8 and 20.

        YOUR TURN 8.35

      1. If data are distributed normally with mean 70 and standard deviation 5, between what two values will 68% of
           the data fall?

      2. If data are distributed normally with mean 40 and standard deviation 7, between what two values will 95% of
           the data fall?

      3. If data are distributed normally with mean 200 and standard deviation 30, between what two values will
           99.7% of the data fall?

There are more problems we can solve using the 68-95-99.7 Rule. but first we must understand what the rule implies.
Remember, the rule says that 68% of the data falls within one standard deviation of the mean. Thus, with normally
distributed data with mean 100 and standard deviation 10, we have this distribution:
894 8 · Statistics

                                                                                     Figure 8.50
       Since we know that 68% of the data lie within one standard deviation of the mean, the implication is that 32% of the data
       must fall beyond one standard deviation away from the mean. Since the histogram is symmetric, we can conclude that
       half of the 32% (or 16%) is more than one standard deviation above the mean and the other half is more than one
       standard deviation below the mean:

                                                                                     Figure 8.51
       Further, we know that the middle 68% can be split in half at the peak of the histogram, leaving 34% on either side:

                                                                                     Figure 8.52
       So, just the "68" part of the 68-95-99.7 Rule gives us four other proportions in addition to the 68% in the rule. Similarly,
       the "95" and "99.7" parts each give us four more proportions:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                        8.6 · The Normal Distribution 895

                           Figure 8.53

                           Figure 8.54

We can put all these together to find even more complicated proportions. For example, since the proportion between

100 and 120 is 47.5% and the proportion between 100 and 110 is 34%, we can subtract to find that the proportion

between 110 and 120 is  :

                                                                             Figure 8.55

  EXAMPLE 8.36

Finding Other Proportions Using the 68-95-99.7 Rule
Assume that we have data that are normally distributed with mean 80 and standard deviation 3.

 1. What proportion of the data will be greater than 86?
 2. What proportion of the data will be between 74 and 77?
 3. What proportion of the data will be between 74 and 83?

     Solution
Before we can answer these questions, we must mark off sections that are multiples of the standard deviation away
from the mean:
896 8 · Statistics

                                                                                     Figure 8.56
        1. To figure out what proportion of the data will be greater than 86, let's start by shading in the area of data that are

             above 86 in our figure, or the data more than two standard deviations above the mean.

                                                                                        Figure 8.57
             We saw in Figure 8.47 that this proportion is 2.5%.
        2. To figure out what proportion of the data will be between 74 and 77, let's start by shading in that area of data. These
             are data that are more than one but less than two standard deviations below the mean.

                                                                                        Figure 8.58
             From Figure 8.47, we know that the proportion of data less than two standard deviations below the mean is 47.5%.
             And, from YOUR TURN 8.33, we know that 34% of the data is less than one standard deviation below the mean:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  8.6 · The Normal Distribution 897

                                                                               Figure 8.59
     Subtracting, we see that the proportion of data between 74 and 77 is 13.5%.
3. To figure out what proportion of the data will be between 74 and 83, let's start by shading in that area of data in our
     figure.

                                                                               Figure 8.60
     Next, we'll break this region into two pieces at the mean:

                                                                               Figure 8.61
     From Figure 8.47, we know the blue (leftmost) region represents 47.5% of the data. And, using YOUR TURN 8.33, we
     get that the red (rightmost) region covers 34% of the data. Adding those together, the proportion we want is 81.5%.

       YOUR TURN 8.36
Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 500 and standard deviation 100. What proportions of
the data fall in these ranges?
898 8 · Statistics

    1. 300 to 500
    2. 600 to 800
    3. 400 to 700

Standardized Scores

When we want to apply the 68-95-99.7 Rule, we must first figure out how many standard deviations above or below the
mean our data fall. This calculation is common enough that it has its own name: the standardized score. Values above
the mean have positive standardized scores, while those below the mean have negative standardized scores. Since it's
common to use the letter to represent a standard score, this value is also often referred to as a -score.

So far, we've only really considered -scores that are whole numbers, but in general they can be any number at all. For
example, if we have data that are normally distributed with mean 80 and standard deviation 6, the value 85 is five units
above the mean, which is less than one standard deviation. Dividing by the standard deviation, we get . Since 85 is of

one standard deviation above the mean, we'd say that the standardized score for 85 is   (which is positive, since

       ). This calculation describes the way we compute standardized scores.

FORMULA

If is a member of a normally distributed dataset with mean and standard deviation , then the standardized score
for is

If you know a -score but not the original data value , you can find it by solving the previous equation for :

    The symbols and are the Greek letters mu and sigma. They are the analogues of the English letters          and ,
    which stand for mean and standard deviation.

    If you convert every data value in a dataset into its -score, the resulting set of data will have mean 0 and standard
    deviation 1. This is why we call these standardized scores: the normal distribution with mean 0 and standard
    deviation 1 is often called the standard normal distribution.

EXAMPLE 8.37

Standardizing Data
Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 50 and standard deviation 6. Compute the standardized
scores (rounded to three decimal places) for these data values:

1. 52
2. 40
3. 68

    Solution

For each of these, we'll plug the given values into the formula. Remember, the mean is  and the standard

deviation is        :

1.
2.
3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      8.6 · The Normal Distribution 899

      YOUR TURN 8.37

1. Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 75 and standard deviation 5. Compute
    standardized scores for each of these data values: 66, 83, and 72.

EXAMPLE 8.38

Converting Standardized Scores to Original Values
Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 10 and standard deviation 2. Convert the following
standardized scores into data values.

1. 1.4
2. -0.9
3. 3.5

    Solution

We'll use the formula previously introduced to convert  -scores into  -values. In this case, the mean is  and the

standard deviation is  :

1.
2.
3.

        YOUR TURN 8.38

  1. Suppose you have a normally distributed dataset with mean 2 and standard deviation 20. Convert these
      standardized scores to data values: -2.3, 1.4, and 0.2.

Using Google Sheets to Find Normal Percentiles

The 68-95-99.7 Rule is great when we're dealing with whole-number -scores. However, if the -score is not a whole
number, the Rule isn't going to help us. Luckily, we can use technology to help us out. We'll talk here about the built-in
functions in Google Sheets, but other tools work similarly.
Let's say we're working with normally distributed data with mean 40 and standard deviation 7, and we want to know at
what percentile a data value of 50 would fall. That corresponds to finding the proportion of the data that are less than
50. If we create our histogram and mark off whole-number multiples of the standard deviation like we did before, we'll
see why the 68-95-99.7 Rule isn't going to help:

                                                                             Figure 8.62

Since 50 doesn't line up with one of our lines, the 68-95-99.7 Rule fails us. Looking back at Figure 8.47 and Figure 8.48,
the best we can say is that 50 is between the 84th and 99.5th percentiles, but that's a pretty wide range. Google Sheets
has a function that can help; it's called NORM.DIST. Here's how to use it:

 1. Click in an empty cell in your worksheet.
900 8 · Statistics

        2. Type "=NORM.DIST("
        3. Inside the parentheses, we must enter a list of four things, separated by commas: the data value, the mean, the

             standard deviation, and the word "TRUE". These have to be entered in this order!
        4. Close the parentheses, and hit Enter. The result is then displayed in the cell; convert it to a percent to get the

             percentile.
       So, for our example, we should type "=NORM.DIST(50, 40, 7, TRUE)" into an empty cell, and hit Enter. The result is
       0.9234362745; converting to a percent and rounding, we can conclude that 50 is at the 92nd percentile. Let's walk
       through a few more examples.

         EXAMPLE 8.39

       Using Google Sheets to Find Percentiles
       Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 28 and standard deviation 4. At what percentile do each
       of the following data values fall?
        1. 30
        2. 23
        3. 35

            Solution
        1. By entering "=NORM.DIST(30, 28, 4, TRUE)" we find that 30 is at the 69th percentile.
        2. By entering "=NORM.DIST(23, 28, 4, TRUE)" we find that 23 is at the 11th percentile.
        3. By entering "=NORM.DIST(35, 28, 4, TRUE)" we find that 35 is at the 96th percentile.

               YOUR TURN 8.39

         1. Suppose you have data that are normally distributed with mean 20 and standard deviation 6. Determine at what
              percentiles these data values fall: 25, 12, and 31.

       Google Sheets can also help us go the other direction: If we want to find the data value that corresponds to a given
       percentile, we can use the NORM.INV function. For example, if we have normally distributed data with mean 150 and
       standard deviation 25, we can find the data value at the 30th percentile as follows:
        1. Click on an empty cell in your worksheet.
        2. Type "=NORM.INV("
        3. Inside the parentheses, we'll enter a list of three numbers, separated by commas: the percentile in question

             expressed as a decimal, the mean, and the standard deviation. These must be entered in this order!
        4. Close the parentheses and hit Enter. The desired data value will be in the cell!
       In our example, we want the 30th percentile; converting 30% to a decimal gives us 0.3. So, we'll type "=NORM.INV(0.3,
       150, 25)" to get 136.8899872; let's round that off to 137.

         EXAMPLE 8.40

       Using Google Sheets to Find the Data Value Corresponding to a Percentile
       Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 47 and standard deviation 9. Find the data values
       (rounded to the nearest tenth) corresponding to these percentiles:
        1. 75th (that's the third quartile)
        2. 12th
        3. 90th

            Solution
        1. By entering "=NORM.INV(0.75, 47, 9)" we find that 53.1 is at the 75th percentile.
        2. By entering "=NORM.INV(0.12, 47, 9)" we find that 36.4 is at the 12th percentile.
        3. By entering "=NORM.INV(0.9, 47, 9)" we find that 58.5 is at the 90th percentile.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · The Normal Distribution 901

        YOUR TURN 8.40
  1. Suppose we have data that are normally distributed with mean 5 and standard deviation 1.6. Identify which data

      values (rounded to the nearest tenth) correspond to these percentiles: 25th (the first quartile), 80th, and 10th.

Check Your Understanding

For each of these problems, assume we're working with normally distributed data with mean 100 and standard
deviation 12.

    42. What percentage of the data falls between 76 and 124? Use the 68-95-99.7 Rule.
    43. What percentage of the data falls between 100 and 112? Use the 68-95-99.7 Rule.
    44. At what percentile does 112 fall? Use the 68-95-99.7 Rule.
    45. What's the -score of the data value 107? Round to three decimal places.
    46. What data value's -score is -2.4?
    47. At what percentile does 107 fall? Use Google Sheets (or another technology).
    48. What data value is at the 90th percentile? Use Google Sheets (or another technology), and round to the nearest

          hundredth.

        SECTION 8.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, explain how you can tell the histogram does NOT represent normally distributed data.
     1.

     2.

For the following exercises, use the 68-95-99.7 Rule to answer the given questions about normally distributed data with
mean 100 and standard deviation 5.

     3. What proportion of the data fall between 95 and 105?
     4. What proportion of the data fall between 90 and 110?
     5. what proportion of the data fall between 85 and 100?
     6. What proportion of the data fall between 110 and 120?
     7. What proportion of the data are less than 90?
     8. What proportion of the data are greater than 105?
     9. What proportion of the data fall between 90 and 105?
    10. What proportion of the data are between 95 and 115?
902 8 · Statistics

For the following exercises, use the 68-95-99.7 Rule to answer the given questions about normally distributed data with
mean 9 and standard deviation 1.

    11. What proportion of the data are less than 7?
    12. What proportion of the data are greater than 12?
    13. What proportion of the data are between 6 and 12?
    14. What proportion of the data are between 8 and 9?
    15. What proportion of the data are between 6 and 8?
    16. What proportion of the data are between 8 and 11?
    17. What proportion of the data are less than 10?
    18. What proportion of the data are greater than 6?

In the following exercises, convert the given data values to standardized scores. Assume the data are distributed
normally with mean 15 and standard deviation 3. Round to the nearest hundredth.

    19.
    20.
    21.
    22.
    23.
    24.
    25.
    26.

In the following exercises, convert the given  -scores to data values. Assume the data are distributed normally with
mean 15 and standard deviation 3.

    27.
    28.
    29.
    30.
    31.
    32.
    33.
    34.

For the following exercises, answer the questions about normally distributed data with mean 200 and standard

deviation 20. Round percentiles to the nearest whole number and round data values to the nearest tenth.

35. At what percentile is        ?

36. At what percentile is        ?

37. At what percentile is        ?

38. At what percentile is        ?

39. At what percentile is        ?

40. At what percentile is        ?

41. At what percentile is        ?

42. At what percentile is        ?

43. What data value is at the 40th percentile?

44. What data value is at the 10th percentile?

45. What data value is at the 55th percentile?

46. What data value is at the 95th percentile?

47. What data value is at the 33rd percentile?

48. What data value is at the third quartile?

49. What data value is at the 65th percentile?

50. What data value is at the 99th percentile?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  8.7 · Applications of the Normal Distribution 903

8.7 Applications of the Normal Distribution

Figure 8.63 Standardized test results generally adhere to the normal distribution. (credit: "Taking a Test" by Marco Verch
Professional Photographer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Apply the normal distribution to real-world scenarios.

As we saw in The Normal Distribution, the word "standardized" is closely associated with the normal distribution. This is
why tests like college entrance exams, state achievement tests for K-12 students, and Advanced Placement tests are
often called "standardized tests": scores are assigned in a way that forces them to follow a normal distribution, with a
mean and standard deviation that are consistent from year to year. Standardization also allows people like college
admissions officers to directly compare an applicant who took the ACT (a college entrance exam) to an applicant who
instead chose to take the SAT (a different college entrance exam). Standardization allows us to compare individuals from
different groups; this is among the most important applications of the normal distribution. We'll explore this and other
real-world uses of the normal distribution in this section.

College Entrance Exams

There are two good ways to compare two data values from different groups: using -scores and using percentiles. The
two methods will always give consistent results (meaning that we won't find, for example, that the first value is better
using -scores but the second value is better using percentiles), so use whichever method is more comfortable for you.

EXAMPLE 8.41

Evaluating College Entrance Exam Scores
According to the Digest of Education Statistics (https://openstax.org/r/nces_ed_gov), composite scores on the SAT have
mean 1060 and standard deviation 195, while composite scores on the ACT have mean 21 and standard deviation 5.

1. At what percentile would an SAT score of 990 fall?
2. What is the z-score of an ACT score of 27?
3. Which is better: a score of 1450 on the SAT or 29 on the ACT?

    Solution
1. Using Google Sheets, we can answer this question with the formula "=NORM.DIST(990, 1060, 195, TRUE)". A score of

     990 would fall at the 36th percentile.

2. Using the formula  , we get  .

3. Let's compare the values using both percentiles and -values:

Percentiles: Using "=NORM.DIST(1450, 1060, 195, TRUE)" we find that an SAT score of 1450 is at the 98th percentile.
Meanwhile, by entering "=NORM.DIST(29, 21, 5, TRUE)" we see that an ACT score of 29 is around the 95th percentile.
Since it's at a higher percentile, we can conclude that an SAT score of 1450 is better than an ACT score of 29.
904 8 · Statistics

 -scores: Using the formula, we see that the  -score for an SAT score of 1450 is                 , while the
 -score for an ACT score of 29 is
an ACT score of 29.                           . Since it has a higher -score, an SAT score of 1450 is better than

      YOUR TURN 8.41

According to the Graduate Management Admission Council (GMAC) (https://openstax.org/r/mba_com), the mean
score on the GMAT (an entrance exam for graduate schools in business management) is 565, with standard
deviation 116. For the LSAT (an entrance exam for law schools), Kaplan (https://openstax.org/r/kaptest_com) informs
us that the mean score is 150 with standard deviation 10.

    1. What is the -score for a GMAT score of 715?
    2. At what percentile is an LSAT score of 166?
    3. Which is better: a GMAT score of 650 or an LSAT score of 161?

Coin flipping

In the opening of The Normal Distribution, we saw that the number of heads we get when we flip a coin 100 times is
distributed normally. It can be shown that if is the number of flips, then the mean of that distribution is and the

standard deviation is (as long as     ). So, for 100 flips, the mean of the distribution is 50 and the standard

deviation is 5. In that opening example, one of our early runs gave us 70 heads in 100 flips, which we noted seemed

unusual. Using the normal distribution, we can identify exactly how unusual that really is. Using Google Sheets, the

formula "=NORM.DIST(70, 50, 5, TRUE)" gives us 0.999968, which is the 99.997th percentile! How is that useful? Suppose

you need to test whether a coin is fair, and so you flip it 100 times. While we might be suspicious if we get 70 heads out

of the 100 flips, we now have a numerical measure for how unusual that is: If the coin were fair, we would expect to see

70 heads (or more) only                       of the time. That's really unlikely! Analysis like this is related to

hypothesis testing, an important application of statistics in the sciences and social sciences.

EXAMPLE 8.42

Flipping a Coin
Let's say we flip a coin 64 times and count the number of heads.

1. What would be the mean of the corresponding distribution?
2. What would be the standard deviation of the corresponding distribution?
3. Suppose we got 25 heads, which seems a little low. At what percentile would 25 heads fall?

Solution

1. Since            , the mean is  .

2. Again using           , we get a standard deviation of         .

3. Using "=NORM.DIST(25, 32, 4, TRUE)", we see that 25 heads is at the 4th percentile. Reading and Interpreting Scatter
     Plots

        YOUR TURN 8.42

  You flip a coin 144 times and count the number of heads.
      1. What is the mean of the corresponding distribution?
      2. What is the standard deviation of the corresponding distribution?
      3. You flipped 81 heads. At what percentile does that fall?

Analyzing Data That Are Normally Distributed

Whenever we're working with a dataset that has a distribution that looks symmetric and bell-shaped, we can use

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                              8.7 · Applications of the Normal Distribution 905

techniques associated with the normal distribution to analyze the data.
  EXAMPLE 8.43

Using Normal Techniques to Analyze Data
The data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) contains the average SAT score for students attending
every institution of higher learning in the United States for which data is available. In Example 8.12, we created a
histogram for these data:

                                                     Figure 8.64 (data source: https://data.ed.gov)
This distribution is fairly symmetric (it's just a little right-skewed) and bell-shaped, so we can use normal distribution
techniques to analyze the data.
 1. What is the mean of these average SAT scores?
 2. What is the standard deviation of these SAT scores?
 3. Using the answers to the previous two questions, use NORM.DIST in Google Sheets to estimate at what percentile

      the University at Buffalo in New York (average SAT: 1250) falls.
 4. Use PERCENTRANK to find the actual percentile of the University at Buffalo, and see how close the estimate in the

      previous question came.
     Solution
 1. Using the AVERAGE function in Google Sheets, we find that the mean is 1141.174.
 2. Using the STDEV function, we get that the standard deviation is 125.517.
 3. Entering "=NORM.DIST(1250, 1141, 125.517, TRUE)" into Google Sheets, we estimate that the University at Buffalo is
      at the 81st percentile.
 4. Using PERCENTRANK, we find that the actual percentile is the 84th. These are close!

        YOUR TURN 8.43
  1. Again using the data in "AvgSAT" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), find the average SAT score of a

      school at the 35th percentile in two ways: using NORM.INV and using PERCENTILE.

        WHO KNEW?
  Political Meddling Exposed
  The normal distribution pops up in some unusual places. Recently, a team at Duke University has been using statistics
  to help identify partisan gerrymandering, where electoral districts have been carefully drawn in a way that benefits
  one political party over another. In their analysis, they found that hypothetical election results in randomly drawn
  districts are normally distributed. By using techniques similar to the ones we used above, they can quantify precisely
906 8 · Statistics

         how biased a particular electoral map is by finding the percentile rank of the actual election result on the normal
         distribution of the hypothetical results. You can find out more about their work at the "Quantifying Gerrymandering"
         site here. (https://openstax.org/r/quantifying-gerrymandering)

     Check Your Understanding

       For the following problems, recall that the SAT exam has mean 1060 and standard deviation 195, and that composite
       scores on the ACT have mean 21 and standard deviation 5.

           49. At what percentile would an SAT score of 940 fall? Round to the nearest whole number.
           50. What score would be at the 67th percentile on the ACT?
           51. Which is a better score: 1300 on the SAT or 27 on the ACT?

       For the following problems, recall that if we flip a coin at least 20 times, the distribution of the number of heads is
       approximately normal with mean equal to half the number of flips and standard deviation equal to half of the square
       root of the number of flips.

           52. Suppose we flip a coin 120 times. What are the mean and standard deviation of the corresponding distribution
                  of heads?

           53. Let's say you flip 70 heads in 120 flips. At what percentile would that fall?
           54. How many heads would be at the 30th percentile? Round to the nearest whole number.

       For the following problems, use the data in "World Tax," (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) which gives the
       tax revenue of many countries of the world in 2017, expressed as a percentage of their gross domestic products. You
       can assume that the distribution is approximately normal (but you can make a histogram to check, if you want).

           55. What tax revenue percentage falls at the third quartile? Answer this question using Google Sheets in two ways:
                  using PERCENTILE and using NORM.INV.

           56. What tax revenue percentage falls at the 20th percentile? Answer this question using Google Sheets in two
                  ways: using PERCENTILE and using NORM.INV.

           57. At what percentile does the United Kingdom (25.62%, found on row 46 in the spreadsheet) fall? Answer this
                  question using Google Sheets in two ways: using PERCENTRANK and using NORM.DIST.

           58. At what percentile does Kiribati (21.97%, found on row 62 in the spreadsheet) fall? Answer this question using
                  Google Sheets in two ways: using PERCENTRANK and using NORM.DIST.

             SECTION 8.7 EXERCISES

       For the following exercises, assume we're looking at results from two different standardized tests. The first, called the
       ABC, has mean 250 and standard deviation 50. The second, called the XYZ, has mean 80 and standard deviation 10.

             1. What would be the -score of a result of 322 on the ABC?
             2. What would be the -score of a result of 57 on the XYZ?
             3. At what percentile would a result of 211 on the ABC fall? Round your answer to the nearest percentile.
             4. At what percentile would a result of 94 on the XYZ fall? Round your answer to the nearest percentile.
             5. What score would fall at the first quartile on the ABC? Round your answer to the nearest whole number.
             6. What score would fall at the 60th percentile on the XYZ? Round your answer to the nearest whole number.
             7. Which score is better: 202 on the ABC or 72 on the XYZ?
             8. Which score is better: 324 on the ABC or 94 on the XYZ?

       For the following exercises, recall that if we flip a coin at least 20 times, the distribution of the number of heads is
       approximately normal with mean equal to half the number of flips and standard deviation equal to half of the square
       root of the number of flips.

             9. What would be the mean and standard deviation for the number of heads in 80 coin flips?
           10. What would be the mean and standard deviation for the number of heads in 144 coin flips?
           11. How many heads would be at the 80th percentile for 80 coin flips? Round your answer to the nearest whole

                  number.
           12. How many heads would be at the 20th percentile for 144 coin flips? Round your answer to the nearest whole

                  number.
           13. What is the -score for 51 heads in 80 coin flips? Round your answer to the nearest hundredth.
           14. What is the -score for 87 heads in 144 coin flips? Round your answer to the nearest hundredth.
           15. Which would be more unusual: flipping 51 heads in 80 tries or flipping 87 heads in 144 tries? How do you know?

       For the following exercises, use the data in "Wheat," (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) which gives the yield

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                   8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 907

of wheat (in bushels) produced over several equally sized plots. (These data were collected as part of an experiment
reported in "The experimental error of field trials" (https://openstax.org/r/sets-059) by W.B. Mercer and A.D. Hall).

    16. Create a histogram of Yield to check that it's approximately normally distributed.
    17. Find the mean and standard deviation of Yield. Round answers to the nearest thousandth.
    18. What proportion of yields does the normal distribution predict should fall below 4.56? Round to the nearest

          thousandth.
    19. At what percentile does the normal distribution predict a yield of 3.6 would fall? Round to the nearest whole

          number.
    20. What yield does the normal distribution estimate would fall at the 80th percentile? Round to the nearest

          hundredth.
    21. What yield does the normal distribution estimate would fall at the 95th percentile? Round to the nearest

          hundredth.
    22. If one of these plots yields 2.8 bushels, would that be a good or bad result? How do you know?

8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

                    Figure 8.65 A scatter plot is a visualization of the relationship between quantitative dataset.

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Construct a scatter plot for a dataset.
 2. Interpret a scatter plot.
 3. Distinguish among positive, negative and no correlation.
 4. Compute the correlation coefficient.
 5. Estimate and interpret regression lines.
One of the most powerful tools statistics gives us is the ability to explore relationships between two datasets containing
quantitative values, and then use that relationship to make predictions. For example, a student who wants to know how
well they can expect to score on an upcoming final exam may consider reviewing the data on midterm and final exam
scores for students who have previously taken the class. It seems reasonable to expect that there is a relationship
between those two datasets: If a student did well on the midterm, they were probably more likely to do well on the final
than the average student. Similarly, if a student did poorly on the midterm, they probably also did poorly on the final
exam.
Of course, that relationship isn't set in stone; a student's performance on a midterm exam doesn't cement their
performance on the final! A student might use a poor result on the midterm as motivation to study more for the final. A
student with a really good grade on the midterm might be overconfident going into the final, and as a result doesn't
prepare adequately.
The statistical method of regression can find a formula that does the best job of predicting a score on the final exam
based on the student's score on the midterm, as well as give a measure of the confidence of that prediction! In this
section, we'll discover how to use regression to make these predictions. First, though, we need to lay some graphical
groundwork.
908 8 · Statistics

     Relationships Between Quantitative Datasets

       Before we can evaluate a relationship between two datasets, we must first decide if we feel that one might depend on
       the other. In our exam example, it is appropriate to say that the score on the final depends on the score on the midterm,
       rather than the other way around: if the midterm depended on the final, then we'd need to know the final score first,
       which doesn't make sense.

       Here's another example: if we collected data on home purchases in a certain area, and noted both the sale price of the
       house and the annual household income of the purchaser, we might expect a relationship between those two. Which
       depends on the other? In this case, sale price depends on income: people who have a higher income can afford a more
       expensive house. If it were the other way around, people could buy a new, more expensive house and then expect a
       raise! (This is very bad advice.)

       It's worth noting that not every pair of related datasets has clear dependence. For example, consider the percent of a
       country's budget devoted to the military and the percent earmarked for public health. These datasets are generally
       related: as one goes up, the other goes down. However, in this case, there's not a preferred choice for dependence, as
       each could be seen as depending on the other. When exploring the relationship between two datasets, if one set seems
       to depend on the other, we'll say that dataset contains values of the response variable (or dependent variable). The
       dataset that the response variable depends on contains values of what we call the explanatory variable (or
       independent variable). If no dependence relationship can be identified, then we can assign either dataset to either role.

         EXAMPLE 8.44

       Identifying Explanatory and Response Variables
       For each of the following pairs of related datasets, identify which (if any) should be assigned the role of response variable
       and which should be assigned to be the explanatory variable.

        1. A person's height and weight
        2. A professional basketball player's salary and their average points scored per game (which is a measure of how good

             they are at basketball)
        3. The length and width of leaves on a tree

            Solution
        1. As people get taller, their weight tends to increase. But if a person goes on a diet and loses weight, we don't expect

             them to also get shorter. So, weight depends on height. That means we'll say that the response variable is weight
             and the explanatory variable is height.
        2. The more points a basketball player scores, the more money they should make. But if a basketball player gets a
             raise, we wouldn't expect them to get better at basketball as a result. So, the response is salary and the explanatory
             is points per game.
        3. The way that the length and width of leaves are connected isn't clear. It seems reasonable that as the width goes up,
             so would the length. But the other direction is also plausible: as the length goes up, so does the width. Without a
             clear dependence relationship, we're free to declare either to be the response and the other to be the explanatory.

               YOUR TURN 8.44

         Given these pairs of datasets, identify which (if either) would be the best choice for the response variable.

             1. A person's age and their annual income
             2. A student's GPA and their score on the SAT
             3. A student's GPA and the number of hours they spend studying per week

       Once we've assigned roles to our two datasets, we can take the first step in visualizing the relationship between them:
       creating a scatter plot.

      Creating Scatter Plots

       A scatter plot is a visualization of the relationship between two quantitative sets of data. The scatter plot is created by
       turning the datasets into ordered pairs: the first coordinate contains data values from the explanatory dataset, and the
       second coordinate contains the corresponding data values from the response dataset. These ordered pairs are then
       plotted in the -plane. Let's return to our exam example to put this into practice.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                         8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 909

  EXAMPLE 8.45

Creating Scatter Plots Without Technology
Students are exploring the relationship between scores on the midterm exam and final exam in their math course. Here
are some of the scores reported by their classmates:

Name Midterm grade Final grade

Student 1  88            84

Student 2  71            80

Student 3  75            77

Student 4  94            95

Student 5  68            73

Create a scatter plot to visualize the data.

     Solution
Step 1: Since it makes more sense to think of the final exam score as being dependent on the midterm exam score, we'll
let the final grade be the response. So, let's think of these two datasets as a set of ordered pairs, midterm first, final
second:

Name (Midterm, Final)

Student 1      (88, 84)

Student 2      (71, 80)

Student 3      (75, 77)

Student 4      (94, 95)

Student 5      (68, 73)

Step 2: Next, let's make the axes. On the horizontal axis, make sure the range of values is sufficient to cover all of the
explanatory data. For our data, that's 68 to 94. Similarly, the vertical axis should cover all of the response data (73 to 95):

           Figure 8.66
910 8 · Statistics

       Step 3: Our first point is (88, 84). So, we'll locate 88 on the horizontal axis, 84 on the vertical axis, and identify the point
       that's directly above the first location and horizontally level with the second:

                                                                             Figure 8.67
Step 4: Repeat this process to place the other four points on the graph:

                                  Figure 8.68

Step 5: Finally, label the axes:

                                                                             Figure 8.69
        YOUR TURN 8.45
  1. Create a scatter plot to visualize the following data, showing the top five NFL receivers by number of receptions
      for the 2019 season. Treat Yards as the response:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 911

Player           Receptions Yards

Stefon Diggs     127                  1535

Davante Adams    115                  1374

DeAndre Hopkins  115                  1407

Darren Waller    107                  1196

Travis Kelce     105                  1416

Table 8.12 (source: https://www.pro-
football-reference.com/years/2019/)

For large datasets, it's impractical to create scatter plots manually. Luckily, Google Sheets automates this process for us.

       VIDEO

      Making Scatter Plots in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Scatter-Plots)

  EXAMPLE 8.46

Creating Scatter Plots in Google Sheets
The dataset "NHL19" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) gives the results of the 2018-2019 National Hockey
League season. The columns are team, wins (W), losses (L), overtime losses (OTL), total points (PTS), goals scored by the
team (GF), goals scored against the team (GA), and goal differential (the difference in GF and GA). Use Google Sheets to
create a scatter plot for GF vs. GA.

      When we talk about plotting one set versus another, the first is the response and the second is explanatory.

     Solution
Step 1: Open the dataset in Google Sheets, and click and drag to select the data we want to visualize (in this case, we
want the columns for GF and GA; make sure you include those labels in the selection).

Step 2: Next, click on the "Insert" menu, then click "Chart." Sheets will automatically choose a chart format; if the result
isn't a scatter plot, click on the drop-down menu under "Chart type" in the Chart Editor on the right side of the window
and select "Scatter chart."

Step 3: Next, check that the correct choices were made for the horizontal and vertical axes. In this case, we want to see
GF on the vertical axis and GA on the horizontal axis. If Sheets made the wrong choice, we can fix it in the Chart Editor by
clicking on the name of the dataset under "X-axis" to open up a dropdown menu, then selecting the variable that should
go on the horizontal axis (GA in this case).

Step 4: Now, click on the variable under "Series" and select the one that should go on the vertical axis (GF). If you had to
make that change, the axis labels in the graph may also need changing; those labels can be fixed using the "Customize"
tab in the Chart Editor under "Chart & axis titles." Your result should look like this:
912 8 · Statistics

                                                                Figure 8.70 (data source: www.nhl.com)
               YOUR TURN 8.46
         1. With the data in "NHL19," (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) use Google Sheets to create a scatter plot
             for points (PTS) vs. wins (W).

     Reading and Interpreting Scatter Plots

       Scatter plots give us information about the existence and strength of a relationship between two datasets. To break that
       information down, there are a series of questions we might ask to help us. First: Is there a curved pattern in the data? If
       the answer is "yes," then we can stop; none of the linear regression techniques from here to the end of this section are
       appropriate. Figure 8.71 and Figure 8.74 show several examples of scatter plots that can help us identify these curved
       patterns.

                                                                         Figure 8.71 Curved pattern

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                   8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 913

                                                                Figure 8.72 No curved pattern

                                                                  Figure 8.73 Curved pattern

                                                                Figure 8.74 No curved pattern
Once we have confirmed that there is no curved pattern in our data, we can move to the next question: Is there a linear
relationship? To answer this, we must look at different values of the explanatory variable and determine whether the
corresponding response values are different, on average. It's important to look at the values "on average" because, in
general, our scatter plots won't include just one corresponding response point for each value of the explanatory variable
(i.e., there may be multiple response values for each explanatory value). So, we try to look for the center of those points.
Let's look again at Figure 8.74, but consider some different values for the explanatory variable. Let's highlight the points
whose -values are around 50 and those that are around 80:
914 8 · Statistics

                                                                                    Figure 8.75
       Now, we can estimate the middle of each group of points. Let's add our estimated averages to the plot as starred points:

                                                                                    Figure 8.76
       Since those two starred points occur at different heights, we can conclude that there's likely a relationship worth
       exploring.
       Here's another example using a different set of data:

                                                                                    Figure 8.77
       Let's look again at the points near 50 and near 80, and estimate the middles of those clusters:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                   8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 915

                                                                             Figure 8.78
Notice that there's not much vertical distance between our two starred points. This tells us that there's not a strong
relationship between these two datasets.

Positive and Negative Linear Relationships

Another way to assess whether there is a relationship between two datasets in a scatter plot is to see if the points seem
to be clustered around a line (specifically, a line that's not horizontal). The stronger the clustering around that line is, the
stronger the relationship.
Once we've established that there's a relationship worth exploring, it's time to start quantifying that relationship. Two
datasets have a positive linear relationship if the values of the response tend to increase, on average, as the values of
the explanatory variable increase. If the values of the response decrease with increasing values of the explanatory
variable, then there is a negative linear relationship between the two datasets. The strength of the relationship is
determined by how closely the scatter plot follows a single straight line: the closer the points are to that line, the
stronger the relationship. The scatter plots in Figure 8.74 to Figure 8.80 depict varying strengths and directions of linear
relationships.

                                                        Figure 8.79 Perfect negative relationship
916 8 · Statistics

                                                                Figure 8.80 Strong negative relationship
                                                                 Figure 8.81 Weak negative relationship

                                                                         Figure 8.82 No relationship

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                          8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 917

                                      Figure 8.83 Weak positive relationship

                                      Figure 8.84 Strong positive relationship

                                      Figure 8.85 Perfect positive relationship

The strength and direction (positive or negative) of a linear relationship can also be measured with a statistic called the
correlation coefficient (denoted ). Positive values of indicate a positive relationship, while negative values of
indicate a negative relationship. Values of close to 0 indicate a weak relationship, while values close to correspond
to a very strong relationship. Looking again at Figure 8.74 to Figure 8.80, the correlation coefficients for each, in
sequential order, are: 1, 0.97, 0.55, 0.03, 0.61, 0.97, and 1.

There's no firm rule that establishes a cutoff value of to divide strong relationships from weak ones, but  is often

given as the dividing line (i.e., if  or  the relationship is strong, and if     the relationship is

weak).
918 8 · Statistics

      The formula for computing is very complicated; it's almost never done without technology. Google Sheets will do the
      computation for you using the CORREL function. The syntax works like this: if your explanatory values are in cells A2 to
      A50 and the corresponding response values are in B2 to B50, then you can find the correlation coefficient by entering
      "=CORREL(A2:A50, B2:B50)". (Note that the order doesn't matter for correlation coefficients; "=CORREL(B2:B50, A2:A50)"
      will give the same result.)
      Let's put all of this together in an example.

         EXAMPLE 8.47

      Interpreting Scatter Plots
      Consider the four scatter plots below:
        1.

                                                                               Figure 8.86
2.

                                                                               Figure 8.87
3.

                                 Figure 8.88

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 919

4.

                                                    Figure 8.89

For each of these, answer the following questions:

a. Is there a curved pattern in the data? If yes, stop here. If no, continue to part b.
b. Classify the strength and direction of the relationship. Make a guess at the value of .

    Solution
1. a. Yes, there is a curved pattern.

2. a. No, there's no curved pattern.

b. Since the points tend upward as we move from left to right, this is a positive relationship. The points seem

pretty closely grouped around a line, so it's fairly strong. Comparing this scatter plot to those in Figure 8.79 to

Figure 8.85, we can see that the relationship is stronger than the one in Figure 8.83 (        ) but not as strong

as the one in Figure 8.84 (            ). So, the value of the correlation coefficient is somewhere between the two.

We might guess that          .

3. a. No, there's no curved pattern.

b. Since the points tend downward as we move from left to right, this is a negative relationship. The points are not

tightly grouped around a line, but the pattern is clear. It looks like it has approximately the same strength as

the plot in Figure 8.83, just with the opposite sign. So, we might guess that               .

4. a. No, there's no curved pattern.

b. Since the points don't really tend upward or downward as we move from left to right, there is no real

relationship here. Thus,        .

      YOUR TURN 8.47

For each of the plots below, answer the following questions:
 a. Is there a curved pattern in the data? If yes, stop here. If no, continue to part b.
b. Classify the strength and direction of the relationship. Make a guess at the value of .
920 8 · Statistics

             1.
             2.
             3.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 921

4.

EXAMPLE 8.48

Finding the Correlation Coefficient
The data that were plotted in the previous example can be found in the dataset "correlationcoefficient1"
(https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets). All of them share the same values for the explanatory variable . The four
responses are labeled through . Compute the correlation coefficients for each, if appropriate, using Google Sheets.
Round to the nearest hundredth.

     Solution
Step 1: There is a curved pattern in the data, so the correlation coefficient isn't meaningful.

Step 2: Using "=CORREL(A2:A101, C2:C101)" we get  .

Step 3: Using "=CORREL(A2:A101, D2:D101)" we get        .

Step 4: Using "=CORREL(A2:A101, E2:E101)" we get     .

        YOUR TURN 8.48

  1. The data that were plotted in Your Turn 8.47 can be found in the dataset "correlationcoefficient2". All of them
      share the same values for the explanatory variable . The four responses are labeled through . Compute
      the correlation coefficients for each, if appropriate, using Google Sheets. Round to the nearest hundredth.

  WORK IT OUT

  Winning with Statistics
  Billy Beane, the former general manager of the Oakland A's baseball team, famously took his low budget team to
  unprecedented heights by using statistics to identify undervalued players; his story is recounted in the book
  Moneyball (which was later made into a movie, with Brad Pitt playing Beane). You can do the same thing: Take a look
  at team statistics in the sport of your choice (https://openstax.org/r/sports-reference) and try to identify a statistic
  that's most closely related to winning (meaning that it has the highest correlation coefficient with team wins).

Linear Regression

The final step in our analysis of the relationship between two datasets is to find and use the equation of the regression
line. For a given set of explanatory and response data, the regression line (also called the least-squares line or line of
best fit) is the line that does the best job of approximating the data.
What does it mean to say that a particular line does the "best job" of approximating the data? The way that statisticians
922 8 · Statistics

characterize this "best line" is rather technical, but we'll include it for the sake of satisfying your curiosity (and backing up
the claim of "best"). Imagine drawing a line that looks like it does a pretty good job of approximating the data. Most of
the points in the scatter plot will probably not fall exactly on the line; the distance above or below the line a given point
falls is called that point's residual. We could compute the residuals for every point in the scatter plot. If you take all those
residuals and square them, then add the results together, you get a statistic called the sum of squared errors for the line
(the name tells you what it is: "sum" because we're adding, "squared" because we're squaring, and "errors" is another
word for "residuals"). The line that we choose to be the "best" is the one that has the smallest possible sum of squared
errors. The implied minimization ("smallest") is where the "least" in "least squares" comes from; the "squares" comes from
the fact that we're minimizing the sum of squared errors. This is very similar to the process we outlined in the "game"
that we used to introduce the mean. Both the regression line and the mean are designed to minimize a sum of squared
errors. Here ends the super technical part.

Finding the Equation of the Regression Line

So, how do we find the equation of the regression line? Recall the point-slope form of the equation of a line:

FORMULA

If a line has slope and passes through a point         , then the point-slope form of the equation of the line is:

The regression line has two properties that we can use to find its equation. First, it always passes through the point of
means. If and are the means of the explanatory and response datasets, respectively, then the point of means is

        . We'll use that as the point in the point-slope form of the equation. Second, if and are the standard
deviations of the explanatory and response datasets, respectively, and if is the correlation coefficient, then the slope is

                . Putting all that together with the point-slope formula gives us this:

  FORMULA

  Suppose and are explanatory and response datasets that have a linear relationship. If their means are and
  respectively, their standard deviations are and respectively, and their correlation coefficient is , then the
  equation of the regression line is:

                                   .

Let's walk through an example.

EXAMPLE 8.49

Finding the Equation of the Regression Line from Statistics
Suppose you have datasets and with the following statistics: has mean 21 and standard deviation 4, has mean 8
and standard deviation 2, and their correlation coefficient is -0.4. What's the equation of the regression line?

Solution

Step 1: We're given              ,  ,     ,     , and  . Let's start with the formula for the equation of the

regression line:

Step 2: Plugging in our values gives us:

Step 3: Our final regression line equation is:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 923

      YOUR TURN 8.49

1. Suppose you have datasets and with the following statistics: has mean 100 and standard deviation 5, has
    mean 200 and standard deviation 20, and their correlation coefficient is 0.75. What's the equation of the
    regression line?

As you can see, finding the equation of the regression line involves a lot of steps if you have to find all of the values of
the needed quantities yourself. But, as usual, technology comes to our rescue. This video (which you actually watched
earlier when learning how to create scatter plots) covers the regression line at around the 3:30 mark. Note that Google
Sheets calls it the "trendline."

Let's put this into practice.

EXAMPLE 8.50

Finding the Equation of the Regression Line Using Google Sheets
In Example 8.46, we considered the relationship between goals scored (GF) and goals against (GA) using the dataset
"NHL19" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets). Recreate the scatter plot in Google Sheets, and use it to find the
equation of the regression line.

Solution

Once we have recreated the scatter plot, we find the equation of the regression line by clicking the three dots at the top

right of the plot, selecting "Edit chart," then clicking on "Customize" and "Series." We add the regression line by checking

the box next to "Trendline," and then we show the equation by selecting "Use Equation" in the drop-down menu under

"Label." The equation of the tangent line is      .

      YOUR TURN 8.50

1. In Your Turn 8.46, you created a scatter plot for points (PTS) vs. wins (W) using the dataset "NHL19"
    (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets). Recreate the scatter plot in Google Sheets, and use it to find the
    equation of the regression line.

Using the Equation of the Regression Line

Once we've found the equation of the regression line, what do we do with it? We'll look at two possible applications:
making predictions and interpreting the slope.

We can use the equation of the regression line to predict the response value for a given explanatory value . All we
have to do is plug that explanatory value into the formula and see what response value results. This is useful in two
ways: first, it can be used to make a guess about an unknown data value (like one that hasn't been observed yet).
Second, it can be used to evaluate performance (meaning, we can predict an outcome given a particular event). In
Example 8.45, we created a scatter plot of final exam scores vs. midterm exam scores using this data:

              Name Midterm Grade Final Grade

              Allison                         88     84

              Benjamin                        71     80

              Carly                           75     77

              Daniel                          94     95

              Elmo                            68     73
924 8 · Statistics

The equation of the regression line is     , where is the final exam score and is the midterm exam

score. If Frank scored 85 on the midterm, then our prediction for his final exam score is                              . To

use the regression line to evaluate performance, we use a data value we've already observed. For example, Allison

scored 88 on the midterm. The regression line predicts that someone who scores an 88 on the midterm will get

                                 on the final. Allison actually scored 84 on the final, meaning she underperformed

expectations by almost 4 points         .

The second application of the equation of the regression line is interpreting the slope of the line to describe the
relationship between the explanatory and response datasets. For the exam data in the previous paragraph, the slope of
the regression line is 0.687. Recall that the slope of a line can be computed by finding two points on the line and dividing
the difference in the -values of those points by the difference in the -values. Keeping that in mind, we can interpret our

slope as                                . Multiplying both sides of that equation by the denominator of the fraction,

we get                                                                  . Thus, a one-point increase in the midterm score

would result in a predicted increase in the final score of 0.687 points. A ten-point drop in the midterm score would give

us a decrease in the predicted final score of 6.87 points. In general, the slope gives us the predicted change in the

response that corresponds to a one unit increase in the explanatory variable.

EXAMPLE 8.51

Applying the Equation of the Regression Line
The data in "MLB2019Off" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) gives offensive team stats for the 2019 Major
League Baseball season. Use that dataset to answer the following questions:

1. What is the equation of the regression line for runs (R) vs. hits (H)?
2. How many runs would we expect a team to score if the team got 1500 hits in a season?
3. Did the Kansas City Royals (KCR) overperform or underperform in terms of runs scored, based on their hit total? By

     how much?
4. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.

Solution

1. Using Google Sheets, we find that the regression line equation is                       , where is the number of runs

scored and is the number of hits.

2. Plugging 1500 into the equation of the regression line, we get                          . We would predict that a

team with 1500 hits would score 870 runs.

3. The Royals had 1356 hits, so we would predict their run total to be                     . They actually scored

691 runs, so they underperformed expectations by 52 runs                .

4. The slope gives us the predicted change in the response that corresponds to a one unit increase in the explanatory

variable. So, we expect one additional hit to result in 0.884 more runs. Since 0.884 runs doesn't really make sense,

we can get a better interpretation by multiplying through by ten or one hundred: Ten additional hits will result in

almost nine additional runs, or a hundred additional hits will yield on average just over 88 additional runs.

      YOUR TURN 8.51

Using the "MLB2019Off" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) dataset, answer the following:
    1. What is the equation of the regression line for the number of times a runner is caught stealing a base (CS) vs.
         the number of successful stolen bases (SB)?
    2. How many times would we expect a team to be caught stealing if the team steals 70 bases in a season?
    3. Did the Philadelphia Phillies (PHI) overperform or underperform in terms of getting caught stealing, based on
         their stolen base total? By how much?
    4. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 925

      WHO KNEW?

Math and the Movies

Statistics and regression are used by Hollywood movie producers to decide what movies to make, and to predict how
much money they'll earn at the box office. According to the American Statistical Association (https://openstax.org/r/
American-Statistical-Association), not only do producers use statistics to identify the next potential blockbuster, but
they've also pinned down how much money awards add to the bottom line. (An Academy Award is worth about $3
million!) In addition, studios use their streaming services to gather data about their customers and the types of
movies they watch; this data helps them learn what kinds of entertainment their customers want more of.

WORK IT OUT

Collecting and Analyzing Your Own Data
This section has demonstrated many pairs of related quantitative datasets. Think about some quantitative variables
that you can ask your classmates about, which might be related. Once you have some ideas, collect the data from
your classmates. Then analyze the data by creating a scatter plot, finding the equation of the regression line (if
appropriate), and interpreting it.

Extrapolation

A very common misuse of regression techniques involves extrapolation, which involves making a prediction about
something that doesn't belong in the dataset.

EXAMPLE 8.52

More Applying the Equation of the Regression Line
The data in "WNBA2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) gives team statistics from the 2019 WNBA season.
Use that dataset to answer these questions about team wins (W) and the proportion of team field goals made (FG%, the
number of shots made divided by the number of shots attempted. Even though this column is labeled using a percent
sign, the values are not expressed as percentages):

1. What is the equation of the regression line for wins vs. proportion of made field goals?
2. How many wins would we expect for a team that makes 42% of its shots?
3. Did the New York Liberty overperform or underperform in terms of wins, based on the team's proportion of made

     field goals?
4. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.

Solution

1. Using Google Sheets, we get the equation  , where is the proportion of field goals made

and is the number of wins.

2. Since 42% corresponds to a proportion of 0.42, we'll plug 0.42 into the regression equation for , which gives us

                                 . We would predict that a team that makes 42% of its shots would win about 16

games.

3. The New York Liberty made 41.4% of their shots, so we expect they would have

wins. In fact, they had only 10 wins, so they underperformed expectations by over 5 wins.

4. Step 1: The slope gives us the expected increase in the response that corresponds to a one unit increase in the

explanatory variable. If we simply go with that interpretation, we would get a sentence like "We expect an increase

in proportion of field goals made of 1 would result in an additional 178 wins." However, that sentence doesn't make

much sense. Let's consider why.

Step 2: First, proportions must be between 0 and 1, the proportion of made field goals can't be increased by 1 and

still make sense. Second, the total number of games played is only 34, so no team could get an additional 178 wins!

So, we'll have to change the units.

Step 3: Since the proportions of made field goals are often expressed as a percentage, we could try to use that. If

we express the slope as a fraction with 1 in the denominator (remember, the denominator represents the
926 8 · Statistics

             proportion of field goals made), then convert the denominator to a percentage and simplify, we get
                                                       .

             Step 4: So, an increase in field goal percentage of 1% would result in an expected increase of 1.78 wins.

               YOUR TURN 8.52
         Use the data in "WNBA2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer these questions about the
         relationship between the proportion of made field goals (FG%) and the proportion of made three-point field goals
         (3P%):

             1. What is the equation of the regression line for proportion of made three-point field goals vs. proportion of
                  made field goals?

             2. What proportion of made three-point field goals would we expect for a team that makes 44% of its field
                  goals?

             3. Did the Dallas Wings overperform or underperform in terms of proportion of made three-point field goals,
                  based on the team's proportion of made field goals?

             4. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.

     Correlation Does Not Imply Causation

       One of the most common fallacies about statistics has to do with the relationship between two datasets. In the dataset
       "Public" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), we find that the correlation coefficient between the 75th percentile
       math SAT score and the 75th percentile verbal SAT score is 0.92, which is really strong. The slope of the regression line
       that predicts the verbal score from the math score is 0.729, which we might interpret as follows: "If the 75th percentile
       math SAT score goes up by 10 points, we'd expect the corresponding verbal SAT score to go up by just over 7 points."
       Does the increasing math score cause the increase in the verbal score? Probably not. What's really going on is that
       there's a third variable that's affecting them both: To raise the SAT math score by 10 points, a school will recruit students
       who do better on the SAT in general; these students will also naturally have higher SAT verbal scores. This third variable
       is sometimes called a lurking variable or a confounding variable. Unless all possible lurking variables are ruled out, we
       cannot conclude that one thing causes another.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                     8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 927

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Dr. Talithia Williams

                         Figure 8.90 A photo of Dr. Williams (credit: Used by permission of Talithia Williams)

Dr. Talithia Williams is a statistician on the faculty of Harvey Mudd College, and the first Black woman to achieve
tenure at this university. She advocates for more women to become involved in the fields of engineering and science,
and is on the board of directors for the EDGE Foundation, an organization that helps women obtain advanced
degrees in mathematics (EDGE standing for Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education). In 2018, Dr. Williams
published the book Power in Numbers: The Rebel Women of Mathematics, a retrospective look at historical female
figures who have contributed to the development of the field of mathematics.

Dr. Williams earned a Master's degree in Mathematics from Howard University and a Master's in Statistics from Rice
University, and also went on to earn her Ph.D. in Statistics from Rice. She has held research appointments at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, the National Security Agency, and NASA. Her research focuses on the environmental and
medical applications of statistics. In 2014, she gave a popular TED talk titled "Own Your Body's Data"
(https://openstax.org/r/TED-Talk_talithia_williams) that discussed the potential insights to be gained from collecting
personal health data. She was even recently a host for the NOVA Wonders documentary series and a narrator for the
NOVA Universe series on PBS.

To stay up-to-date on Dr. Williams's accomplishments, you can follow her on Twitter (https://openstax.org/r/
twit_talithiaw) or her Facebook account (https://openstax.org/r/facebk_talithiaw).

      WHO KNEW?

Statistics and Eugenics

Some of the brightest minds in the history of statistics unfortunately decided to use their considerable intellects to
further a pseudoscience known as eugenics. Eugenicists took Charles Darwin's theories of evolution and ruthlessly
applied them to the human race. Francis Galton (1822-1911), a cousin of Darwin and also the mathematician who
invented the formula for standard deviation, claimed that people in the British upper classes possessed higher
928 8 · Statistics

         intelligence due to their superior breeding. Karl Pearson (1857-1936), who derived the formula for the correlation
         coefficient, argued in National Life from the Standpoint of Science, that, instead of providing social welfare programs,
         nations could better improve the fortunes of the poor by waging "war with inferior races." Ronald Fisher (1890-1962)
         was possibly the most important statistician of the 20th century, having invented several new techniques (including
         the ubiquitous analysis of variance), and yet he also founded the Cambridge University Undergraduates Eugenics
         Society, whose self-prescribed goal was to evangelize "not by precept only, but by example, the doctrine of a new
         natural ability of worth and blood."
         When eugenics took hold in the United States, it was used to justify terrible acts by the government, including the
         forced sterilization of individuals with mental illness, epilepsy, a physical impairment (like blindness), or a criminal
         history. The Nazi regime took these ideas to their ultimate, terrible conclusion: killing people who had mental or
         physical disabilities, or who were born into an "inferior" race. Over six million people died in this Holocaust, one of the
         darkest events in human history. To learn more, watch this video about Francis Galton and the legacy of eugenics
         (https://openstax.org/r/Galton-and-eugenics)

     Check Your Understanding

       59. Make a scatter plot for the following data without technology:
                                                                                20 11 8 22 25
                                                                                13 15 17 13 10

       For the following problems, answer these questions:
        a. Is there a curved pattern in the data? If yes, stop here.
        b. Classify the strength and direction of the relationship. Make a guess at the value of .

           60.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                    8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 929

    61.

Use the data in "MLB2019Off" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to investigate the relationship between
slugging percentage (SLG, explanatory) and runs scored (R, response).

    62. What's the correlation coefficient? Round to the nearest hundredth.
    63. What's the equation of the regression line? Round the slope and intercept to the nearest whole number.

The regression equation used to predict average monthly faculty salary (FacSal) from out-of-state tuition (OutState)
using the data in "TNSchools" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) is

    64. Predict the average monthly faculty salary for a school that charges $30,000 in out-of-state tuition.
    65. Maryville College charges $34,880 for out-of-state students, and their average monthly faculty salary is $6,765.

          Do they pay faculty more or less than expected? By how much?
    66. Write a sentence to interpret the slope.

      SECTION 8.8 EXERCISES

1. This table contains data for the first five schools (alphabetically) that fielded an NCAA Division I men's basketball
    team in the 2018-2019 season. It shows the total number of points each team scored (PF) and the total number of
    points their opponents scored against them (PA). Create a scatter plot without technology of PA vs. PF.

School             PF               PA

Abilene Christian  2502 2161

Air Force          2179 2294

Akron              2271 2107

Alabama A&M        1938 2285

Alabama-Birmingham 2470 2370

(source: www.sports-reference.com)

2. This table contains data for the first five schools (alphabetically) that fielded an NCAA Division I men's basketball
    team in the 2018-2019 season. It shows the total number of field goals each team scored (FG) and the total
    number of three-point field goals they scored (3P). Create a scatter plot without technology of 3P vs. FG.
930 8 · Statistics

                                 School             FG 3P

                                 Abilene Christian  897 251

                                 Air Force          802 234

                                 Akron              797 297

                                 Alabama A&M        736 182

                                 Alabama-Birmingham 906 234

                                 (source: www.sports-reference.com)

For the following exercises, use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), on every school
that fielded an NCAA Division I men's basketball team in the 2018-2019 season.

     3. Use Google Sheets to create a scatter plot of points scored against a team (PA) vs. points scored by the team
          (PF).

     4. Use Google Sheets to create a scatter plot of number of three-point field goals made (3P) vs. total field goals
          made (FG).

     5. Use Google Sheets to create a scatter plot of number of fouls (Fouls) vs. number of blocks (BLK).
     6. Use Google Sheets to create a scatter plot of points scored (PF) vs. percent of three-point shots made (3P%).

For the following exercises, answer the following questions:

 a. Is there a curved pattern in the data? If yes, stop here. If no, continue to part b.
b. Classify the strength and direction of the relationship. Make a guess at the value of .

     7.

     8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 931

 9.
10.
11.
12.
932 8 · Statistics

           13.

           14.
       For the following exercises, use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) on every school
       that fielded an NCAA Division I men'sbasketball team in the 2018-2019 season.

           15. What is the correlation coefficient for points scored against a team (PA) vs. points scored by the team (PF)?
                  Round to the nearest hundredth.

           16. What is the equation of the regression line for PA vs. PF?
           17. Predict the total number of points scored against a team that itself scores 2200 points.
           18. Georgia Tech scored 2091 points, and had 2130 points scored against them. Is their PA higher or lower than

                  expected? By how much?
           19. Write a sentence that interprets the slope of the regression line for PA vs. PF.
           20. What is the correlation coefficient for three-point field goals made (3P) vs. total field goals made (FG)? Round to

                  the nearest hundredth.
           21. What is the equation of the regression line for 3P vs. FG?
           22. How many three-point field goals made would you expect for a team that made 1000 total field goals?
           23. Seton Hall made 888 field goals; of those, 240 were three-point field goals. Did they make more or fewer three-

                  point field goals than expected? How many more or fewer?
           24. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line for 3P vs. FG.
       For the following exercises, use the datasets "Public" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) and "Private"
       (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), which give many institutions of higher learning in the United States
       (public institutions in "Public" and private, non-profit institutions in "Private"), the schools' 75th percentiles on the math
       section of the SAT (SATM75), the verbal section of the SAT (SATV75), the math section of the ACT (ACTM75), and the
       English section of the ACT (ACTE75). It also gives the schools' admission rates (AdmRate) and total annual cost of
       attendance (Cost).
           25. It might seem reasonable to expect the cost to attend a school to go down as the proportion of applicants

                  admitted goes up. Create two scatter plots (one for private schools, one for public) to investigate that hunch.
                  Can we use linear regression to describe that relationship for these? Why or why not?
           26. Find the correlation between the 75th percentiles of the two sections of the SAT at public schools and at private
                  schools. Which has a stronger relationship?
           27. What score would we predict falls at the 75th percentile on the verbal section of the SAT at a public school
                  where the 75th percentile on the math section of the SAT is 500?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              8.8 · Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines 933

28. What score would we predict falls at the 75th percentile on the verbal section of the SAT at a private school
      where the 75th percentile on the math section of the SAT is 500?

29. Find the slope of the regression line that we would use to predict the 75th percentile SAT math score from the
      75th percentile ACT English score at public schools, and write a sentence to interpret that slope.

30. Predict the cost of attendance at a public school whose 75th percentile on the SAT verbal section is 700.
31. The cost of attendance at DePauw University, a private school, is $62,567. The 75th percentile on the SAT math

      section is 680. Is DePauw more or less expensive that we would predict based on the SAT math score? By how
      much?
32. The cost of attendance at Coastal Carolina University, a public school, is $24,599. The 75th percentile of ACT
      English scores at Coastal Carolina is 24. Is the cost higher or lower than we would expect based on the ACT
      English score? By how much?
33. Find the equation of the regression line that we would use to predict the 75th percentile ACT English score from
      the 75th percentile ACT math score at public institutions.
34. Find the equation of the regression line that we would use to predict cost of attendance at public schools using
      the 75th percentile ACT math score.
35. Does the University of Hawai'i at Hilo have a higher or lower 75th percentile verbal SAT score (590) than we'd
      expect based on its 75th percentile math SAT score (580)? By how much?
36. Find the slope of the regression line we would use to estimate cost from the 75th percentile SAT math scores at
      public institutions. Write a sentence to interpret that slope.
37. Find the slope of the regression line we would use to estimate cost from the 75th percentile SAT math scores at
      private institutions. Write a sentence to interpret that slope.
38. Look at the scatter plots that show the relationship between cost and the 75th percentiles of the various test
      scores at private institutions. Which (if any) of the four exhibit a pattern that rules out analysis using linear
      regression?
39. Look at the scatter plots that show the relationship between cost and the 75th percentiles of the various test
      scores at public institutions. Which (if any) of the four exhibit a pattern that rules out analysis using linear
      regression?
40. Looking at public institutions, rank the four test scores from highest to lowest in terms of the strength of their
      relationships to cost.
934 8 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

8.1 Gathering and Organizing Data

  · sample
  · units
  · data
  · population
  · simple random sample
  · systematic random sample
  · stratified sample
  · cluster sample
  · quantitative data
  · categorical data
  · categorical frequency Distribution
  · binned frequency distribution

8.2 Visualizing Data

  · proportion
  · bar chart
  · pie chart
  · stem-and-leaf plot
  · distribution (of quantitative data)
  · histogram
  · bar chart for labeled data

8.3 Mean, Median and Mode

  · mode
  · bimodal
  · median
  · mean

8.4 Range and Standard Deviation

  · range
  · standard deviation

8.5 Percentiles

  · percentile
  · quartile
  · quintile
  · quantile

8.6 The Normal Distribution

  · normal distribution
  · 68-95-99.7 Rule
  · standardized score ( -score)

8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

  · response variable (dependent variable)
  · explanatory variable (independent variable)
  · scatter plot
  · positive linear relationship
  · negative linear relationship
  · correlation coefficient
  · regression line (least-squares line, line of best fit)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      8 · Chapter Summary 935

Key Concepts

8.1 Gathering and Organizing Data

  · Categorical data places units into groups (categories), while quantitative data is a numerical measure of a property
      of a unit.

  · The sampling method for a study depends on the way that randomization is used to select units for the sample.
  · Frequency distributions help to summarize data by counting the number of units that fall into a particular category

      or range of quantitative values.

8.2 Visualizing Data

  · Categorical data can be visualized using pie charts or bar charts; quantitative data can be visualized using stem-and-
      leaf plots or histograms.

  · Areas in pie charts and bar charts represent proportions of the data falling into a particular category, while areas in
      histograms represent proportions of the data that fall into a given range of data values (or "bins"). Stem-and-leaf
      plots are visual representations of entire datasets.

  · By manipulating the axes, changing widths of bars, or making bad choices for bins, we can create data
      visualizations that misrepresent the distribution of data.

8.3 Mean, Median and Mode

  · The mode of a dataset is the value that appears the most frequently. The median is a value that is greater than or
      equal to no more than 50% of the data and less than or equal to no more than 50% of the data. The mean is the
      sum of all the data values, divided by the number of units in the dataset.

  · The median of a dataset is not affected by outliers, but the mean will be biased toward outliers. This distinction
      might affect which measure of centrality is used to summarize a dataset.

8.4 Range and Standard Deviation

  · The range of a dataset is the difference between its largest and smallest values. The standard deviation is
      approximately the mean difference (in absolute value) that individual units fall from the mean of the dataset.

8.5 Percentiles

  · The percentile rank of a data value is the percentage of all values in the dataset that are less than or equal to the
      given value.

8.6 The Normal Distribution

  · Normally distributed data follow a bell-shaped, symmetrical distribution.
  · The mean of normally distributed data falls at the peak of the distribution. The standard deviation of normally-

      distributed data is the distance from the peak to either of the inflection points.
  · Data that are normally distributed follow the 68-95-99.7 Rule, which says that approximately 68% of the data fall

      within one standard deviation of the mean, 95% fall within two standard deviations, and 99.7% fall within three
      standard deviations.
  · The -score for a data value is the number of standard deviations that value falls above (or below, if the -score is
      negative) the mean.
  · We can use the normal distribution to estimate percentiles.

8.7 Applications of the Normal Distribution

  · We can use -scores to compare data values from different datasets.

8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

  · If one variable affects the value of another variable, we say the first is an explanatory variable and the second is a
      response variable.

  · Scatter plots place a point in the -plane for each unit in the dataset. The -value is the value of the explanatory
      variable, and the -value is the value of the response variable.

  · The correlation coefficient gives us information about the strength and direction of the relationship between two
      variables. If is positive, the relationship is positive: an increase in the value of the explanatory variable tends to
      correspond to an increase in the value of the response variable. If is negative, the relationship is negative: an
      increase in the value of the explanatory variable tends to correspond to a decrease in the value of the response
      variable. Values of that are close to 0 indicate weak relationships, while values close to -1 or indicate strong
936 8 · Chapter Summary

    relationships.
· The regression line for a relationship between two variables is the line that best represents the data. It can be used

    to predict values of the response variable for a given value of the explanatory variable.

Videos

8.2 Visualizing Data

· Make a Simple Bar Graph in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Bar-Graphs)
· Create Pie Charts Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Pie-Charts)
· Make a Histogram Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Histograms)
· How to Spot a Misleading Graph (https://openstax.org/r/Misleading-Graphs)

8.3 Mean, Median and Mode

· Compute Measures of Centrality Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Computing-Measures-of-Centrality)

8.4 Range and Standard Deviation

· Find the Minimum and Maximum Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Finding-Minimum-and-Maximum)
· Find the Standard Deviation Using Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Finding-Standard-Deviation)

8.5 Percentiles

· Using RANK, PERCENTRANK, and PERCENTILE in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Using-RANK-PERCENTRANK-
    and-PERCENTILE)

8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

· Making Scatter Plots in Google Sheets (https://openstax.org/r/Scatter-Plots)

Formula Review

8.3 Mean, Median and Mode

Suppose we have a set of data with values, ordered from smallest to largest. If  is odd, then the median is the data
value at position . If is even, then we find the values at positions and          . If those values are named and ,
then the median is defined to be .

8.4 Range and Standard Deviation

Here, s is the standard deviation, represents each data value, is the mean of the data values, is the number of data
values, and the capital sigma ( ) indicates that we take a sum.

8.6 The Normal Distribution

If is a member of a normally distributed dataset with mean and standard deviation , then the standardized score for
  is

If you know a -score but not the original data value , you can find it by solving the previous equation for :

8.8 Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines

If a line has slope and passes through a point  , then the point-slope form of the equation of the line is:

Suppose and are explanatory and response datasets that have a linear relationship. If their means are and
respectively, their standard deviations are and respectively, and their correlation coefficient is , then the equation
of the regression line is:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      8 · Chapter Summary 937

Projects

 1. Browse through some news websites to find five stories that report on data and include data visualizations. Can you
      tell from the report how the data were collected? Was randomization used? Are the visualizations appropriate for
      the data? Are the visualizations presented in a way that might bias the reader?

 2. We discussed three measures of centrality in this chapter: the mode, the median, and the mean. In a broader
      context, the mean as we discussed it is more properly called the arithmetic mean, to distinguish it from other types
      of means. Examples of these include the geometric mean, harmonic mean, truncated mean, and weighted mean.
      How are these computed? How do they compare to the arithmetic mean? In what situations would each of these be
      preferred to the arithmetic mean?

 3. Simpson's Paradox is a statistical phenomenon that can sometimes appear when we observe a relationship within
      several subgroups of a population, but when the data for all thegroups are analyzed all together, the opposite
      relationship appears. Find some examples of Simpson's Paradox in real-world situations, and write a paragraph or
      two that would explain the concept to someone who had never studied statistics before.
938 8 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Gathering and Organizing Data
Decide whether randomization is being used in the selection of these samples. If it is, identify the type of random
sample (simple, systematic, cluster, or stratified).

     1. College students want to gauge interest in a new club they're thinking about starting. They choose three
          residence halls at random and slide a survey form under the door to every room.

     2. The managers of a campus dining hall want feedback on a new dish that is being served, so they ask the first 10
          people who choose that dish what they think of it.

     3. The administration of a large university system with five campuses wants to administer a survey to students in
          the system. The administration chooses 50 students at random from each campus; the 250 students selected
          form thesample.

 4. A sample of college students were asked how many of their meals were provided by a campus dining hall on the
      previous day. Here are the results:

                                                                   0103233

                                                                   2202110

                                                                   0120301

                                                                   3230130

Create a frequency distribution for these data.

Visualizing Data
 5. Create a bar chart to visualize the data in question 4.

6. Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) on every school that fielded an NCAA
    Division I men's basketball team in the 2018-2019 season, to create a histogram of the number of free throws
    made by each team (FT).

Mean, Median and Mode
 7. The data below show the top ten scorers (by points per game) in the National Basketball Association for the
      2018-2019 season. Find the mode, median, and mean age of these players without technology.

                                 Rank                        Player       Age

                                 1               James Harden             29

                                 2               Paul George              28

                                 3 Giannis Antetokounmpo 24

                                 4                           Joel Embiid  24

                                 5               Stephen Curry            30

                                 6               Devin Booker             22

                                 7               Kawhi Leonard            27

                                 Table 8.13 (source: https://www.basketball-
                                 reference.com/leagues/
                                 NBA_2019_leaders.html)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             8 · Chapter Summary 939

Rank  Player          Age

8     Kevin Durant    30

9     Damian Lillard  28

10    Bradley Beal    25

Table 8.13 (source: https://www.basketball-
reference.com/leagues/
NBA_2019_leaders.html)

 8. Using the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), find the mean, median, and mode of the
      number of free throws made by each team (FT).

Range and Standard Deviation
 9. Using the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), find the range and standard deviation of
      the number of free throws made by each team (FT).

Percentiles
Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), to answer the following:

    10. What number of free throws (FT) is at the 40th percentile?
    11. At what percentile is Syracuse University, which made 480 free throws?

The Normal Distribution
12. Identify the means and standard deviations of these normal distributions:

Answer the following about data that are distributed normally with mean 200 and standard deviation 20:

    13. What proportion of the data are between 160 and 240?
    14. What's the standardized score of the data value 235?
    15. At what percentile would the data value 187 fall?
    16. What data value would be at the 90th percentile?

Applications of the Normal Distribution
Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer the following:

    17. What is the standardized score for Purdue Universitiy's number of free throws (FT = 461)?
    18. At what percentile would we estimate Purdue's value of FT to fall, using the normal distribution?
    19. At what percentile does Purdue's value of FT actually fall?

Scatter Plots, Correlation, and Regression Lines
For each of the following scatter plots, decide whether linear regression would be appropriate. If it is, classify the
strength and direction of the relationship.
940 8 · Chapter Summary

    20.

    21.

    22.
Use the data in "NBA2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer the following:

    23. What is the correlation coefficient between the number of field goals attempted per game (FGA) and number of
          points scored per game (PTS)?

    24. What is the equation of the regression line we would use to predict PTS from FGA?
    25. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.
    26. Predict the number of points per game for a player who attempts 16 field goals per game.
    27. Danilo Gallinari attempted 13 field goals per game, and averaged 19.8 points per game. Did he score more or

          fewer points per game than expected? By how much?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               8 · Chapter Summary 941

Chapter Test

Decide whether randomization is being used in the selection of these samples. If it is, identify the type of random
sample (simple, systematic, cluster, or stratified).

     1. A vinyl record dealer is trying to price a large collection she's thinking of buying. She looks at every tenth record
          on the shelf and notes the value.

     2. A court clerk is charged with identifying one hundred people for a jury pool for upcoming legal hearings. He
          has an alphabetized list of registered voters in his jurisdiction, so he uses a random number generator to pick
          one hundred names from the list.

     3. A state agricultural officer is worried about the spread of a parasitic disease among cattle. He chooses 30 cattle
          farms at random and tests each cow on those 30 farms for the disease.

 4. A sample of donations to a blood bank contained these blood types:

                                                            A O A O A A AB O

                                                            O A AB A O O A A

                                                            OO B OBO O O

                                                            B A O AOO A A

Create a frequency distribution for these data.

5. Create a bar chart without technology to visualize the data in question 4.

6. Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to create a histogram of the number of
    total rebounds by each team (TRB).

7. The table below shows the number of players on the rosters of each English Premier League team. Find the mode,
    median, and mean without technology.

Team                    Active Players           Team                          Active Players

Manchester United F.C.  27                       Newcastle United F.C.         28

Manchester City F.C.    24                       Aston Villa F.C.              24

Chelsea F.C.            25                       Fulham F.C.                   27

Arsenal F.C.            28                       Southampton F.C.              24

Tottenham Hotspur F.C.  27                       Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.  22

Liverpool F.C.          30                       Brighton & Hove Albion        31

Crystal Palace          29                       Burnley F.C.                  22

Everton F.C.            23                       West Bromwich Albion F.C.     26

Leicester City          25                       Leeds United F.C.             25

West Ham United F.C.    24                       Sheffield United F.C.         27

Table 8.14 (source: https://fbref.com/en/comps/9/Premier-League-
Stats#all_stats_squads_standard)
942 8 · Chapter Summary

 8. Using the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), find the mean, median, and mode of the
      total number of rebounds made by each team (TRB).

 9. Using the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets), find the range and standard deviation of
      the total number of rebounds made by each team (TRB).

Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer the following:
    10. What number of total rebounds (TRB) is at the 3rd quartile?
    11. At what percentile is the University of Evansville, which had 1095 total rebounds?

Answer the following about data that are distributed normally with mean 50 and standard deviation 5:
    12. What proportion of the data are between 35 and 65?
    13. What's the standardized score of the data value 37?
    14. At what percentile would the data value 58 fall?
    15. What data value would be at the 40th percentile?

Use the data in "MBB2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer the following:
    16. What is the standardized score for the number of total rebounds (TRB) recorded by Mississippi State University
          (TRB = 1215)?
    17. At what percentile would we estimate Mississippi State's TRB value fall, using the normal distribution?
    18. At what percentile does Mississippi State's TRB value actually fall?

Use the data in "NBA2019" (https://openstax.org/r/Chapter8_Data-Sets) to answer the following:
    19. What is the correlation coefficient between the number of two-point field goals made per game (2P) and
          number of points scored per game (PTS)?
    20. What is the equation of the regression line we would use to predict PTS from 2P?
    21. Write a sentence to interpret the slope of the regression line.
    22. Predict the number of points per game for a player who makes 6 two-point field goals per game.
    23. J.J. Redick made 2.8 field goals per game, and averaged 18.1 points per game. Did he score more or fewer
          points per game than expected? By how much?

Access for free at openstax.org
                       9 · Introduction 943

9  METRIC MEASUREMENT

Figure 9.1 A road sign in Finland, a country that uses the metric system. (credit: modification of work by Anna Järvenpää/
Flickr, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  9.1 The Metric System
  9.2 Measuring Area
  9.3 Measuring Volume
  9.4 Measuring Weight
  9.5 Measuring Temperature

      Introduction

You are planning a road trip from your home state to the sunny beaches of Mexico and need to prepare a budget. While
in the United States, gasoline is sold in gallons and distances are measured in miles, but in almost any other country you
will find that gasoline is sold in liters and distance is measured in kilometers.

Whether you're traveling, baking, watching an international sporting event, working with machine tools, or using
scientific equipment, it's important to understand the metric system, or the International System of Units (SI). The
metric system is a decimal measuring system that uses meters, liters, and grams to quantify length, capacity, and mass.
It is used in all but three countries in the world, including the United States.
944 9 · Metric Measurement

    9.1 The Metric System

       Figure 9.2 A scale that measures weight in both metric and customary units. (credit: "Weighing the homemade cheddar"
       by Ruth Hartnup/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Identify units of measurement in the metric system and their uses.
        2. Order the six common prefixes of the metric system.
        3. Convert between like unit values.
       Even if you don't travel outside of the United States, many specialty grocery stores utilize the metric system. For
       example, if you want to make authentic tamales you might visit the nearest Hispanic grocery store. While shopping, you
       discover that there are two brands of masa for the same price, but one bag is marked 1,200 g and the other 1 kg. Which
       one is the better deal? Understanding the metric system allows you to understand that 1,200 grams is equivalent to 1.2
       kg, so the 1,200 g bag is the better deal.

     Units of Measurement in the Metric System

       Units of measurement provide common standards so that regardless of where or when an object or substance is
       measured, the results are consistent. When measuring distance, the units of measure might be feet, meters, or miles.
       Weight might be expressed in terms of pounds or grams. Volume or capacity might be measured in gallons, or liters.
       Understanding how metric units of measure relate to each other is essential to understanding the metric system:

         · The metric unit for distance is the meter (m). A person's height might be written as 1.8 meters (1.8 m). A meter
             slightly longer than a yard (3 feet), while a centimeter is slightly less than half an inch.

         · The metric unit for area is the square meter (m2). The area of a professional soccer field is 7,140 square meters
             (7,140 m2).

         · The metric base unit for volume is the cubic meter (m3). However, the liter (L), which is a metric unit of capacity, is
             used to describe the volume of liquids. Soda is often sold in 2-liter (2 L) bottles.

         · The gram (g) is a metric unit of mass but is commonly used to express weight. The weight of a paper clip is
             approximately 1 gram (1 g).

         · The metric unit for temperature is degrees Celsius (°C). The temperature on a warm summer day might be 24 °C.
       While the U.S. Customary System of Measurement uses ounces and pounds to distinguish between weight units of
       different sizes, in the metric system a base unit is combined with a prefix, such as kilo- in kilogram, to identify the
       relationship between smaller or larger units.

             When using abbreviations to represent metric measures, always separate the quantity and the units with a space,
             with no spaces between the letters or symbols in the units. For example, 7 millimeters is written as 7 mm, not 7mm.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            9.1 · The Metric System 945

          TECH CHECK
  It is important to be able to convert between the U.S. Customar System of Measurement and the metric system.
  However, in this chapter we'll focus on converting units within the metric system. Why? Typing "200 centimeters in
  inches" into any browser search bar will instantly convert those measures for you (Figure 9.3). You'll have an
  opportunity in the Projects to work between measurement systems.

                                                          Figure 9.3 (credit: Screenshot/Google)
  Let's be honest. Most of us use computers or smartphones to perform many of the calculations and conversions we
  were taught in math class. But there is value in understanding the metric system since it exists all around us, and
  most importantly, knowing how the different metric units relate to each other allows you to compare prices, find the
  right tool in a workshop, or acclimate when in another country. No matter the circumstance, you cannot avoid the
  metric system.

  EXAMPLE 9.1
Determining the Correct Base Unit
Which base unit would be used to express the following?
 1. amount of water in a swimming pool
 2. length of an electrical wire
 3. weight of one serving of peanuts

     Solution
 1. Liquid volume is generally expressed in units of liters (L).
 2. Length is measured in units of meters (m).
 3. Weight is commonly expressed in units of grams (g).

        YOUR TURN 9.1
  Determine the correct base measurement for each of the following.

      1. weight of a laptop
      2. width of a table
      3. amount of soda in a pitcher

While there are other base units in the metric system, our discussions in this chapter will be limited to units used to
express length, area, volume, weight, and temperature.
946 9 · Metric Measurement

Metric Prefixes

Unlike the U.S. Customary System of Measurement in which 12 inches is equal to 1 foot and 3 feet are equal to 1 yard,

the metric system is structured so that the units within the system get larger or smaller by a power of 10. For example, a

centimeter is  , or 100 times smaller than a meter, while the kilometer is 103, or 1,000 times larger than a meter.

The metric system combines base units and unit prefixes reasonable to the size of a measured object or substance. The
most used prefixes are shown in Table 9.1. An easy way to remember the order of the prefixes, from largest to smallest,
is the mnemonic King Henry Died From Drinking Chocolate Milk.

                            Prefix        kilo- hecto- deca- base unit deci- cent- milli-

                            Abbreviation

                            Magnitude

               Table 9.1 Metric Prefixes

  EXAMPLE 9.2

Ordering the Magnitude of Units
Order the measures from smallest unit to largest unit.

centimeter, millimeter, decimeter

     Solution
Looking at the metric prefixes, we can see that the prefix order from smallest unit to largest unit is milli-, centi-, deci-, so
the order of the units from smallest to largest is millimeter, centimeter, decimeter.

        YOUR TURN 9.2

  1. Order the measures from largest unit to smallest unit.
      hectogram, decagram, kilogram

  EXAMPLE 9.3

Determining Reasonable Values for Length
What is a reasonable value for the length of a person's thumb: 5 meters, 5 centimeters, or 5 millimeters?

     Solution
Given that a meter is slightly longer than a yard, 5 meters is not a reasonable value for the length of a person's thumb.
Since a millimeter is 10 times smaller than a centimeter, which is approximately inch, 5 millimeters is not a reasonable
estimate for the length of a person's thumb. The correct answer is 5 centimeters.

        YOUR TURN 9.3

  1. What is a reasonable estimate for the length of a hallway: 2.5 kilometers, 2.5 meters, or 2.5 centimeters?

Converting Metric Units of Measure

Imagine you order a textbook online and the shipping detail indicates the weight of the book is 1 kg. By attaching the
letter "k" to the base unit of gram (g), the unit used to express the measure is or 1,000 times greater than a gram.
One kilogram is equivalent to 1,000 grams.
The tip of a highlighter measures approximately 1 cm. The letter "c" attached to the base unit of meter (m) means the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     9.1 · The Metric System 947

unit used to express the measure is  of a meter. One meter is equivalent to 100 centimeters.

A conversion factor is used to convert from smaller metric units to bigger metric units and vice versa. It is a number
that when used with multiplication or division converts from one metric unit to another, both having the same base unit.
In the metric system, these conversion factors are directly related to the powers of 10. The most common used
conversion factors are shown in Figure 9.4.

                         Figure 9.4 Common Metric Conversion Factors for (a) Meters, (b) Liters, and (c) Grams
  EXAMPLE 9.4
Converting Metric Distances Using Multiplication
The firehouse is 13.45 km from the library. How many meters is it from the firehouse to the library?

     Solution
When converting from a larger unit to a smaller unit, use multiplication. The conversion factor from kilometer to the
base unit of meters is 1,000.

So, the firehouse is 13,450 meters away from the firehouse.

        YOUR TURN 9.4

  1. The record for the men's high jump is 2.45 m. What is the record when expressed in centimeters?

  EXAMPLE 9.5
Converting Metric Capacity Using Division
How many liters is 3,565 milliliters?

     Solution
When converting from a smaller unit to a larger unit, use division. The conversion factor from milliliter to the base unit of
liters is 1,000.

So, 3,565 milliliters is 3.565 liters.
948 9 · Metric Measurement

               YOUR TURN 9.5
         1. A bottle of cleaning solution measures 7.6 liters. How many decaliters is that?

         EXAMPLE 9.6
       Converting Metric Units of Mass to Solve Problems
       Caroline and Aiyana are working on a chemistry experiment together and must perform calculations using
       measurements taken during the experiment. Due to miscommunication, Caroline took measurements in centigrams and
       Aiyana used milligrams. Convert Caroline's measurement of 125 centigrams to milligrams.

            Solution
       When converting from a larger unit to a smaller unit, use multiplication. The conversion factor from centigrams to the
       milligrams is 10.

       So, the 125 centigrams are 1,250 milligrams.

               YOUR TURN 9.6
         1. Convert Aiyana's measurement of 1,457 mg to centigrams.

         EXAMPLE 9.7
       Converting Metric Units of Volume to Solve Problems
       A bottle contains 500 mL of juice. If the juice is packaged in 24-bottle cases, how many liters of juice does the case
       contain?

            Solution
       Step 1: Multiply the amount of juice in each bottle by the number of bottles.

       Step 2: Divide by 1,000 to convert from milliliters to liters.

       So, there are 12 liters of juice in each case.

               YOUR TURN 9.7
         1. A hospital orders 250 doses of liquid amoxicillin. Each dose is 5 mL. How many liters of amoxicillin did the

              hospital order?

                        PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
         Valerie Antoine
         In the 1970s, people were told that they must learn the metric system because the United States was soon going to

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            9.1 · The Metric System 949

  convert to using metric measurements. Children and young adults probably watched educational cartoons about the
  metric system on Saturday mornings.
  In 1975, President Gerald Ford signed the Metric Conversion Act and created a board of 17 people commissioned to
  coordinate the voluntary switch to the metric system in the United States. Among those 17 people was Valerie
  Antoine, an engineer who made it her life's work to push for this change. Despite President Ronald Reagan dissolving
  the board in 1982, effectively killing the move to the metric system at the time, Antoine continued the movement out
  of her own home as the executive director of the U.S. Metric Association. Reagan's decision followed intensive
  lobbying by American businesses whose factories used machinery designed to use customary measurements by
  workers trained in customary measurements. There was also intense public pressure from American citizens who
  didn't want to go through the time consuming and expensive process of changing the country's entire infrastructure.
  Fueled by a Congressional mandate in 1992 that required all federal agencies make the switch to the metric system,
  Antoine never gave up hope that the metric system would trickle down from the government and find its way into
  American schools, homes, and everyday life.

       VIDEO
      U.S. Office of Education: Metric Education (https://openstax.org/r/U.S._Office_Education)

  EXAMPLE 9.8
Converting Grams to Solve Problems
The nutrition label on a jar of spaghetti sauce indicates that one serving contains 410 mg of sodium. You have poured
two servings over your favorite pasta before recalling your doctor's advice about keeping your sodium consumption
below 1 g per meal. Have you followed your doctor's recommendation?

     Solution
Step 1: Multiply the number of servings by the amount of sodium in each serving.

Step 2: Divide by 1,000 to convert from milligrams to grams.

You have followed doctor's recommendation because 0.82 g is less than 1 gram.

        YOUR TURN 9.8

  1. The FDA recommends that you consume less than 0.5 g of caffeine daily. A cup of coffee contains 95 mg of
      caffeine and a can of soda contains 54 mg. If you drink 2 cups of coffee and 3 cans of soda, have you kept your
      day's caffeine consumption to the FDA recommendation? Explain.

  EXAMPLE 9.9
Comparing Different Units
A student carefully measured 0.52 cg of copper for a science experiment, but their lab partner said they need 6 mg of
copper total. How many more centigrams of copper does the student need to add?

     Solution
Step 1: Convert these two measurements into a common unit. Since the question asks for the number of centigrams,
950 9 · Metric Measurement

convert 6 mg to centigrams, which is 0.6 cg.  which is 0.08 cg. This means the student must add another 0.08 cg

Step 2: Find the difference by subtracting
of copper.

        YOUR TURN 9.9

  1. Kyrie boasted he jumped out of an airplane at an altitude of 3,810 meters on his latest skydive trip. His friend
      said they beat Kyrie because their jump was at an altitude of 3.2 km. Whose skydive was at a greater altitude?

        WHO KNEW?

  The United States and the Metric System
  Did you know that the metric system pervades daily life in the United States already? While Americans still may
  purchase gallons of milk and measure house sizes in square feet, there are many instances of the metric system.
  Photographers buy 35 mm film and use 50 mm lenses. When you have a headache, you might take 600 mg of
  ibuprofen. And if you are eating a low-carb diet you probably restrict your carb intake to fewer than 20 g of carbs
  daily. Did you know even the dollar is metric? In the video, Neil DeGrasse Tyson and comedian co-host Chuck Nice
  provide an amusing perspective on the metric system.
  The International System of Units (SI) is the current international standard metric system and is the most widely used
  system around the world. In most English-speaking countries SI units such as meter, liter, and metric ton are spelled
  metre, litre, and tonne.

       VIDEO
      Neil deGrasse Tyson Explains the Metric System (https://openstax.org/r/Tyson_Explains_Metric_System)

  WORK IT OUT

  Get to Know the Metric System
  Just how much is the metric system a part of your life now? Probably more than you think. For the next 24 hours, take
  notice as you move through your daily activities. When you are shopping, are the package sizes provided in metric
  units? Change the weather app on your phone to display the temperature in degrees Celsius. Are you able to tell what
  kind of day it will be now? While the United States is not officially using the metric system, you will still find the metric
  system all around you.

Check Your Understanding

 1. Which metric base unit would be used to measure the height of a door?
 2. Which metric base unit would be used to measure your weight?
 3. Which is greater: 12 hectoliters or 12 centiliters?
 4. Convert 1,520 cm to meters (m).
 5. Convert 1.34 km to decameters (dam).
 6. Convert 12,700 cg to hectograms (hg).
 7. Convert 750 km to millimeters (mm).
 8. Which is the larger measurement: 0.04 dam or 40 cm?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            9.1 · The Metric System 951

        SECTION 9.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the base unit of the metric system described. Choose from liter, gram, or meter.
     1. amount of soda in a bottle
     2. weight of a book you are mailing
     3. amount of gasoline needed to fill a car's tank
     4. height of a computer desk
     5. weight of a dog at the veterinarian's office
     6. dimensions of the newest HD TV
     7. distance a student athlete ran on the treadmill during their latest workout
     8. amount of water to add to bleach for mopping floors

 9. Write the order of the metric prefixes from greatest to least.

For the following exercises, choose the smaller of the two units.
    10. decagrams or decigrams
    11. centimeters or millimeters
    12. liters or kiloliters
    13. decigrams or centigrams
    14. decameters or hectometers
    15. milliliters or deciliters

16. Convert 158 hectometers to meters (m).

17. Convert 12.3 cg to grams (g).

18. Convert 160 dam to kilometer (km).

19. You purchase 10 kg of candy. You divide the candy into 25 bags. How many grams of candy are in each bag?

20. An outdoor track is 400 m long. If you run 10 laps around the track, how many kilometers have you run?

21. An aspirin tablet is 650 mg. If you take 2 aspirin twice in one day, how many grams of aspirin have you taken?

22. A juice box contains 450 mL of juice. If there are 6 juice boxes in a package, how many liters of juice are in the
      package?

23. Carlos consumed 4 cans of his favorite energy drink. If each can contains 111 mg of caffeine, how many grams of
      caffeine did he consume?

24. Celeste ran a total distance of 72,548 m in 1 week while training for a 5K fun run. How many kilometers did she
      run?

25. During week one of their diet, Dakota consumed 413 g of carbs. After speaking to their doctor, they only consumed
      210 g of carbs the second week. How many fewer milligrams of carbs did they consume the second week?

26. Kaylea gained 2.3 kg of muscle weight in 9 months of working out. Cho gained 250 decagrams of muscle during
      that same time. Who gained more muscle weight? How many grams more?
952 9 · Metric Measurement

    9.2 Measuring Area

       Figure 9.5 A painter uses an extension roller to paint a wall. (credit: "Paint Rollers are effective" by WILLPOWER STUDIOS/
       Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Identify reasonable values for area applications.
        2. Convert units of measures of area.
        3. Solve application problems involving area.
       Area is the size of a surface. It could be a piece of land, a rug, a wall, or any other two-dimensional surface with
       attributes that can be measured in the metric unit for distance-meters. Determining the area of a surface is important to
       many everyday activities. For example, when purchasing paint, you'll need to know how many square units of surface
       area need to be painted to determine how much paint to buy.
       Square units indicate that two measures in the same units have been multiplied together. For example, to find the area
       of a rectangle, multiply the length units and the width units to determine the area in square units.
       Note that to accurately calculate area, each of the measures being multiplied must be of the same units. For example, to
       find an area in square centimeters, both length measures (length and width) must be in centimeters.
         FORMULA
         The formula used to determine area depends on the shape of that surface. Here we will limit our discussions to the
         area of rectangular-shaped objects like the one in Figure 9.6. Given this limitation, the basic formula for area is:

                                                  Figure 9.6 Rectangle with Length and Width Labeled

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    9.2 · Measuring Area 953

Reasonable Values for Area

Because area is determined by multiplying two lengths, the magnitude of difference between different square units is

exponential. In other words, while a meter is 100 times greater in length than a centimeter, a square meter  is

              times greater in area than a square centimeter  . The relationships between benchmark

metric area units are shown in the following table.

              Units                    Relationship           Conversion Rate

              to

              to

              to

An essential understanding of metric area is to identify reasonable values for area. When testing for reasonableness you
should assess both the unit and the unit value. Only by examining both can you determine whether the given area is
reasonable for the situation.

EXAMPLE 9.10

Determining Reasonable Units for Area

Which unit of measure is most reasonable to describe the area of a sheet of paper: , , or        ?

     Solution
In the U.S. Customary System of Measurement, the length and width of paper is usually measured in inches. In the
metric system centimeters are used for measures usually expressed in inches. Thus, the most reasonable unit of
measure to describe the area of a sheet of paper is square centimeters. Square kilometers is too large a unit and square
millimeters is too small a unit.

      YOUR TURN 9.10
1. Which unit of measure is most reasonable to describe the area of a forest: km2, cm2, or mm2?

EXAMPLE 9.11

Determining Reasonable Values for Area
You want to paint your bedroom walls. Which represents a reasonable value for the area of the walls: 100 cm2, 100 m2,
or 100 km2?

     Solution                                              which is much too small for the walls of a bedroom. An
                                                       which is much too large for the walls of a bedroom. So, a
An area of 100 cm2 is equivalent to a surface of
area of 100 km2 is equivalent to a surface of
reasonable value for the area of the walls is 100 m2.
954 9 · Metric Measurement

               YOUR TURN 9.11
         1. Which represents a reasonable value for the area of the top of a kitchen table: 1,800 mm2, 1,800 cm2, or

                           ?

         EXAMPLE 9.12
       Explaining Reasonable Values for Area
       A landscaper is hired to resod a school's football field. After measuring the length and width of the field they determine
       that the area of the football field is 5,350 km2. Does their calculation make sense? Explain your answer.

            Solution
       No, kilometers are used to determine longer distances, such as the distance between two points when driving. A football
       field is less than 1 kilometer long, so a more reasonable unit of value would be m2. An area of 5,350 km2 can be
       calculated using the dimensions 53.5 by 100, which are reasonable dimensions for the length and width of a football
       field. So, a more reasonable value for the area of the football field is 5,350 m2.

               YOUR TURN 9.12
         1. A crafter uses four letter-size sheets of paper to create a paper mosaic in the shape of a square. They decide they

              want to frame the paper mosaic, so they measure and determine that the area of the paper mosaic is
                                 . Does their calculation make sense? Explain your answer.

     Converting Units of Measures for Area

       Just like converting units of measure for distance, you can convert units of measure for area. However, the conversion
       factor, or the number used to multiply or divide to convert from one area unit to another, is not the same as the
       conversion factor for metric distance units. Recall that the conversion factor for area is exponentially relative to the
       conversion factor for distance. The most frequently used conversion factors are shown in Figure 9.7.

                                                 Figure 9.7 Common Conversion Factors for Metric Area Units
              VIDEO
             Converting Metric Units of Area (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_Units_of_Area)

         EXAMPLE 9.13
       Converting Units of Measure for Area Using Division
       A plot of land has an area of 237,500,000 m2. What is the area in square kilometers?

            Solution
       Use division to convert from a smaller metric area unit to a larger metric area unit. To convert from m2 to km2, divide the
       value of the area by 1,000,000.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 9.2 · Measuring Area 955

The plot of land has an area of 237.5 km2.

        YOUR TURN 9.13
  1. A roll of butcher paper has an area of 1,532,900 cm2. What is the area of the butcher paper in square meters?

  EXAMPLE 9.14
Converting Units of Measure for Area Using Multiplication
A plot of land has an area of 0.004046 km2. What is the area of the land in square meters?

     Solution
Use multiplication to convert from a larger metric area unit to a smaller metric area unit. To convert from km2 to m2,
multiply the value of the area by 1,000,000.

The plot of land has an area of 4,046 m2.

        YOUR TURN 9.14
  1. A bolt of fabric has an area of 136.5 m2. What is the area of the bolt of fabric in square centimeters?

  EXAMPLE 9.15
Determining Area by Converting Units of Measure for Length First
A computer chip measures 10 mm by 15 mm. How many square centimeters is the computer chip?

     Solution
Step 1: Convert the measures of the computer chip into centimeters

Step 2: Use the area formula to determine the area of the chip.

The computer chip has an area of  .

        YOUR TURN 9.15

  1. A piece of fabric measures 100 cm by 106 cm. What is the area of the fabric in square meters?

Solving Application Problems Involving Area

While it may seem that solving area problems is as simple as multiplying two numbers, often determining area requires
more complex calculations. For example, when measuring the area of surfaces, you may need to account for portions of
the surface that are not relevant to your calculation.
956 9 · Metric Measurement

         EXAMPLE 9.16

       Solving for the Area of Complex Surfaces
       One side of a commercial building is 12 meters long by 9 meters high. There is a rolling door on this side of the building
       that is 4 meters wide by 3 meters high. You want to refinish the side of the building, but not the door, with aluminum
       siding. How many square meters of aluminum siding are required to cover this side of the building?

            Solution
       Step 1: Determine the area of the side of the building.

Step 2: Determine the area of the door.

Step 3: Subtract the area of the door from the area of the side of the building.

So, you need to purchase  of aluminum siding.

        YOUR TURN 9.16

  1. You want to cover a garden with topsoil. The garden is 5 meters by 8 meters. There is a path in the middle of the
      garden that is 8 meters long and 0.75 meters wide. What is the area of the garden you need to cover with
      topsoil?

When calculating area, you must ensure that both distance measurements are expressed in terms of the same distance
units. Sometimes you must convert one measurement before using the area formula.

  EXAMPLE 9.17

Solving for Area with Distance Measurements of Different Units
A national park has a land area in the shape of a rectangle. The park measures 2.2 kilometers long by 1,250 meters wide.
What is the area of the park in square kilometers?

     Solution
Step 1: Use a conversion fraction to convert the information given in meters to kilometers.

Step 2: Multiply to find the area.

The park has an area of 2.75 km2.
        YOUR TURN 9.17

  1. An Olympic pool measures 50 meters by 2,500 centimeters. What is the surface area of the pool in square

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                9.2 · Measuring Area 957

      meters?

When calculating area, you may need to use multiple steps, such as converting units and subtracting areas that are not
relevant.

  EXAMPLE 9.18
Solving for Area Using Multiple Steps
A kitchen floor has an area of 15 m2. The floor in the kitchen pantry is 100 cm by 200 cm. You want to tile the kitchen and
pantry floors using the same tile. How many square meters of tile do you need to buy?

     Solution
Step 1: Determine the area of the pantry floor in square centimeters.

Step 2: Divide the area in cm2 by the conversion factor to determine the area in m2 since the other measurement for the
kitchen floor is in m2.

The area of the kitchen pantry floor is 2 m2.
Step 3: Add the two areas of the pantry and the kitchen floors together.

So, you need to buy 17 m2 of tile.

        YOUR TURN 9.18
  1. Your bedroom floor has an area of 25 m2. The living room floor measures 600 cm by 750 cm. How many square

      meters of carpet do you need to buy to carpet the floors in both rooms?

        WHO KNEW?
  The Origin of the Metric System
  The metric system is the official measurement system for every country in the world except the United States, Liberia,
  and Myanmar. But did you know it originated in France during the French Revolution in the late 18th century? At the
  time there were over 250,000 different units of weights and measures in use, often determined by local customs and
  economies. For example, land was often measured in days, referring to the amount of land a person could work in a
  day.

       VIDEO
      Why the Metric System Matters (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System_Matters)

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each area.
     9. bedroom wall: 12 km2, 12 m2, 12 cm2, or 12 mm2
    10. city park: 1,200 km2, 1,200 m2, 1,200 cm2, or 1,200 mm2
958 9 · Metric Measurement

    11. kitchen table: 2.5 km2, 2.5 m2, 2.5 cm2, or 2.5 mm2

For the following exercises, convert the given area to the units shown.
    12. 20,000 cm2 = __________ m2
    13. 5.7 m2 = __________ cm2
    14. 217 cm2 = __________ mm2

15. A wall measures 4 m by 2 m. A doorway in the wall measures 0.5 m by 1.6 m. What is the area of the wall not taken
      by the door in square meters?

        SECTION 9.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each area.
     1. kitchen floor: 16 km2, 16 m2, 16 cm2, or 16 mm2
     2. national Park: 1,000 km2, 1,000 m2, 1,000 cm2, or 1,000 mm2
     3. classroom table: 5 km2, 5 m2, 5 cm2, or 5 mm2
     4. window: 9,000 km2, 9,000 m2, 9,000 cm2, or 9,000 mm2
     5. paper napkin: 10,000 km2, 10,000 m2, 10,000 cm2, or 10,000 mm2
     6. parking lot: 45,000 km2, 45,000 m2, 45,000 cm2, or 45,000 mm2

For the following exercises, convert the given area to the units shown.
     7.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.

For the following exercises, determine the area.

19.  cm,                         m

20.       mm,                        m

21.  km,                             m

22.       cm,                        m

23.  cm,                         mm

24.       m,                     km

25.  cm,                         mm

26.       mm,                        m

27.  km,                             m

28. A notebook is 200 mm by 300 mm. A sticker on the notebook cover measures 2 cm by 2 cm. How many square
      centimeters of the notebook cover is still visible?

29. A bedroom wall is 4 m by 2.5 m. A window on the wall is 1 m by 2 m. How much wallpaper is needed to cover the
      wall?

30. A wall is 5 m by 2.5 m. A picture hangs on the wall that is 600 mm by 300 mm. How much of the wall, in m2, is not

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.2 · Measuring Area 959

      covered by the picture?
31. What is the area of the shape that is shown?

32. A quilter made a design using a small square, a medium square, and a large square. What is the area of the
      shaded parts of the design that is shown?

33. A landscaper makes a plan for a walkway in a backyard, as shown. How many square meters of patio brick does
      the landscaper need to cover the walkway?

34. A painter completed a portrait. The height of the portrait is 36 cm. The width is half as long as the height. What is
      the area of the portrait in square meters?

35. A room has an area of 137.5 m2. The length of the room is 11 m. What is the width of the room?
36. A wall is 4.5 m long by 3 m high. A can of paint will cover an area of 10 m2. How many cans of paint are needed if

      each wall needs 2 coats of paint?

37. A soccer field is 110 meters long and 75 meters wide. If the cost of artificial turf is $30 per square meter, what is
      the cost of covering the soccer field with artificial turf?

38. A window is 150 centimeters wide and 90 centimeters high. If three times the area of the window is needed for
      curtain material, how much curtain material is needed in square meters?

39. A rectangular flower garden is 5.5 meters wide and 8.4 meters long. A path with a width of 1 meter is laid around
      the garden. What is the area of the path?

40. A dining room is 8 meters wide by 6 meters long. Wood flooring costs $12.50 per square meter. How much will it
      costs to install wood flooring in the dining room?
960 9 · Metric Measurement

    9.3 Measuring Volume

       Figure 9.8 Packing cartons sit on a loading dock ready to be filled. (credit: "boxing day" by Erich Ferdinand/Flickr, CC BY
       2.0)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Identify reasonable values for volume applications.
        2. Convert between like units of measures of volume.
        3. Convert between different unit values.
        4. Solve application problems involving volume.
       Volume is a measure of the space contained within or occupied by three-dimensional objects. It could be a box, a pool, a
       storage unit, or any other three-dimensional object with attributes that can be measured in the metric unit for
       distance-meters. For example, when purchasing an SUV, you may want to compare how many cubic units of cargo the
       SUV can hold.
       Cubic units indicate that three measures in the same units have been multiplied together. For example, to find the
       volume of a rectangular prism, you would multiply the length units by the width units and the height units to determine
       the volume in square units:
       Note that to accurately calculate volume, each of the measures being multiplied must be of the same units. For example,
       to find a volume in cubic centimeters, each of the measures must be in centimeters.
         FORMULA
         The formula used to determine volume depends on the shape of the three-dimensional object. Here we will limit our
         discussions to the area to rectangular prisms like the one in Figure 9.9 Given this limitation, the basic formula for
         volume is:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      9.3 · Measuring Volume 961

              Figure 9.9 Rectangular Prism with Height , Length , and Width Labeled.

Reasonable Values for Volume

Because volume is determined by multiplying three lengths, the magnitude of difference between different cubic units is
exponential. In other words, while a meter is 100 times greater in length than a centimeter, a cubic meter, m3, is

                                            times greater in area than a cubic centimeter, cm3. This relationship between benchmark
metric volume units is shown in the following table.

Units         Relationship                                                     Conversion Rate

km3 to m3                                                                      1 km3 = 1,000,000,000 m3

m3 to dm3                                                                      1 m3 = 1,000 dm3

dm3 to cm3                                                                     1 cm3 = 1,000 dm3

cm3 to mm3                                                                     1 cm3 = 1,000 mm3

To have an essential understanding of metric volume, you must be able to identify reasonable values for volume. When
testing for reasonableness you should assess both the unit and the unit value. Only by examining both can you
determine whether the given volume is reasonable for the situation.

EXAMPLE 9.19

Determining Reasonable Values for Volume
A grandparent wants to send cookies to their grandchild away at college. Which represents a reasonable value for the
volume of a box to ship the cookies:

  · 3,375 km3,
  · 3,375 m3, or
  · 3,375 cm3?

     Solution                                                                              which is far too
                                                                               which is also too large. A
A volume of 3,375 km3 is equivalent to a rectangular prism with dimensions of
large for a shipping box. An area of 3,375 m3 is equivalent to a surface of
reasonable value for the volume of the box is 3,375 cm3.
962 9 · Metric Measurement

      YOUR TURN 9.19

1. Which represents a reasonable value for the volume of a storage area:
    8 m3, 8 cm3, or 8 mm3?

EXAMPLE 9.20

Identifying Reasonable Values for Volume
A food manufacturer is prototyping new packaging for one of its most popular products. Which represents a reasonable
value for the volume of the box:

  · 2 dm3,
  · 2 cm3, or
  · 2 mm3?

    Solution

A decimeter is equal to 10 centimeters. A box with a volume of 2 dm3 might have the dimensions                         ,

or                               , which is reasonable. A box with a volume of 2 cm3 or 2 mm3 would be too small.

        YOUR TURN 9.20

  1. Which represents a reasonable value for the volume of a fish tank:
      40,000 mm3, 40,000 cm3, or 40,000 m3?

  EXAMPLE 9.21

Explaining Reasonable Values for Volume
A farmer has a hay loft. They calculate the volume of the hayloft as 64 cm3. Does the calculation make sense? Explain
your answer.

     Solution
No. Centimeters are used to determine smaller distances, such as the length of a pencil. A hayloft is more than 64
centimeters long, so a more reasonable unit of value would be m2. A volume of 64 m3 can be calculated using the
dimensions 4 meters by 4 meters by 4 meters, which are reasonable dimensions for a hayloft. So, a more reasonable
value for the volume of the hayloft is 64 m3.

        YOUR TURN 9.21

  1. An artist creates a glass paperweight. They decide they want to box and ship the paperweight, so they measure
      and determine that the volume of the cubic box is 125,000 mm3. Does their calculation make sense? Explain your
      answer.

Converting Like Units of Measures for Volume

Just like converting units of measure for distance, you can convert units of measure for volume. However, the conversion
factor, the number used to multiply or divide to convert from one volume unit to another, is different from the
conversion factor for metric distance units. Recall that the conversion factor for volume is exponentially relative to the
conversion factor for distance. The most frequently used conversion factors are illustrated in Figure 9.10.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           9.3 · Measuring Volume 963

                                       Figure 9.10 Common Conversion Factors for Metric Volume Units
  EXAMPLE 9.22
Converting Like Units of Measure for Volume Using Multiplication
A pencil case has a volume of 1,700 cm3. What is the volume in cubic millimeters?

     Solution
Use multiplication to convert from a larger metric volume unit to a smaller metric volume unit. To convert from cm3 to
mm3, multiply the value of the volume by 1,000.
The pencil case has a volume of 1,700,000 mm3.

        YOUR TURN 9.22
  1. A jewelry box has a volume of 8 cm3. What is the volume of the jewelry box in cubic millimeters?

       VIDEO
      How to Convert Cubic Centimeters to Cubic Meters (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_CC_to_CM)
  EXAMPLE 9.23
Converting Like Units of Measure for Volume Using Multi-Step Multiplication
A shipping container has a volume of 33.2 m3. What is the volume in cubic centimeters?
     Solution
Use multiplication to convert a larger metric volume unit to a smaller metric volume unit. To convert from m3 to cm3,
first multiply the value of the volume by 1,000 to convert from m3 to dm3, and then multiply again by 1,000 to convert
from dm3 to cm3.
The shipping container has a volume of 32,200,000 cm3.

        YOUR TURN 9.23
  1. A gasoline storage tank has a volume of 37.854 m3. What is the volume of the storage tank in cubic centimeters?

  EXAMPLE 9.24
Converting Like Units of Measure for Volume Using Multi-Step Division
A holding tank at the local aquarium has a volume of 22,712,000,000 cm3. What is the volume in cubic meters?
964 9 · Metric Measurement

            Solution
       Figure 9.10 indicates that when converting from a smaller metric volume unit to a larger metric volume unit you divide
       using the given conversion factor. To convert from cm3 to m3, divide the value of the volume by 1,000 to first convert
       from cm3 to dm3, then divide again to convert from dm3 to m3.

The holding tank has a volume of 22,712 m3.

      YOUR TURN 9.24
1. A warehouse has a volume of 465,000,000 cm3. What is the volume of the warehouse in cubic meters?

Understanding Other Metric Units of Volume

When was the last time you purchased a bottle of soda? Was the volume of the bottle expressed in cubic centimeters or
liters? The liter (L) is a metric unit of capacity often used to express the volume of liquids. A liter is equal in volume to 1
cubic decimeter. A milliliter is equal in volume to 1 cubic centimeter. So, when a doctor orders 10 cc (cubic centimeters) of
saline to be administered to a patient, they are referring to 10 mL of saline.

The most frequently used factors for converting from cubic meters to liters are listed in Table 9.2.

                                             m3 to L  m3 to mL

                                                   Table 9.2 Relationships Between Metric
                                                   Volume and Metric Capacity Units

       VIDEO
      Converting Metric Units of Volume (https://openstax.org/r/Converting_Metric_Units_of_Volume)

  EXAMPLE 9.25

Converting Different Units of Measure for Volume
A holding tank at the local aquarium has a volume of 22,712,000,000 cm3? What is the capacity of the holding tank in
liters?

     Solution
Use division to convert from cubic centimeters to liters. To determine the equivalent volume in liters, convert from cm3
to L by dividing the value of the volume in cm3 by 1,000.

The holding tank holds 22,712,000 L of water.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          9.3 · Measuring Volume 965

      YOUR TURN 9.25
1. A gas can has a volume of 19,000 cm3. How much gas, in liters, does the gas can hold?

EXAMPLE 9.26

Converting Different Units of Measure for Volume Using Multiplication
An airplane used 150 m3 of fuel to fly from New York to Hawaii. How many liters of fuel did the airplane use?

Solution

Because 1 liter is equivalent to 1 cubic decimeter, use multiplication to convert from m3 to dm3. Multiply the value of the

volume by 1,000 to convert from m3 to dm3. Because  , the resulting value is equivalent to the number of

liters used.

The airplane used 150,000 liters of fuel.

        YOUR TURN 9.26

  1. A gasoline storage tank has a volume of 37.854 m3. What is the volume of the storage tank in liters?

  EXAMPLE 9.27

Converting Different Units of Measure for Volume Using Multi-Step Division
How many liters can a pitcher with a volume of 8,000,000 mm3 hold?

     Solution
Use division to convert from a smaller metric volume unit to a larger metric volume unit. To convert from mm3 to dm3,
Step 1: Divide by 1,000 to convert from mm3 to cm3.
Step 2: Divide again by 1,000 to convert from cm3 to dm3.
Step 3: Use the unit value to express the volume in terms of liters.

The pitcher can hold 8 liters of liquid.

        YOUR TURN 9.27
  1. A glass jar has a volume of 800,000 mm3. How many mL of liquid can the glass jar hold?

Solving Application Problems Involving Volume

Knowing the volume of an object lets you know just how much that object can hold. When making a bowl of punch you
might want to know the total amount of liquid a punch bowl can hold. Knowing how many liters of gasoline a car's tank
can hold helps determine how many miles a car can drive on a full tank. Regardless of the application, understanding
volume is essential to many every day and professional tasks.
966 9 · Metric Measurement

EXAMPLE 9.28

Using Volume to Solve Problems

A cubic shipping carton's dimensions measure          . A company wants to fill the carton with smaller cubic

boxes that measure              . How many of the smaller boxes will fit in each shipping carton?

     Solution
Step 1: Determine the volume of the shipping carton.

Step 2: Use the appropriate conversion factor to convert the volume of the shipping carton from m3 to cm3.

Step 3: Determine the volume of the smaller boxes.
Step 4: Divide the volume of the shipping carton, in cm3, by the volume of the smaller box, in cm3.

The shipping carton will hold 8,000 smaller boxes.

        YOUR TURN 9.28
  1. A factory can mill 300 cubic meters of flour each day. They package the flour in boxes that measure

                                     . How many boxes of flour does the factory produce each day?

  EXAMPLE 9.29
Solving Volume Problems with Different Units
A carton of juice measures 6 cm long, 6 cm wide and 20 cm tall. A factory produces 28,800 liters of orange juice each day.
How many cartons of orange juice are produced each day?

     Solution
Step 1: Find the volume of the carton in cubic centimeters.

Step 2: Convert the volume in cm3 to liters.

Step 3: Divide the number of liters of orange juice produced each day by the volume of each carton.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           9.3 · Measuring Volume 967

The factory produces 40,000 cartons of orange juice each day.
        YOUR TURN 9.29

  1. An ice cream maker boxes frozen yogurt mix in boxes that measure 25 cm long, 8 cm wide and 35 cm tall. They
      produce 42,000 liters of frozen yogurt mix each day. How many boxes of frozen yogurt mix are produced each
      day?

  EXAMPLE 9.30
Solving Complex Volume Problems
A fish tank measures 60 cm long, 15 cm wide and 34 cm tall (Figure 9.11). The tank is 25 percent full. How many liters of
water are needed to completely fill the tank?

                                                                             Figure 9.11
     Solution
Step 1: Determine the volume of the fish tank in cubic centimeters.

Step 2: Convert the volume in cm3 to volume in liters.

Step 3: Since the tank is 25 percent full, the tank is 75 percent empty. Convert 75 percent to its decimal equivalent.
Multiply the total volume by 75 percent expressed in decimal form to determine how many liters of water are required to
fill the tank.

So, 22.95 liters of water are needed to fill the tank.
968 9 · Metric Measurement

               YOUR TURN 9.30

         1. A fish tank measures 75 cm long, 20 cm wide and 25 cm tall. The tank is 50 percent full. How many liters of water
              are needed to completely fill the tank?

         WORK IT OUT

         How Does Shape Affect Volume?
         Take two large sheets of card stock. Roll one piece to tape the longer edges together to make a cylinder. Tape the
         cylinder to the other piece of card stock which serves as the base of the cylinder. Fill the cylinder to the top with
         cereal. Pour the cereal from the cylinder into a plastic storage or shopping bag. Remove the cylinder from the base
         and the tape from the cylinder. Re-roll the cylinder along the shorter edges a tape together. Attach the new cylinder to
         the base. Pour the cereal from the plastic bag into the cylinder. What do you observe? How does the shape of a
         container affect its volume?

     Check Your Understanding

       For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each volume.
           16. Terrarium: 50,000 km3, 50,000 m3, 50,000 cm3, or 50,000 mm3
           17. Milk carton: 236,000 L, 236 L, 236,000 mL, or 236 mL
           18. Box of crackers: 1,500 km3, 1,500 m3, 1,500 cm3, or 1,500 mm3

       For the following exercises, Convert the given volume to the units shown.
           19. 42,500 mm3 = __________ cm3
           20. 1.5 dm3 = __________ mL
           21. 6.75 cm3 = __________ mm3

       For the following exercises, determine the volume of objects with the dimensions shown.
           22.
                         ________ L
           23.
                         ________ mL
           24.
                         ________ m3

             SECTION 9.3 EXERCISES

       For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each volume.
             1. Fish tank:
                 71,120 km3, 71,120 m3, 71,120 cm3, or 71,120 mm3
             2. Juice box:
                 125,000 L, 125 L, 125,000 mL, or 125 mL
             3. Box of cereal:
                 2,700 km3, 2,700 m3, 2,700 cm3, or 2,700 mm3
             4. Water bottle:
                 5 L, 0.5 L, 5 mL, or 0.5 mL
             5. Shoe box:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                9.3 · Measuring Volume 969

    3,600 km3, 3.6 m3, 3,600 cm3, or 3,600 mm3
6. Swimming pool:

    45 L, 45,000 L, 45 mL, or 45,000 mL

For the following exercises, convert the given volume to the units shown.
     7. 38,861 mm3 = __________ cm3
     8. 13 dm3 = __________ mL
     9. 874 cm3 = __________ mm3
    10. 4 m3 = __________ cm3
    11. 0.00003 m3 = _________ mm3
    12. 57,500 mm3 = _______ L
    13. 0.007 m3 = __________ L
    14. 8,600 cm3 = _________ m3
    15. 45.65 m3 = _______ cm3
    16. 0.06 m3 = __________ dm3
    17. 0.081 m3 = _________ mL
    18. 3,884,000 mm3 = _______ m3

For the following exercises, determine the volume of objects with the dimensions shown.

    19.

                 ________ L

    20.

                 ________ mL

    21.
                 ________ m3

    22.
                 ________ cm3

    23.
                 ________ m3

    24.

                 ________ L

    25.

                 ________ mL

    26.
                 ________ cm3

    27.
                 ________ m3

28. A box has dimensions of                         . The box currently holds 1,250 cm3 of rice. How many cubic

centimeters of rice are needed to completely fill the box?

29. The dimensions of a medium storage unit are                     . What is the volume of a small storage area with
      dimensions half the size of the medium unit?

30. How much liquid, in liters, can a container with dimensions of                       hold?

31. What is the volume of the rectangular prism that is shown?
970 9 · Metric Measurement

32. A box is 15 centimeters long and 5 centimeters wide. The volume of the box is 225 cm3. What is the height of the
      box?

33. Kareem mixed two cartons of orange juice, three 2-liter bottles of soda water and six cans of cocktail fruits to make
      a fruit punch for a party. The cartons of orange juice and cans of cocktail fruits each have a volume of 500 cm3.

      How much punch, in liters, did Kareem make?

34. A holding tank has dimensions of               . If the tank is half-full, how more liters of liquid can the tank
      hold?

35. A large plastic storage bin has dimensions of                            . A medium bin's dimensions are half the size

of the large bin. A small bin's dimensions are the size of the medium bin. If the storage bins come in a set of

3--small, medium, and large--what is the total volume of the storage bin set in cubic centimeters?

36. A soft serve ice cream machine holds a 19.2 liter bag of ice cream mix. If the average serving size of an ice cream
      cone is 120 mL, how many cones can be made from each bag of mix?

37. A shipping carton has dimensions of                                      . How many boxes with dimensions of
                                           will fit in the shipping carton?

38. A recipe for chili makes 3.5 liters of chili. If a restaurant serves chili in 250 mL bowls, how many bowls of chili can
      they serve?

39. A contractor is building an in-ground pool. They excavate a pit that measures                                 . The dirt is being

taken away in a truck that holds 30 m3. How many trips will the truck have to make to cart away all of the dirt?

40. A juice dispenser measures                     . How many 375 mL servings will a full dispenser serve?

9.4 Measuring Weight

Figure 9.12 Weight scale at the local Antigua market (credit: "Weight scale at the local Antigua market" by Lucía García
González/Flickr, CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify reasonable values for weight applications.
 2. Convert units of measures of weight.
 3. Solve application problems involving weight.

In the metric system, weight is expressed in terms of grams or kilograms, with a kilogram being equal to 1,000 grams. A
paper clip weighs about 1 gram. A liter of water weighs about 1 kilogram. In fact, in the same way that 1 liter is equal in
volume to 1 cubic decimeter, the kilogram was originally defined as the mass of 1 liter of water. In some cases,
particularly in scientific or medical settings where small amounts of materials are used, the milligram is used to express
weight. At the other end of the scale is the metric ton (mt), which is equivalent to 1,000 kilograms. The average car
weighs about 2 metric tons.

Any discussion about metric weight must also include a conversation about mass. Scientifically, mass is the amount of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            9.4 · Measuring Weight 971

matter in an object whereas weight is the force exerted on an object by gravity. The amount of mass of an object
remains constant no matter where the object is. Identical objects located on Earth and on the moon will have the same
mass, but the weight of the objects will differ because the moon has a weaker gravitational force than Earth. So, objects
with the same mass will weigh less on the moon than on Earth.
Since there is no easy way to measure mass, and since gravity is just about the same no matter where on Earth you go,
people in countries that use the metric system often use the words mass and weight interchangeably. While scientifically
the kilogram is only a unit of mass, in everyday life it is often used as a unit of weight as well.

Reasonable Values for Weight

To have an essential understanding of metric weight, you must be able to identify reasonable values for weight. When
testing for reasonableness, you should assess both the unit and the unit value. Only by examining both can you
determine whether the given weight is reasonable for the situation.

       VIDEO
      Metric System: Units of Weight (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System:_units_of_weight)

  EXAMPLE 9.31

Identifying Reasonable Units for Weight
Which is the more reasonable value for the weight of a newborn baby:

  · 3.5 kg or
  · 3.5 g?

     Solution
Using our reference weights, a baby weighs more than 3.5 paperclips, so 3.5 kilograms is a more reasonable value for
the weight of a newborn baby.

        YOUR TURN 9.31

  1. Which represents a reasonable value for the weight of a penny:
      2.5 g or 2.5 kg

  EXAMPLE 9.32

Determining Reasonable Values for Weight
Which of the following represents a reasonable value for the weight of three lemons?

  · 250 g,
  · 2,500 g, or
  · 250 kg?

     Solution
Because a kilogram is about 2.2 pounds, we can eliminate 250 kg as it is way too heavy. 2,500 grams is equivalent to 2.5
kilograms, or about five pounds, which is again, too heavy. So, a reasonable value for the weight of three lemons would
be 250 grams.

        YOUR TURN 9.32

  1. Which represents a reasonable value for the weight of a car:
      1,300 g, 130 kg, or 1,300 kg?
972 9 · Metric Measurement

                WHO KNEW?
         How Do You Measure the Weight of a Whale?
         It is impossible to weigh a living whale. Fredrik Christiansen from the Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies in
         Denmark developed an innovative way to measure the weight of whales. Using images taken from a drone and
         computer modeling, the weight of a whale can be estimated with great accuracy.

              VIDEO
             Using Drones to Weigh Whales? (https://openstax.org/r/Using_drones_to_weigh_whales?)
         EXAMPLE 9.33
       Explaining Reasonable Values for Weight
       The blue whale is the largest living mammal on Earth. Which of the following is a reasonable value for the weight of a
       blue whale: 149 g, 149 kg, or 149 mt? Explain your answer.
            Solution
       A reasonable value for the weight of a blue whale is 149 metric tons. Both 149 g and 149 kg are much too small a value
       for the largest living mammal on Earth.

               YOUR TURN 9.33
         1. The Etruscan shrew is one of the world's smallest mammals. It has a huge appetite, eating almost twice its

              weight in food each day. Its heart beats at a rate of 25 beats per second! Which of the following is a reasonable
              value for the weight of an Etruscan shrew: 2 g, 2 kg, or 2 mt? Explain your answer.

     Converting Like Units of Measures for Weight

       Just like converting units of measure for distance, you can convert units of measure for weight. The most frequently used
       conversion factors for metric weight are illustrated in Figure 9.13.

                                               Figure 9.13 Common Conversion Factors for Metric Weight Units
         EXAMPLE 9.34
       Converting Metric Units of Weight Using Multistep Division
       How many kilograms are in 24,300,000 milligrams?

            Solution
       Use division to convert from a smaller metric weight unit to a larger metric weight unit. To convert from milligrams to
       kilograms,
       Step 1: Divide the value of the weight in milligrams by 1,000 to first convert from milligrams to grams.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   9.4 · Measuring Weight 973

Step 2: Divide by 1,000 again to convert from grams to kilograms.

So, 24,300,000 milligrams are equivalent to 24.3 kilograms.

        YOUR TURN 9.34
  1. How many kilograms are in 175,000 milligrams?

  EXAMPLE 9.35
Converting Metric Units of Weight Using Multiplication
The average ostrich weighs approximately 127 kilograms. How many grams does an ostrich weigh?

     Solution
Use multiplication to convert from a larger metric weight unit to a smaller metric weight unit. To convert from kilograms
to grams, multiply the value of the weight by 1,000.

The average ostrich weighs 127,000 grams.

        YOUR TURN 9.35
  1. The world's heaviest tomato weighed 4.869 kg when measured on July 15, 2020. How much did the tomato weigh

      in grams?

  EXAMPLE 9.36
Converting Metric Units of Weight Using Multistep Multiplication
How many milligrams are there in 0.025 kilograms?

     Solution
Use multiplication to convert from a larger metric weight unit to a smaller metric weight unit. To convert from kilograms
to grams,
Step 1: Multiply the value of the weight by 1,000.
Step 2: Multiply the result by 1,000 to convert from grams to milligrams.

So, 0.025 kilograms is equivalent to 25,000 milligrams.
974 9 · Metric Measurement

               YOUR TURN 9.36

         1. How many milligrams are there in 1.23 kilograms?

              VIDEO
             Metric Units of Mass: Convert mg, g, and kg (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_mg-g-kg)

     Solving Application Problems Involving Weight

       From children's safety to properly cooking a pie, knowing how to solve problems involving weight is vital to everyday life.
       Let's review some ways that knowing how to work with metric weight can facilitate important decisions and delicious
       eating.

         EXAMPLE 9.37
       Comparing Weights to Solve Problems
       The maximum weight for a child to safely use a car seat is 29 kilograms. If a child weighs 23,700 grams, can the child
       safely use the car seat?

            Solution
       Step 1: Convert the child's weight in grams to kilograms.

Step 2: Compare the two weights.

Yes, the child can safely use the car seat.

YOUR TURN 9.37

1. The dosage recommendations for a popular brand of acetaminophen are listed in table below. What is the
    recommended dosage for a child who weighs 17,683 grams?

                                             Weight  Dosage

                                             11 kg to 15 kg 5 mL

                                             16 kg to 21 kg 7.5 mL

                                             22 kg to 27 kg 10 mL

  EXAMPLE 9.38

Solving Multistep Weight Problems
A recipe for scones calls for 350 grams of flour. How many kilograms of flour are required to make 4 batches of scones?

     Solution
Step 1: Multiply the grams of flour need by 4 to determine the total amount of flour needed.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          9.4 · Measuring Weight 975

Step 2: Convert from grams to kilograms.

So, 1.4 kilograms of flour are needed to make four batches of scones.

        YOUR TURN 9.38
  1. A croissant recipe calls for 500 g of flour. How many kilograms of flour are required to make 10 batches of

      croissants?

  EXAMPLE 9.39
Solving Complex Weight Problems
The average tomato weighs 140 grams. A farmer needs to order boxes to pack and ship their tomatoes to local grocery
stores. They estimate that this year's harvest will yield 125,000 tomatoes. A box can hold 12 kilograms of tomatoes. How
many boxes does the farmer need?

     Solution
Step 1: Determine the total estimated weight of the harvested tomatoes.

Step 2: Convert the total weight from grams to kilograms.

Step 3: Divide the weight of the tomatoes by the weight each box can hold.

So, the farmer will need to order 1,458 boxes.

        YOUR TURN 9.39
  1. The average potato weighs 225 grams. A grocery chain orders 5,000 bags of potatoes. Each bag weighs 5 kg.

      Approximately how many potatoes did they order?

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each weight.
    25. Candy bar:
          50 kg, 50 g, or 50 mg
    26. Lion:
          180 kg, 180 g, or 180 mg
    27. Basketball:
          624 kg, 624 g, or 624 mg

For the following exercises, convert the given weight to the units shown.
    28. 8,900 g = __________ kg
976 9 · Metric Measurement

           29. 17 g = __________ mg
           30. 0.07 kg = __________ g

       For the following exercises, determine the total weight in the units shown.
           31. three 48 g granola bars ________ kg
           32. seven 28 g cheese slices ________ mg
           33. six 15 mg tea bags ________ g

             SECTION 9.4 EXERCISES

       For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each weight.
             1. Aspirin tablet:
                 300 kg, 300 g, or 300 mg
             2. Elephant:
                 5,000 kg, 5,000 g, or 5,000 mg
             3. Baseball:
                 145 kg, 145 g, or 145 mg
             4. Orange:
                 115 kg, 115 g, or 115 mg
             5. Pencil:
                 6 kg, 6 g, or 6 mg
             6. Automobile:
                 1,300 kg, 1,300 g, or 1,300 mg

       For the following exercises, convert the given weight to the units shown.
             7. 3,500 g = __________ kg
             8. 53 g = __________ mg
             9. 0.02 kg = __________ g
           10. 200 mg = __________ g
           11. 2.3 g = _________ mg
           12. 20 kg = _______ mg
           13. 2,300 kg = __________ g
           14. 8,700 mg = _________ g
           15. 9,730 mg = _______ kg
           16. 0.0078 kg = __________ g
           17. 2.34 g = _________ mg
           18. 234.5 mg = _______ g

       For the following exercises, determine the total weight in the units shown.
           19. Three 350 mg tablets ________ g
           20. Seven 115 g soap bars ________ kg
           21. Six 24 g batteries ________ mg
           22. Fifty 3.56 g pennies ________ mg
           23. Eight 2.25 kg bags of potatoes ________ g
           24. Four 23 kg sacks of flour ________ g
           25. Ten 2.5 kg laptops ________ g
           26. Seven 1,150 g chickens ________ kg
           27. Ninety 4,500 mg marbles ________ kg

       28. There are 26 bags of flour. Each bag weighs 5 kg. What is the total weight of the flour?

       29. The average female hippopotamus weighs 1,496 kg. The average male hippopotamus weighs 1,814 kg. How much
             heavier, in grams, is the male hippopotamus than the female hippopotamus?

       30. Twelve pieces of cardboard weigh 72 grams. What is the weight of one piece of cardboard?

       31. Miguel's backpack weighs 2.4 kg and Shanayl's backpack weighs 2,535 grams. Whose backpack is heavier and by
             how much?

       32. A souvenir chocolate bar weighs 1.815 kg. If you share the candy bar equally with two friends, how many grams of
             chocolate does each person get?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    9.5 · Measuring Temperature 977

33. You purchase 10 bananas that weigh 50 grams each. If bananas cost $5.50 per kilogram, how much did you pay?
34. A family-size package of ground meat costs $15.75. The package weighs 4.5 kg. What is the cost per gram of the

      meat?
35. A box containing 6 identical books weighs 7.2 kg. The box weighs 600 g. What is the weight of each book in grams?
36. A 2.316 kg bag of candy is equally divided into 12 party bags. What is the weight of the candy, in grams, in each

      party bag?
37. A store has 450 kg of flour at the beginning of the day. At the end of the day the store has 341 kg of flour. If flour

      costs $0.35 per kilogram, how much flour, in dollars, did the store sell that day?
38. A local restaurant offers lobster for $110 per kilogram. What is the price for a lobster that weighs 450 grams?
39. A student's backpack weighs 575 grams. Their books weigh 3.5 kg. If the student's weight while wearing their

      backpack is 58.25 kg, how much does the student weigh in kilograms?
40. The weight of a lamb is 41 kg 340 g. What is the total weight, in kilograms, of four lambs of the same weight?

9.5 Measuring Temperature

Figure 9.14 A thermometer that measures temperature in both customary and metric units. (credit: "Thermometer" by
Jeff Djevdet/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Convert between Fahrenheit and Celsius.
 2. Identify reasonable values for temperature applications.
 3. Solve application problems involving temperature.
When you touch something and it feels warm or cold, what is that really telling you about that substance? Temperature
is a measure of how fast atoms and molecules are moving in a substance, whether that be the air, a stove top, or an ice
cube. The faster those atoms and molecules move, the higher the temperature.
In the metric system, temperature is measured using the Celsius (°C) scale. Because temperature is a condition of the
physical properties of a substance, the Celsius scale was created with 100 degrees separating the point at which water
freezes, 0 °C, and the point at which water boils, 100 °C. Scientifically, these are the points at which water molecules
change from one state of matter to another--from solid (ice) to liquid (water) to gas (water vapor).

      When reading temperatures, it's important to look beyond the degree symbol to determine which temperature scale
      the units express. For example, 13 °C reads "13 degrees Celsius," indicating that the temperature is expressed using
      the Celsius scale, while 13 °F reads "13 degrees Fahrenheit," indicating that the temperature is expressed using the
978 9 · Metric Measurement

             Fahrenheit scale.
              VIDEO
             Misconceptions About Temperature (https://openstax.org/r/Misconceptions_About_Temperature)
               WHO KNEW?
         How Many Temperature Scales Are There?
         Did you know that in addition to Fahrenheit and Celsius, there is a third temperature scale widely used throughout
         the world? The Kelvin scale starts at absolute zero, the lowest possible temperature at which there is no heat energy
         present at all. It is primarily used by scientists to measure very high or very low temperatures when water is not
         involved.

     Converting Between Fahrenheit and Celsius Temperatures

       Understanding how to convert between Fahrenheit and Celsius temperatures is an essential skill in understanding
       metric temperatures. You likely know that below 32 °F means freezing temperatures and perhaps that the same holds
       true for 0 °C. While it may be difficult to recall that water boils at 212 °F, knowing that it boils at 100 °C is a fairly easy
       thing to remember.
       But what about all the temperatures in between? What is the temperature in degrees Celsisus on a scorching summer
       day? What about a cool autumn afternoon? If a recipe instructs you to preheat the oven to 350 °F, what Celsius
       temperature do you set the oven at?
       Figure 9.15 lists common temperatures on both scales, because we don't use Celsius temperatures daily it's difficult to
       remember them. Fortunately, we don't have to. Instead, we can convert temperatures from Fahrenheit to Celsius and
       from Celsius to Fahrenheit using a simple algebraic expression.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           9.5 · Measuring Temperature 979

Figure 9.15 Common Temperatures
980 9 · Metric Measurement

         FORMULA
         The formulas used to convert temperatures from Fahrenheit to Celsius or from Celsius to Fahrenheit are outlined in
         Table 9.3.

                                                           Fahrenheit to Celsius Celsius to Fahrenheit

                                                         Table 9.3 Temperature Conversion Formulas

         EXAMPLE 9.40
       Converting Temperatures from Fahrenheit to Celsius
       A recipe calls for the oven to be set to 392 °F. What is the temperature in Celsius?

            Solution
       Use the formula in Table 9.3 to convert from Fahrenheit to Celsius.

       So, 392 °F is equivalent to 200 °C.

               YOUR TURN 9.40
         1. What is 482 °F in Celsius?
         EXAMPLE 9.41
       Converting Temperatures from Celsius to Fahrenheit
       On a sunny afternoon in May, the temperature in London was 20 °C. What was the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit?

            Solution
       Use the formula in Table 9.3 to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit.

       The temperature was 68 °F.

               YOUR TURN 9.41
         1. What is 75 °C in Fahrenheit?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    9.5 · Measuring Temperature 981

  EXAMPLE 9.42
Comparing Temperatures in Celsius and Fahrenheit
A manufacturer requires a vaccine to be stored in a refrigerator at temperatures between 36 °F and 46 °F. The
refrigerator in the local pharmacy cools to 3 °C. Can the vaccine be stored safely in the pharmacy's refrigerator?

     Solution
Use the formula in Table 9.3 to convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit.

Then, compare the temperatures.

Yes. 37.4 °F falls within the acceptable range to store the vaccine, so it can be stored safely in the pharmacy's refrigerator.

        YOUR TURN 9.42
  1. In July, the average temperature in Madrid is 16.7 °C. The average temperature in Toronto in July is 57.4 °F. Which

      city has the higher temperature, and by how many degrees Celsius?

Reasonable Values for Temperature

While knowing the exact temperature is important in most cases, sometimes an approximation will do. When trying to
assess the reasonableness of values for temperature, there is a quicker way to convert temperatures for an
approximation using mental math. These simpler formulas are listed in Table 9.4.

  FORMULA
  The formulas used to estimate temperatures from Fahrenheit to Celsius or from Celsius to Fahrenheit are outlined in
  Table 9.4.

                                                   Fahrenheit to Celsius Celsius to Fahrenheit

                                                 Table 9.4 Estimate Temperature Conversion

       VIDEO
      Temperature Conversion Trick (http://openstax.org/r/Temperature_Conversion_Trick)
  EXAMPLE 9.43
Using Benchmark Temperatures to Determine Reasonable Values for Temperatures
Which is the more reasonable value for the temperature of a freezer?
  · 5 °C or
  · -5 °C?
982 9 · Metric Measurement

            Solution
       We know that water freezes at 0 °C. So, the more reasonable value for the temperature of a freezer is -5 °C, which is
       below 0 °C. At temperature of 5 °C is above freezing.

               YOUR TURN 9.43
         1. To make candy apples, you must boil the sugar mixture for about 20 minutes. Which is the more reasonable

              value for the temperature of the mixture when boiling:
          · 48 °C or
          · 148 °C?

         EXAMPLE 9.44
       Using Estimation to Determine Reasonable Values for Temperatures
       The average body temperature is generally accepted as 98.6 °F. What is a reasonable value for the average body
       temperature in degrees Celsius:

         · 98.6 °C,
         · 64.3 °C, or
         · 34.3 °C?

            Solution
       To estimate the average body temperature in degrees Celsius, subtract 30 from the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit,
       and divide the result by 2.

       A reasonable value for average body temperature is 34.3 °C.

               YOUR TURN 9.44
         1. Which represents a reasonable value for temperature of a hot summer day:
          · 102 °C,
          · 37 °C, or
          · 20 °C?

         EXAMPLE 9.45
       Using Conversion to Determine Reasonable Values for Temperatures
       Which is a reasonable temperature for storing chocolate:

         · 28 °C,
         · 18 °C, or
         · 2 °C?

            Solution
       Use the formula in Table 9.3 to determine the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    9.5 · Measuring Temperature 983

A temperature of 82.4 °F would be too hot, causing the chocolate to melt. A temperature of 35.6 °F is very close to
freezing, which would affect the look and feel of the chocolate. So, a reasonable temperature for storing chocolate is 18
°C, or 64.4 °F.

        YOUR TURN 9.45

  1. Which represents a reasonable temperature for cooking chili:
  · 240 °C,
  · 60 °C, or
  · 6 °C?

Solving Application Problems Involving Temperature

Whether traveling abroad or working in a clinical laboratory, knowing how to solve problems involving temperature is an
important skill to have. Many food labels express sizes in both ounces and grams. Most rulers and tape measures are
two-sided with one side marked in inches and feet and the other in centimeters and meters. And while many
thermometers have both Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, it really isn't practical to pull out a thermometer when cooking a
recipe that uses metric units. Let's review at few instances where knowing how to fluently use the Celsius scale helps
solve problems.

  EXAMPLE 9.46
Using Subtraction to Solve Temperature Problems
The temperature in the refrigerator is 4 °C. The temperature in the freezer is 21 °C lower. What is the temperature in the
freezer?

     Solution
Use subtraction to find the difference.

So, the temperature in the freezer is -17 °C.

        YOUR TURN 9.46

  1. At 6 PM, the temperature was 4 °C. By 6 AM the temperature had fallen by 6 °C. What was the temperature at 6
      AM?

  EXAMPLE 9.47
Using Addition to Solve Temperature Problems
A scientist was using a liquid that was 35 °C. They needed to heat the liquid to raise the temperature by 6 °C. What was
the temperature after the scientist heated it?

     Solution
Use addition to find the new temperature.

The temperature of the liquid was 41 °C after the scientist heated it.

        YOUR TURN 9.47

  1. A hot dog was cooked in a microwave oven. The hot dog was 4 °C when it was put in the microwave and the
984 9 · Metric Measurement

              temperature increased by 59 °C when it was taken out. What was the temperature of the cooked hot dog?

         EXAMPLE 9.48
       Solving Complex Temperature Problems
       The optimum temperature for a chemical compound to develop its unique properties is 392 °F. When the heating
       process begins, the temperature of the compound is 20 °C. For safety purposes the compound can only be heated 9 °C
       every 15 minutes. How long until the compound reaches its optimum temperature?

            Solution
       Step 1: Determine the optimum temperature in degrees Celsius using the formula in Table 9.3.

       Step 2: Subtract the starting temperature.

       Step 3: Determine the number of 15-minute cycles needed to heat the compound to its optimum temperature.

       Step 4: Multiply the number of cycles needed by 15 minutes and convert the product to hours and minutes.

       So, it will take 2 hours and 15 minutes for the compound to reach its optimum temperature.

               YOUR TURN 9.48
         1. After reaching a temperature of 302 °F a chemical compound cools at the rate of 5 °C every 6 minutes. How long

              will it take until the compound has reached a temperature of zero degree Celsius.
              VIDEO
             Learn the Metric System in 5 Minutes (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System_in_5_Minutes)

     Check Your Understanding

       For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each temperature.
           34. Popsicle:
                  28.5 °C or
                  28.5 °F
           35. Room temperature:
                  20 °F or
                  20 °C
           36. Hot coffee:
                  71.1 °C or

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        9.5 · Measuring Temperature 985

          71.1 °F

For the following exercises, use mental math to approximate the temperature.
    37. 450 °F = __________ °C
    38. 35 °C = __________ °F
    39. 100 °F = __________ °C

For the following exercises, convert the temperatures to the nearest degree.
    40. 225 °F = __________ °C
    41. 27 °C = __________ °F
    42. 750 °F = __________ °C

        SECTION 9.5 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each temperature.
     1. Human body:
          37 °C or
          37 °F
     2. An ice cube:
          32 °C or
          0 °C
     3. Boiling water:
          212 °C
          or 212 °F
     4. Summer day:
          8 °C,
          23 °C, or
          75 °C
     5. Winter day:
          33 °C,
          30 °C, or
          3 °C
     6. Lava:
          700 °C,
          70 °C, or
          7 °C

For the following exercises, use mental math to approximate the temperature.
     7. 500 °F = __________ °C
     8. 25 °C = __________ °F
     9. 350 °F = __________ °C
    10. 150 °C = __________ °F
    11. -4 °F = __________ °C
    12. 73 °C = __________ °F
    13. 72 °F = __________ °C
    14. 10 °C = __________ °F
    15. 1,020 °F = __________ °C

For the following exercises, convert the temperatures to the nearest degree.
    16. 450 °F = __________ °C
    17. 35 °C = __________ °F
    18. 525 °F = __________ °C
    19. 140 °C = __________ °F
    20. -40 °F = __________ °C
    21. 67 °C = __________ °F
    22. 85 °F = __________ °C
    23. 15 °C = __________ °F
    24. 1,200 °F = __________ °C
    25. 112 °F = __________ °C
    26. 105 °C = __________ °F
986 9 · Metric Measurement

           27. 125 °F = __________ °C
       28. A cup of tea is 30 °C. After adding ice, the temperature of the tea decreased 3 °C. What is the temperature of the

             tea now?
       29. A liquid with a temperature of 15 °C is placed on a stovetop. The liquid is heated at the rate of 1.5 °C per minute.

             What is the temperature of the liquid after 10 minutes?
       30. The temperature inside a store is 22 °C. Outside the temperature is 37 °C. How much cooler is it in the store than

             outside?
       31. A boiling pan of water is 212 °F. As the water cools the temperature drops 6 °C every 2 minutes. How many

             minutes until the temperature of the water reaches 40 °C?
       32. On May 1 the temperature was 79 °F. On June 1 the temperature was 25 °C. Which day was warmer?
       33. For each log placed on a fire, the temperature increases 45 °C. How many logs are needed for the campfire to

             increase 315 °C?
       34. The temperature of a Bunsen burner flame increases 572 °F each minute. About how many minutes does it take

             for the flame to increase 1,200 °C?
       35. The instructions to cook a pizza say to set the oven at 425 °F. To the nearest degree, what is the temperature in

             degrees Celsius?
       36. In the evening the temperature was 3 °C. By morning, the temperature had fallen 4 °C. What is the temperature

             now?
       37. An 8,000 BTU air conditioner can cool a room 1 °C every 5 minutes. If the temperature in the room is 24 °C, how

             long will it take the air conditioner to cool the room to 20 °C?
       38. What is 95 °F in degrees Celsius?
       39. What is 50 °C in degrees Fahrenheit?
       40. Which is a reasonable value for the temperature of a room:

         · 60 °C,
         · 40 °C, or
         · 20 °C?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 9 · Chapter Summary 987

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

9.1 The Metric System

· metric system

· meter (m)

· gram (g)

· liter (L)
· square meter (m2)
· cubic meter (m3)

· degrees Celsius (°C)

· conversion factor

9.2 Measuring Area

· area
· square units

9.3 Measuring Volume

· volume
· cubic units

9.4 Measuring Weight

· mass

9.5 Measuring Temperature

· temperature

Key Concepts

9.1 The Metric System

· The metric system is decimal system of weights and measures based on base units of meter, liter, and gram. The
    system was first proposed in 1670 and has since been adopted as the International System of Units and used in
    nearly every country in the world.

· Each successive unit on the metric scale is 10 times larger than the previous one. To convert between units with the
    same base unit, you must either multiply or divide by a power of 10.

· The most used prefixes are listed in Table 9.1. An easy way to remember the order of the prefixes, from largest to
   smallest, is the mnemonic King Henry Died from Drinking Chocolate Milk.

9.2 Measuring Area

· Area describes the size of a two-dimensional surface. It is the amount of space contained within the lines of a two-
    dimensional space.

· Area is measured in square meters units; in the metric system the base unit for area is square meters ( ).

9.3 Measuring Volume

· Volume is a measure of the space contained within or occupied by three-dimensional objects.
· Volume is measured in cubic units; the base unit for volume in the metric system is cubic meters (m3)

· The liter (L) is a metric unit of capacity but is often used to express the volume of liquids. One liter is equivalent to

one cubic decimeter, which is the volume of a cube measuring  .

9.4 Measuring Weight

· Mass is the amount of matter in an object whereas weight is the force exerted on an object by gravity. The mass of
    an object never changes; the weight of an object changes depending on the force of gravity. An object with the
    same mass would weigh less on the moon than on Earth because the moon's gravity is less than that of Earth.

· In the metric system, weight and mass are often used interchangeably and are expressed in terms in grams or
    kilograms.
988 9 · Chapter Summary

9.5 Measuring Temperature

  · Temperature is a measure of how fast atoms and molecules are moving in a substance, whether that be the air, a
      stove top, or an ice cube. The faster those atoms and molecules move, the higher the temperature.

  · In the metric system, temperature is measured using the Celsius (°C) scale.
  · The Celsius scale was created with 100 degrees separating the point at which water freezes, 0 °C, and the point at

      which water boils, 100 °C. Scientifically, these are the points at which water molecules change from one state of
      matter to another--from solid (ice) to liquid (water) to gas (water vapor).

Videos

9.1 The Metric System

  · U.S. Office of Education: Metric Education (https://openstax.org/r/U.S._Office_Education)
  · Neil deGrasse Tyson Explains the Metric System (https://openstax.org/r/Tyson_Explains_Metric_System)

9.2 Measuring Area

  · Converting Metric Units of Area (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_Units_of_Area)
  · Why the Metric System Matters (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System_Matters)

9.3 Measuring Volume

  · How to Convert Cubic Centimeters to Cubic Meters (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_CC_to_CM)
  · Converting Metric Units of Volume (https://openstax.org/r/Converting_Metric_Units_of_Volume)

9.4 Measuring Weight

  · Metric System: Units of Weight (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System:_units_of_weight)
  · Using Drones to Weigh Whales? (https://openstax.org/r/Using_drones_to_weigh_whales?)
  · Metric Units of Mass: Convert mg, g, and kg (https://openstax.org/r/Convert_mg-g-kg)

9.5 Measuring Temperature

  · Misconceptions About Temperature (https://openstax.org/r/Misconceptions_About_Temperature)
  · Temperature Conversion Trick (http://openstax.org/r/Temperature_Conversion_Trick)
  · Learn the Metric System in 5 Minutes (https://openstax.org/r/Metric_System_in_5_Minutes)

Formula Review

9.1 The Metric System

You can convert between unit sizes with the same base unit using the conversion factors shown in Figure 9.4.

9.2 Measuring Area

To determine the area of rectangular-shaped objects:

                                          Figure 9.16 Rectangle with Length and Width Labeled
You can convert between metric area units using the conversion factors shown in Figure 9.7.

9.3 Measuring Volume

To determine the volume of a rectangular prism:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      9 · Chapter Summary 989

                            Figure 9.17 Rectangular Prism with Height , Length , and Width Labeled
You can convert between metric volume units and metric capacity units using the relationships shown in Table 9.2.

9.4 Measuring Weight

You can convert between metric weight units using the conversion factors shown in Figure 9.13.

9.5 Measuring Temperature

To convert temperature from Fahrenheit to Celsius:

To convert temperature from Celsius to Fahrenheit:

To estimate temperature from Fahrenheit to Celsius:

To estimate temperature from Celsius to Fahrenheit:

Projects

Cooking

 1. Take a favorite recipe that uses customary measures and convert the measures and cooking temperature to the
      metric system.

 2. Find a recipe that uses metric measures and convert the measures and cooking temperature to the U.S. Customary
      System of Measurement, using cups, tablespoons, or teaspoons as required.

 3. What did you observe? Was it easier to convert from one system to another? Which system allows for more precise
      measurements? What kitchen tools would you need in your kitchen if you used the metric system?

Shopping

 1. Compare the average gas price in California to the average gas price in Puerto Rico.
 2. What conversions did you need to make to do the comparison?
 3. Do you think that the price of the gasoline is affected by the units in which it is sold?

Sports

 1. What system of measurement is used for track and field events? Why do you think this system is used?
 2. What system of measurement is used for football? Why do you think this system is used?
 3. Research various sports records. Which units of measurement is used? What do you think influenced the unit of

      measure used?
990 9 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

The Metric System
For the following exercises, determine the base unit of the metric system described: liter, gram, or meter.

     1. amount of juice in a carton
     2. weight of a puppy
     3. height of a wall

For the following exercises, choose the smaller of the two units.
     4. hectogram or centigram
     5. decameter or kilometer
     6. milliliter or deciliter

 7. Convert 236 cm to meters (m).

 8. Convert 137.5 mg to grams (g).

 9. You purchase 15 kg of birdseed. You divide the birdseed into 10 bags. How many grams of birdseed are in each
      bag?

10. A track is 650 m long. If you run 8 laps around the track, how many kilometers did you run?

Measuring Area
For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each area.

    11. bedroom floor
          12 km2
          12 m2
          12 cm2
          12 mm2

    12. nature preserve
          800 km2
          800 m2
          800 cm2
          800 mm2

    13. desk surface
          0.125 km2
          0.125 m2
          0.125 cm2
          0.125 mm2

For the following exercises, convert the given area to the units shown.
    14. 650,000 cm2 = __________ m2
    15. 17 m2 = __________ cm2
    16. 759 cm2 = __________ mm2

17. A laptop is 30 cm by 20 cm. A sticker on the laptop cover measures 15 mm by 15 mm. How many square
      centimeters of the laptop cover is still visible?

18. A dining room wall is 2.75 m by 2.25 m. A window on the wall is 0.75 m by 1.5 m. How many square meters is the
      surface of the wall?

19. A floor is 6 m by 4 m. A rug on the floor measures 200 cm by 100 cm. How much of the floor, in m2, is not covered
      by the rug?

20. A ceiling is 4 m by 2.5 m. A skylight in the ceiling measures 75 cm by 80 cm. How much of the ceiling, in m2, would
      need to be painted if you decide to change the color of the ceiling?

Measuring Volume
For the following exercises, determine the most reasonable value for each volume.

    21. aquarium
          65,750 km3
          65,750 m3
          65,750 cm3
          65,750 mm3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           9 · Chapter Summary 991

22. carton of soup

      94,000 L

      94 L

      940,000 mL

      940 mL

23. gift box
      6,250 km3
      6,250 m3
      6,250 cm3
      6,250 mm3

For the following exercises, convert the given volume to the units shown.
    24. 59,837 mm3 = __________ cm3
    25. 12.5 dm3 = __________ mL
    26. 368 cm3 = __________ mm3

27. A box has dimensions of                         . The box currently holds 1,750 cm3 of black beans. How many

cubic centimeters of black beans are needed to completely fill the box?

28. The dimensions of a small storage unit are      . What is the volume of a medium storage area with
      dimensions twice the size of the small unit?

29. How much liquid, in liters, can a container with dimensions of                  hold?

30. A box is 20 cm long and 15 cm wide. The volume of the box is 2,100 cm3. What is the height of the box?

Measuring Weight
31. What is the most reasonable estimate for the weight of a small stack of coins?

      120 mg
      12 g
      1.2 kg
      0.12 mt

For the following exercises, convert the given weight to the units shown.
    32. 7,900 g = __________ kg
    33. 81 g = __________ mg
    34. 0.12 kg = __________ g

For the following exercises, determine the total weight in the units shown.
    35. four 450 mg tablets ________ g
    36. six 45 g candy bars ________ kg
    37. seven 1.5 g buttons ________ mg

38. A box of chocolate weighs 2.75 kg. If you share the candy bar equally with 5 friends, how many grams of chocolate
      does each person get?

39. You purchase 15 tomatoes that weigh 100 grams each. If tomatoes cost $1.18 per kilogram, how much did you
      pay?

40. A value-size package of ground chicken costs $23.00. The package weighs 2.5 kg. What is the cost per gram of the
      chicken?

Measuring Temperature
For the following exercises, convert the temperatures to the nearest degree.

    41. 365 °F = __________ °C
    42. 42 °C = __________ °F
    43. 575 °F = __________ °C
    44. 135 °C = __________ °F
    45. -20 °F = __________ °C
    46. 73 °C = __________ °F

47. The temperature of a welder's torch increases 1,112 ºF every 3 minutes. About how many minutes does it take for
      the torch to increase 1,200 ºC?

48. A substance is heated to 302 ºF. As the substance cools the temperature drops 4 ºC every 3 minutes. How many
992 9 · Chapter Summary

      minutes until the temperature of the water reaches 130 ºC?
49. On November 1 the temperature was 40 ºF. On December 1 the temperature was 7 ºC. Which day was cooler?
50. The instructions to cook lasagna say to set the oven at 475 ºF. To the nearest degree, what is the temperature in

      degrees Celsius?

Chapter Test

 1. A student consumed 10 cans of their favorite soda last week. If each can contained 39 g of sugar, how many
      milligrams of sugar did they consume?

 2. An athlete ran a total distance of 154 km in one month while training for a 5K fun run. How many meters did they
      run?

 3. A doctor recommends their patient drinks 5 liters of water on days of vigorous exercise. If the patient drinks 3,400
      mL, how much more do they need to drink?

 4. A garden walkway has the dimensions shown. How many square meters of brick are needed to cover the walkway?

5. A studio apartment has a length of 1,200 cm and a width that one half of the length. What is the area of the
    apartment in meters?

6. A living room is 7 m long and 8 m wide. Carpet costs $9.50 per square meter. How much will it cost to carpet the
    room?

7. Arif mixed two cartons of orange juice that each contain 600 cL, two bottles of cranberry juice that each contain
    1,250 mL, and one 2-liter bottle of soda water to make punch for a party. How much punch, in liters, did Arif make?

8. A fish tank has the dimensions  . What is the capacity of the fish tank in liters?

9. A recipe for chili makes 5.4 L of chili. If a restaurant serves chili in 300 mL bowls, how many bowls of chili can they
    serve?

10. If a person weighs 76 kg but loses 3 kilograms, how much does the person weigh in grams?

11. A car weighs approximately 2 metric tons (mt). If a used car dealer has 222,000 kg of cars in their lot, how many
      cars are in the lot?

12. A restaurant has 126 kg of rice. If each serving contains 125 g, how many servings will they make?

13. A boiling pan of water is 212 °F. As the water cools the temperature drops 12 °C every 3 minutes. How many
      minutes until the temperature of the water reaches 28 °C?

14. On May 1 the temperature was 75 °F. On June 1 the temperature was 28 °C. Which day was warmer?

15. For each log placed on a fire, the temperature increases 45 °C. How many logs are needed for the campfire to
      increase 315 °C?

Access for free at openstax.org
              10 · Introduction 993

10  GEOMETRY

Figure 10.1 The School of Athens by the Renaissance artist Raphael, painted between 1509 and 1511, depicts some of
the greatest minds of ancient times. (credit: modification of work "School of Athens" by Raphael (1483-1520), Vatican
Museums/Wikimedia, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  10.1 Points, Lines, and Planes
  10.2 Angles
  10.3 Triangles
  10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference
  10.5 Tessellations
  10.6 Area
  10.7 Volume and Surface Area
  10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry

      Introduction

The painting The School of Athens presents great figures in history such as Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, Euclid, Archimedes,
and Pythagoras. Other scientists are also represented in the painting.

To the ancient Greeks, the study of mathematics meant the study of geometry above all other subjects. The Greeks
looked for the beauty in geometry and did not allow their geometrical constructions to be "polluted" by the use of
anything as practical as a ruler. They permitted the use of only two tools--a compass for drawing circles and arcs, and an
unmarked straightedge to draw line segments. They would mark off units as needed. However, they never could be sure
of what the units meant. For instance, how long is an inch? These mathematicians defined many concepts.

The Greeks absorbed much from the Egyptians and the Babylonians (around 3000 BCE), including knowledge about
congruence and similarity, area and volume, angles and triangles, and made it their task to introduce proofs for
everything they learned. All of this historical wisdom culminated with Euclid in 300 BCE.

Euclid (325-265 BC) is known as the father of geometry, and his most famous work is the 13-volume collection known as
The Elements, which are said to be "the most studied books apart from the Bible." Euclid brought together everything
offered by the Babylonians, the Egyptians, and the more refined contributions by the Greeks, and set out, successfully, to
organize and prove these concepts as he methodically developed formal theorems.

This chapter begins with a discussion of the most basic geometric tools: the point, the line, and the plane. All other
topics flow from there. Throughout the eight sections, we will talk about how to determine angle measurement and
learn how to recognize properties of special angles, such as right angles and supplementary angles. We will look at the
relationship of angles formed by a transversal, a line running through a set of parallel lines. We will explore the concepts
of area and perimeter, surface area and volume, and transformational geometry as used in the patterns and rigid
994 10 · Geometry

       motions of tessellations. Finally, we will introduce right-angle trigonometry and explore the Pythagorean Theorem.

    10.1 Points, Lines, and Planes

       Figure 10.2 The lower right-hand corner of The School of Athens depicts a figure representing Euclid illustrating to
       students how to use a compass on a small chalkboard. (credit: modification of work "School of Athens" by Raphael
       (1483-1520), Vatican Museums/Wikimedia, Public Domain)

     Learning Objectives

       After completing this section, you should be able to:
        1. Identify and describe points, lines, and planes.
        2. Express points and lines using proper notation.
        3. Determine union and intersection of sets.
       In this section, we will begin our exploration of geometry by looking at the basic definitions as defined by Euclid. These
       definitions form the foundation of the geometric theories that are applied in everyday life.
       In The Elements, Euclid summarized the geometric principles discovered earlier and created an axiomatic system, a
       system composed of postulates. A postulate is another term for axiom, which is a statement that is accepted as truth
       without the need for proof or verification. There were no formal geometric definitions before Euclid, and when terms
       could not be defined, they could be described. In order to write his postulates, Euclid had to describe the terms he
       needed and he called the descriptions "definitions." Ultimately, we will work with theorems, which are statements that
       have been proved and can be proved.

     Points and Lines

       The first definition Euclid wrote was that of a point. He defined a point as "that which has no part." It was later expanded
       to "an indivisible location which has no width, length, or breadth." Here are the first two of the five postulates, as they are
       applicable to this first topic:
        1. Postulate 1: A straight line segment can be drawn joining any two points.
        2. Postulate 2: Any straight line segment can be extended indefinitely in a straight line.
       Before we go further, we will define some of the symbols used in geometry in Figure 10.3:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 995

                                            Figure 10.3 Basic Geometric Symbols for Points and Lines

From Figure 10.3, we see the variations in lines, such as line segments, rays, or half-lines. What is consistent is that two
collinear points (points that lie on the same line) are required to form a line. Notice that a line segment is defined by its
two endpoints showing that there is a definite beginning and end to a line segment. A ray is defined by two points on the
line; the first point is where the ray begins, and the second point gives the line direction. A half-line is defined by two
points, one where the line starts and the other to give direction, but an open circle at the starting point indicates that the
starting point is not part of the half-line. A regular line is defined by any two points on the line and extends infinitely in
both directions. Regular lines are typically drawn with arrows on each end.

  EXAMPLE 10.1

Defining Lines
For the following exercises, use this line (Figure 10.4).

                                             Figure 10.4

1. Define .
2. Define .

3. Define .
4. Define .

    Solution                                                                                             and ends at
1. The symbol , two letters with a straight line above, refers to the line segment that starts at point

     point .
2. The letter alone refers to point .

3. The symbol , two letters with a line above containing arrows on both ends, refers to the line that extends
     infinitely in both directions and contains the points and .

4. The symbol , two letters with a straight line above, refers to the line segment that starts at point and ends at
     point .

      YOUR TURN 10.1

For the following exercises, use this line.

    1. Define
    2. Define
    3.
    4.
996 10 · Geometry

       There are numerous applications of line segments in daily life. For example, airlines working out routes between cities,
       where each city's airport is a point, and the points are connected by line segments. Another example is a city map. Think
       about the intersection of roads, such that the center of each intersection is a point, and the points are connected by line
       segments representing the roads. See Figure 10.5.

                            Figure 10.5 Air Line Routes

EXAMPLE 10.2

Determining the Best Route

View the street map (Figure 10.6) as a series of line segments from point to point. For example, we have vertical line

segments ,    and on the right. On the left side of the map, we have vertical line segments ,  The

horizontal line segments are , , , , ,  and  There are two diagonal line segments, and

Assume that each location is on a corner and that you live next door to the library.

                                                                     Figure 10.6 Street Map
 1. Let's say that you want to stop at the grocery store on your way home from school. Come up with three routes you

      might take to do your errand and then go home. In other words, name the three ways by the line segments in the
      order you would walk, and which way do you think would be the most efficient route?
 2. How about stopping at the library after school? Name four ways you might travel to the library and which way do
      you think is the most efficient?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 997

3. Suppose you need to go to the post office and the dry cleaners on your way home from school. Name three ways
     you might walk to do your errands and end up at home. Which way do you think is the most efficient way to walk,
     get your errands done, and go home?

Solution

1. From school to the grocery store and home: first way                                         ; second way           ;
                                                                                                              ; fourth
third way            . It seems that the third way is the most efficient way.

2. From school to the library: first way  ; second way                                          ; third way

way             . The first way should be the most efficient way.

3. From school to the post office or dry cleaners to home: first way                            ; second way

                     ; third way                         . The third way would be the most efficient way.

      YOUR TURN 10.2

1. Using the street map in Figure 10.6, find two ways you would stop at the dry cleaners and the grocery store after
    school on your way home.

Parallel Lines

Parallel lines are lines that lie in the same plane and move in the same direction, but never intersect. To indicate that the

line and the line are parallel we often use the symbol   The distance between parallel lines remains

constant as the lines extend infinitely in both directions. See Figure 10.7.

                                          Figure 10.7 Parallel Lines

Perpendicular Lines

Two lines that intersect at a angle are perpendicular lines and are symbolized by . If and are perpendicular,

we write   When two lines form a right angle, a angle, we symbolize it with a little square See Figure 10.8.

                                                               Figure 10.8 Perpendicular Lines

  EXAMPLE 10.3

Identifying Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Identify the sets of parallel and perpendicular lines in Figure 10.9.
998 10 · Geometry

                                                                             Figure 10.9

     Solution
Drawing these lines on a grid is the best way to distinguish which pairs of lines are parallel and which are perpendicular.
Because they are on a grid, we assume all lines are equally spaced across the grid horizontally and vertically. The grid
also tells us that the vertical lines are parallel and the horizontal lines are parallel. Additionally, all intersections form a

     angle. Therefore, we can safely say the following:

, the line containing the points and is parallel to the line containing the points and .

, the line containing the points and is parallel to the line containing the points and .

               , the line containing the points and is perpendicular to the line containing the points  and . We know
this because both lines trace grid lines, and intersecting grid lines are perpendicular.

We can also state that           ; the line containing the points and is perpendicular to the line containing the

points and because both lines trace grid lines, which are perpendicular by definition.

We also have            ; the line containing the points and is perpendicular to the line containing the points and

because both lines trace grid lines, which are perpendicular by definition.

Finally, we see that             ; the line containing the points and is perpendicular to the line containing the points

and because both lines trace grid lines, which are perpendicular by definition.

      YOUR TURN 10.3
1. Identify the sets of parallel and perpendicular lines in the given figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 999

Defining Union and Intersection of Sets

Union and intersection of sets is a topic from set theory that is often associated with points and lines. So, it seems
appropriate to introduce a mini-version of set theory here. First, a set is a collection of objects joined by some common
criteria. We usually name sets with capital letters. For example, the set of odd integers between 0 and 10 looks like this:

                           When it involves sets of lines, line segments, or points, we are usually referring to the union or
intersection of set.

The union of two or more sets contains all the elements in either one of the sets or elements in all the sets referenced,

and is written by placing this symbol in between each of the sets. For example, let set           and let set

          Then, the union of sets A and B is

The intersection of two or more sets contains only the elements that are common to each set, and we place this symbol

in between each of the sets referenced. For example, let's say that set         and let set           Then,

the intersection of sets and is

EXAMPLE 10.4

Defining Union and Intersection of Sets
Use the line (Figure 10.10) for the following exercises. Draw each answer over the main drawing.

                                              Figure 10.10

1. Find       .

2. Find       .

3. Find       .

4. Find       .

5. Find       .

Solution

1. Find       . This is the intersection of the ray and the ray          Intersection includes only the elements that

are common to both lines. For this intersection, only the line segment is common to both rays. Thus,

2. Find                                                           Figure 10.11           Union includes all elements
              . The problem is asking for the union of two line segments, and
1000 10 · Geometry

               in the first line and all elements in the second line. Since is part of ,

3. Find                                                              Figure 10.12  . As the line segment  is included on
     the line
                 . This is the union of the line with the line segment
               then the union of these two lines equals the line .

                                    Figure 10.13

4. Find        . The intersection of the line with line segment                    is the set of elements common to both lines.

In this case, the only element in common is the line segment

                                    Figure 10.14

5. Find        . This is the intersection of the ray and the line segment                 Intersection includes elements

common to both lines. There are no elements in common. The intersection yields the empty set, as shown in Figure

10.15. Therefore,                .

                                    Figure 10.15

        YOUR TURN 10.4

  For the following exercises, use the line shown to identify and draw the union or intersection of sets.

      1.
      2.
      3.

Planes

A plane, as defined by Euclid, is a "surface which lies evenly with the straight lines on itself." A plane is a two-dimensional
surface with infinite length and width, and no thickness. We also identify a plane by three noncollinear points, or points
that do not lie on the same line. Think of a piece of paper, but one that has infinite length, infinite width, and no
thickness. However, not all planes must extend infinitely. Sometimes a plane has a limited area.
We usually label planes with a single capital letter, such as Plane , as shown in Figure 10.16, or by all points that
determine the edges of a plane. In the following figure, Plane contains points and , which are on the same line,
and point , which is not on that line. By definition, is a plane. We can move laterally in any direction on a plane.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 1001

                                                                      Figure 10.16 Plane
One way to think of a plane is the Cartesian coordinate system with the -axis marked off in horizontal units, and -axis
marked off in vertical units. In the Cartesian plane, we can identify the different types of lines as they are positioned in
the system, as well as their locations. See Figure 10.17.

                         Figure 10.17 Cartesian Coordinate Plane

This plane contains points , , and . Points and are colinear and form a line segment. Point is not on that line
segment. Therefore, this represents a plane.

To give the location of a point on the Cartesian plane, remember that the first number in the ordered pair is the

horizontal move and the second number is the vertical move. Point is located at                      point is located at

and point is located at  We can also identify the line segment as

Two other concepts to note: Parallel planes do not intersect and the intersection of two planes is a straight line. The
equation of that line of intersection is left to a study of three-dimensional space. See Figure 10.18.

                                                      Figure 10.18 Parallel and Intersecting Planes
To summarize, some of the properties of planes include:

  · Three points including at least one noncollinear point determine a plane.
1002 10 · Geometry

           · A line and a point not on the line determine a plane.
           · The intersection of two distinct planes is a straight line.
          EXAMPLE 10.5
        Identifying a Plane
        For the following exercises, refer to Figure 10.19

                                                         Figure 10.19

1. Identify the location of points , , , and .
2. Describe the line from point to point .
3. Describe the line from point containing point .
4. Does this figure represent a plane?

Solution

1. Point is located at           point is located at                      point is located at  point is located at

2. The line from point to point is a line segment

3. The line from point containing point is a ray starting at point in the direction of .
4. Yes, this figure represents a plane because it contains at least three points, points and form a line segment,

     and neither point nor point is on that line segment.

      YOUR TURN 10.5
For the following exercises, refer to the given figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 1003

      1. Identify the location of points , , , , , and .
      2. Describe the line that includes point and point .
      3. Describe the line from to point .
      4. Describe the line from to point .
      5. Does this figure represent a plane?

  EXAMPLE 10.6

Intersecting Planes
Name two pairs of intersecting planes on the shower enclosure illustration (Figure 10.20).

                                          Figure 10.20

Solution

The plane  intersects plane  , and plane  intersects plane               .

      YOUR TURN 10.6
1. Name two pairs of intersecting planes on the shower enclosure shown.
1004 10 · Geometry

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Plato
          Part of a remarkable chain of Greek mathematicians, Plato (427-347 BC) is known as the teacher. He was responsible
          for shaping the development of Western thought perhaps more powerfully than anyone of his time. One of his
          greatest achievements was the founding of the Academy in Athens where he emphasized the study of geometry.
          Geometry was considered by the Greeks to be the "ultimate human endeavor." Above the doorway to the Academy, an
          inscription read, "Let no one ignorant of geometry enter here."
          The curriculum of the Academy was a 15-year program. The students studied the exact sciences for the first 10 years.
          Plato believed that this was the necessary foundation for preparing students' minds to study relationships that
          require abstract thinking. The next 5 years were devoted to the study of the "dialectic." The dialectic is the art of
          question and answer. In Plato's view, this skill was critical to the investigation and demonstration of innate
          mathematical truths. By training young students how to prove propositions and test hypotheses, he created a culture
          in which the systematic process was guaranteed. The Academy was essentially the world's first university and held the
          reputation as the ultimate center of learning for more than 900 years.

     Check Your Understanding

        Use the graph for the following exercises.

              1. Identify the type of line containing point and point .

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10.1 · Points, Lines, and Planes 1005

     2. Identify the type of line containing points and .
     3. Identify the type of line that references point and contains point .

Use the line for the following exercises.

4. Determine  .

5. Determine  .

6. Determine  .

7. How can you determine whether two lines are parallel?

8. How can you determine whether two lines are perpendicular?

9. Determine if the illustration represents a plane.

        SECTION 10.1 EXERCISES

Use this graph for the following exercises.

     1. Identify the kind of line passing through the points  and .
     2. Identify the kind of line passing through the points  and .
     3. Identify all sets of parallel lines.
     4. Identify all sets of perpendicular lines.

Use the line for the following exercises.
1006 10 · Geometry

5. Find             .

6. Find                .

7. Find             .

8. Find

9. Find

10. Find

For the following exercises, reference this line.

11. Name the points in the set               .

12. Name the points contained in the set           .

13. Name the points in the set            .

14. Name the points in the set            .

15. Name the points in the set            .

16. Name the points in the set            .

17. Name the points in the set   .

18. Name the points in the set            .

Use the given figure for the following exercises.

19. Describe the lighter plane (right) in the drawing.
20. Describe the darker plane (left) in the drawing.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           10.2 · Angles 1007

10.2 Angles

Figure 10.21 This modern architectural design emphasizes sharp reflective angles as part of the aesthetic through the
use of glass walls. (credit: "Société Générale @ La Défense @ Paris" by Images Guilhem Vellut/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify and express angles using proper notation.
 2. Classify angles by their measurement.
 3. Solve application problems involving angles.
 4. Compute angles formed by transversals to parallel lines.
 5. Solve application problems involving angles formed by parallel lines.

Unusual perspectives on architecture can reveal some extremely creative images. For example, aerial views of cities
reveal some exciting and unexpected angles. Add reflections on glass or steel, lighting, and impressive textures, and the
structure is a work of art. Understanding angles is critical to many fields, including engineering, architecture,
landscaping, space planning, and so on. This is the topic of this section.

We begin our study of angles with a description of how angles are formed and how they are classified. An angle is the
joining of two rays, which sweep out as the sides of the angle, with a common endpoint. The common endpoint is called
the vertex. We will often need to refer to more than one vertex, so you will want to know the plural of vertex, which is
vertices.

In Figure 10.22, let the ray stay put. Rotate the second ray in a counterclockwise direction to the size of the angle

you want. The angle is formed by the amount of rotation of the second ray. When the ray continues to rotate in a

counterclockwise direction back to its original position coinciding with ray  the ray will have swept out  We call
the rays the "sides" of the angle.

                        Figure 10.22 Vertex and Sides of an Angle

Classifying Angles

Angles are measured in radians or degrees. For example, an angle that measures radians, or 3.14159 radians, is equal

to the angle measuring  An angle measuring radians, or 1.570796 radians, measures To translate degrees to
1008 10 · Geometry

radians, we multiply the angle measure in degrees by  For example, to write in radians, we have

To translate radians to degrees, we multiply by   For example, to write radians in degrees, we have

Another example of translating radians to degrees and degrees to radians is To write in degrees, we have

                    To write in radians, we have                    . However, we will use degrees throughout this chapter.

FORMULA

To translate an angle measured in degrees to radians, multiply by
To translate an angle measured in radians to degrees, multiply by

Several angles are referred to so often that they have been given special names. A straight angle measures ; a

right angle measures an acute angle is any angle whose measure is less than and an obtuse angle is any

angle whose measure is between and               See Figure 10.23.

                                                      Figure 10.23 Classifying and Naming Angles

An easy way to measure angles is with a protractor (Figure 10.24). A protractor is a very handy little tool, usually made of
transparent plastic, like the one shown here.

         Figure 10.24 Protractor (credit: modification of work "School drawing tools" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
With a protractor, you line up the straight bottom with the horizontal straight line of the angle. Be sure to have the
center hole lined up with the vertex of the angle. Then, look for the mark on the protractor where the second ray lines
up. As you can see from the image, the degrees are marked off. Where the second ray lines up is the measurement of
the angle.

      Make sure you correctly match the center mark of the protractor with the vertex of the angle to be measured.
      Otherwise, you will not get the correct measurement. Also, keep the protractor in a vertical position.

Notation

Naming angles can be done in couple of ways. We can name the angle by three points, one point on each of the sides

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            10.2 · Angles 1009

and the vertex point in the middle, or we can name it by the vertex point alone. Also, we can use the symbols or
before the points. When we are referring to the measure of the angle, we use the symbol . See Figure 10.25.

                                 Figure 10.25 Naming an Angle

We can name this angle     , or  , or

EXAMPLE 10.7

Classifying Angles
Determine which angles are acute, right, obtuse, or straight on the graph (Figure 10.26). You may want to use a
protractor for this one.

  Solution                                             Figure 10.26  Right angles                        Straight angles
                                                                     measure                             measure
Acute angles measure less  Obtuse angles measure between
             than                              and

Most angles can be classified visually or by description. However, if you are unsure, use a protractor.
1010 10 · Geometry

                YOUR TURN 10.7
          1. Determine which angles are acute, obtuse, right, and straight in the graph.

Adjacent Angles

Two angles with the same starting point or vertex and one common side are called adjacent angles. In Figure 10.27,

angle  is adjacent to            . Notice that the way we designate an angle is with a point on each of its two sides

and the vertex in the middle.

                                 Figure 10.27 Adjacent Angles

Supplementary Angles

Two angles are supplementary if the sum of their measures equals  In Figure 10.28, we are given that

       so what is                These are supplementary angles. Therefore, because            , and as

       we have

                                                            Figure 10.28 Supplementary Angles

  EXAMPLE 10.8

Solving for Angle Measurements and Supplementary Angles
Solve for the angle measurements in Figure 10.29.

                                 Figure 10.29

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              10.2 · Angles 1011

Solution

Step 1: These are supplementary angles. We can see this because the two angles are part of a horizontal line, and a

horizontal line represents  Therefore, the sum of the two angles equals

Step 2:

Step 3: Find the measure of each angle:

Step 4: We check:

        YOUR TURN 10.8
  1. Solve for the angle measurements in the figure shown.

Complementary Angles

Two angles are complementary if the sum of their measures equals In Figure 10.30, we have           and
                                                                                              the
          What is the       These are complementary angles. Therefore, because

                                                           Figure 10.30 Complementary Angles

  EXAMPLE 10.9

Solving for Angle Measurements and Complementary Angles
Solve for the angle measurements in Figure 10.31.
1012 10 · Geometry

                                                    Figure 10.31

     Solution
We have that

Then,               ,                , and

      YOUR TURN 10.9
1. Find the measure of each angle in the illustration.

Vertical Angles

When two lines intersect, the opposite angles are called vertical angles, and vertical angles have equal measure. For
example, Figure 10.32 shows two straight lines intersecting each other. One set of opposite angles shows angle markers;
those angles have the same measure. The other two opposite angles have the same measure as well.

  EXAMPLE 10.10                             Figure 10.32 Vertical Angles
                                     Find the measures of the remaining angles.
Calculating Vertical Angles
In Figure 10.33, one angle measures

                                                    Figure 10.33

     Solution                       are vertical angles. Therefore,
The 40-degree angle and

Notice that and are supplementary angles, meaning that the sum of    and         equals  Therefore,

                                 .

Since and are vertical angles, then         equals

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              10.2 · Angles 1013

      YOUR TURN 10.10                                         find the measure of the remaining angles.

1. Given the two intersecting lines in the figure shown and 

Transversals

When two parallel lines are crossed by a straight line or transversal, eight angles are formed, including alternate
interior angles, alternate exterior angles, corresponding angles, vertical angles, and supplementary angles. See Figure
10.34. Angles 1, 2, 7, and 8 are called exterior angles, and angles 3, 4, 5, and 6 are called interior angles.

                                                                    Figure 10.34 Transversal

Alternate Interior Angles

Alternate interior angles are the interior angles on opposite sides of the transversal. These two angles have the same
measure. For example, and are alternate interior angles and have equal measure; and are alternate
interior angles and have equal measure as well. See Figure 10.35.

                                                          Figure 10.35 Alternate Interior Angles

Alternate Exterior Angles

Alternate exterior angles are exterior angles on opposite sides of the transversal and have the same measure. For
example, in Figure 10.36, and are alternate exterior angles and have equal measures; and are alternate
exterior angles and have equal measures as well.

                                                          Figure 10.36 Alternate Exterior Angles
1014 10 · Geometry

     Corresponding Angles

        Corresponding angles refer to one exterior angle and one interior angle on the same side as the transversal, which have
        equal measures. In Figure 10.37, and are corresponding angles and have equal measures; and are
        corresponding angles and have equal measures; and are corresponding angles and have equal measures; and

             are corresponding angles and have equal measures as well.

                                 Figure 10.37 Corresponding Angles

EXAMPLE 10.11

Evaluating Space

You live on the corner of First Avenue and Linton Street. You want to plant a garden in the far corner of your property

(Figure 10.38) and fence off the area. However, the corner of your property does not form the traditional right angle. You

learned from the city that the streets cross at an angle equal to  What is the measure of the angle that will border

your garden?

                                 Figure 10.38

     Solution                                           the supplementary angle is  Therefore, the garden will
As the angle between Linton Street and First Avenue is
form a angle at the corner of your property.

        YOUR TURN 10.11

  1. Suppose you have a similar property to the one in Figure 10.53, but the angle that corresponds to the garden
      corner is . What is the measure between the two cross streets?

  EXAMPLE 10.12
Determining Angles Formed by a Transversal
In Figure 10.39 given that angle 3 measures find the measures of the remaining angles and give a reason for your
solution.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               10.2 · Angles 1015

                                                 Figure 10.39

Solution

               by vertical angles.

by corresponding angles.

               by vertical angles.

               by supplementary angles.

               by vertical angles.

               by alternate exterior angles.

               by vertical angles.

      YOUR TURN 10.12               , find the  ,  , and  .

1. In the given figure if 

EXAMPLE 10.13

Measuring Angles Formed by a Transversal         find the measure of the remaining angles and state the reason for your
In Figure 10.40 given that angle 2 measures
solution.

                                                 Figure 10.40

Solution

               by vertical angles, because and are the opposite angles formed by two intersecting lines.

          by supplementary angles to         or  We see that and form a straight angle as does and

A straight angle measures   so

               by vertical angles, because and are the two opposite angles formed by two intersecting lines.

                             by corresponding angles because they are the same angle formed by the transversal crossing two
parallel lines, one exterior and one interior.
1016 10 · Geometry

                             by vertical angles because and are the two opposite angles formed by two intersecting lines.

                           by alternate exterior angles because, like vertical angles, these angles are the opposite angles
formed by the transversal intersecting two parallel lines.

                           by vertical angles because these are the opposite angles formed by two intersecting lines.

      YOUR TURN 10.13                      , find  , and 

1. In the provided figure given that the 

  EXAMPLE 10.14

Finding Missing Angles
Find the measures of the angles 1, 2, 4, 11, 12, and 14 in Figure 10.41 and the reason for your answer given that and

   are parallel.

                                           Figure 10.41

Solution
              , supplementary angles
              , vertical angles

            , vertical angles
          , corresponding angles
          , vertical angles
          , supplementary angles

      YOUR TURN 10.14
1. Using Figure 10.58, find the measures of angles 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.2 · Angles 1017

WHO KNEW?

The Number 360

Did you ever wonder why there are  in a circle? Why not       or  The number 360 was chosen by

Babylonian astronomers before the ancient Greeks as the number to represent how many degrees in one complete

rotation around a circle. It is said that they chose 360 for a couple of reasons: It is close to the number of days in a

year, and 360 is divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, ...

Check Your Understanding

Classify the following angles as acute, right, obtuse, or straight.

   10. 
   11. 
   12. 
   13. 

For the following exercises, determine the measure of the angles in the given figure.

   14. Find the measure of  and state the reason for your solution.
   15. Find the measure of  and state the reason for your solution.
   16. Find the measure of  and state the reason for your solution.

        SECTION 10.2 EXERCISES

Classify the angles in the following exercises as acute, obtuse, right, or straight.

    1. 
    2. 
    3. 
    4. 
    5. 
    6. 

 7. Use the given figure to solve for the angle measurements.

8. Use the given figure to solve for the angle measurements.
1018 10 · Geometry

         9. Give the measure of the supplement to
        Use the given figure for the following exercises. Let angle 2 measure .

            10. Find the measure of angle 1 and state the reason for your solution.
            11. Find the measure of angle 3 and state the reason for your solution.
            12. Find the measure of angle 4 and state the reason for your solution.
            13. Find the measure of angle 5 and state the reason for your solution.
            14. Find the measure of angle 6 and state the reason and state the reason for your solution.
            15. Find the measure of angle 7 and state the reason for your solution.
            16. Find the measure of angle 8 and state the reason for your solution.
        17. Use the given figure to solve for the angle measurements.

        Use the given figure for the following exercises.

            18. Find the measure of angle 3 and explain the reason for your solution.
            19. Find the measure of angle 8 and explain the reason for your solution.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   10.3 · Triangles 1019

10.3 Triangles

Figure 10.42 The appearance of triangles in buildings is part of modern-day architectural design. (credit: "Inside
Hallgrímskirkja church, Reykjavik, Iceland" by O Palsson/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify triangles by their sides.
 2. Identify triangles by their angles.
 3. Determine if triangles are congruent.
 4. Determine if triangles are similar.
 5. Find the missing side of similar triangles.

How were the ancient Greeks able to calculate the radius of Earth? How did soldiers gauge their target? How was it
possible centuries ago to estimate the height of a sail at sea? Triangles have always played a significant role in how we
find heights of objects too high to measure or distances between objects too far away to calculate. In particular, the
concept of similar triangles has countless applications in the real world, and we shall explore some of those applications
in this section.

Technology has given us instruments that allow us to find measurements of distant objects with little effort. However, it
is all based on the properties of triangles discovered centuries ago. In this section, we will explore the various types of
triangles and their special properties, as well as how to measure interior and exterior angles. We will also explore
congruence theorems and similarity.

Identifying Triangles

Joining any three noncollinear points with line segments produces a triangle. For example, given points , , and ,

connected by the line segments  and we have a triangle, as shown in Figure 10.43.

                                Figure 10.43 Triangle

Triangles are classified by their angles and their sides. All angles in an acute triangle measure  One of the angles in

a right triangle measures symbolized by . One angle in an obtuse triangle measures between and                      Sides

that have equal length are indicated by the same hash marks. Figure 10.44 illustrates the shapes of the basic triangles,
1020 10 · Geometry

their names, and their properties.                                                               is opposite angle  , side

A few other facts to remember as we move forward:

  · The points where the line segments meet are called the vertices (plural for vertex).
  · We often refer to sides of a triangle by the angle they are opposite. In other words, side

      is opposite angle , and side is opposite angle .

                                 Figure 10.44 Types of Triangles

We want to add a special note about right triangles here, as they are referred to more than any other triangle. The side
opposite the right angle is its longest side and is called the hypotenuse, and the sides adjacent to the right angle are
called the legs.

One of the most important properties of triangles is that the sum of the interior angles equals  Euclid discovered
and proved this property using parallel lines. The completed sketch is shown in Figure 10.45.

                                 Figure 10.45 Sum of Interior Angles

This is how the proof goes:

Step 1: Start with a straight line and a point not on the line.

Step 2: Draw a line through point parallel to the line .

Step 3: Construct two transversals (a line crossing the parallel lines), one angled to the right and one angled to the left,
to intersect the parallel lines.

Step 4: Because of the property that alternate interior angles inside parallel lines are equal, we have that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 10.3 · Triangles 1021

Step 5: Notice that                  by the straight angle property.
Step 6: Therefore, by substitution,
                                                  and      we have that

Therefore, the sum of the interior angles of a

  EXAMPLE 10.15

Finding Measures of Angles Inside a Triangle
Find the measure of each angle in the triangle shown (Figure 10.46). We know that the sum of the angles must equal

     Solution                                          Figure 10.46
Step 1: As the sum of the interior angles equals       we can use algebra to find the measures:

Step 2: Now that we have the value of , we can substitute 45 into the other two expressions to find the measure of
those angles:

Step 3: Then,  ,                     , and

      YOUR TURN 10.15
1. Find the measures of each angle in the triangle shown.
1022 10 · Geometry

          EXAMPLE 10.16
        Finding Angle Measures
        Find the measure of angles numbered 1-5 in Figure 10.47.

                                         Figure 10.47

     Solution

The            because it is supplementary with the unknown angle of the adjacent triangle. The unknown angle

measures The                      because of vertical angles. The     because the angle that is supplementary to

the       measures , and angle 5 is the unknown angle in that triangle. The   by vertical angles. Finally,

          as it is the third angle in the triangle with angles measuring and

      YOUR TURN 10.16
1. Find the measure of angles 1, 2, and 3 in the figure shown.

Congruence

If two triangles have equal angles and their sides lengths are equal, the triangles are congruent. In other words, if you
can pick up one triangle and place it on top of the other triangle and they coincide, even if you have to rotate one, they
are congruent.

EXAMPLE 10.17

Determining If Triangles Are Congruent

In Figure 10.48, is the triangle  congruent to triangle            ?

                                         Figure 10.48

     Solution

Triangle       is congruent to triangle  . Angles and              are congruent to angles and , which implies that angle
                                                                  , and side is congruent to side , which implies that
is congruent to angle . Side is congruent to side

side is congruent to side .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            10.3 · Triangles 1023

     YOUR TURN 10.17

1. In the figure shown, is triangle       congruent to triangle  ?

The Congruence Theorems

The following theorems are tools you can use to prove that two triangles are congruent. We use the symbol   to define

congruence. For example,                  .

Side-Side-Side (SSS). If three sides of one triangle are equal to the corresponding sides of the second triangle, then the
triangles are congruent. See Figure 10.49.

                                          Figure 10.49 Side-Side-Side (SSS)

We have that        ,                and        then

Side-Angle-Side (SAS). If two sides of a triangle and the angle between them are equal to the corresponding two sides

and included angle of the second triangle, then the triangles are congruent. See Figure 10.50. We see that

and           ,           , then                      .

                                          Figure 10.50 Side-Angle-Side (SAS)

Angle-Side-Angle (ASA). If two angles and the side between them in one triangle are congruent to the two

corresponding angles and the side between them in a second triangle, then the two triangles are congruent. See Figure

10.51. Notice that        , and              ,           , then

                                          Figure 10.51 Angle-Side-Angle (ASA)
1024 10 · Geometry

Angle-Angle-Side (AAS). If two angles and a nonincluded side of one triangle are congruent to two angles and the
nonincluded corresponding side of a second triangle, then the triangles are congruent.

See Figure 10.52. We see that    ,  , and  , then  .

                                                            Figure 10.52 Angle-Angle-Side (AAS)
  EXAMPLE 10.18
Identifying Congruence Theorems
What congruence theorem is illustrated in Figure 10.53?

                                                                            Figure 10.53
     Solution
AAS: Two angles and a non-included side in one triangle are congruent to the corresponding angles and side in the
second triangle.

        YOUR TURN 10.18
  1. Identify the congruence theorem being illustrated in the figure shown.

  EXAMPLE 10.19
Determining the Congruence Theorem
What congruence theorem is illustrated in Figure 10.54?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      10.3 · Triangles 1025

                  Figure 10.54

     Solution
The SSS theorem.

      YOUR TURN 10.19
1. What congruence theorem is being illustrated in the figure shown?

Similarity

If two triangles have the same angle measurements and are the same shape but differ in size, the two triangles are
similar. The lengths of the sides of one triangle will be proportional to the corresponding sides of the second triangle.
Note that a single fraction is called a ratio, but two fractions equal to each other is called a proportion, such as
This rule of similarity applies to all shapes as well as triangles. Another way to view similarity is by applying a scaling
factor, which is the ratio of corresponding measurements between an object or representation of the object, to an
image that produces the second, similar image.
For example, why are the two images in Figure 10.55 are similar? These two images have the same proportions between
elements. Therefore, they are similar.

                                                                     Figure 10.55 Similarity
1026 10 · Geometry

          EXAMPLE 10.20
        Determining If Triangles Are Similar
        Are the two triangles shown in Figure 10.56 similar?

                                                                            Figure 10.56

     Solution
Step 1: We will look at the proportions within each triangle. In triangle (alpha), the side opposite the angle
measures 7, and the side opposite the angle measures 4. Then, the measures of the corresponding sides in triangle

  (beta) measures 3.5 and 2, respectively. We have

This is the proportion           . The scaling factor is 0.5714.

Step 2: Let's try another correspondence. In triangle , the hypotenuse measures 8.06 and the side opposite the
angle measures 7. In triangle , the hypotenuse measure 4.03 and the side opposite the angle measures 3.5. We
have

Step 3: Now, let's look at the proportions between triangle and triangle The side measuring 2 in triangle
corresponds to the side measuring 4 in triangle , the side measuring 3.5 in triangle corresponds to the side
measuring 7 in triangle and the hypotenuse in triangle corresponds to the hypotenuse in triangle We have

Thus, the corresponding angles are equal and the proportions between each pair of corresponding sides equals 0.5. In
other words, the scaling factor is 0.5. Therefore, the triangles are similar.

YOUR TURN 10.20

1. Is triangle  similar to triangle  in the figure shown?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3 · Triangles 1027

  EXAMPLE 10.21
Proving Similarity
In Figure 10.57, is triangle (delta) similar to triangle (epsilon)? Find the lengths of sides and as part of your answer.

        Figure 10.57

     Solution                                                                                   . That is enough to
We can see that all three angles in triangle are equal to the corresponding angles in triangle
determine similarity. However, we want to find the values of and to prove similarity.

Step 1: We have to do is set up the proportions between the corresponding sides. We have the side that measures 2.375
in triangle corresponding to the side measuring 1.069 in triangle . We have the hypotenuse/side in triangle
measuring 6 corresponding to the hypotenuse/side labeled in triangle . And, finally, the side labeled in triangle
corresponds to the side measuring 2.475 in triangle

Each proportion should be equal. We start with the proportion of the shorter sides. Thus

Step 2: We solve for using the first proportion. Set the two ratios equal to each other, cross-multiply, and solve for .
We have:

So,  .

Step 3: Checking that length in the proportion factor of 0.45, we have:

Step 4: Solving for , we will use the same proportion we used to solve for . We have:
1028 10 · Geometry

        Step 5: We test the proportions. We have the following:

        The proportions are all equal. Therefore, we have proven the property of similarity between triangle and triangle
                YOUR TURN 10.21

          1. Are these triangles similar? Find the lengths of sides and to prove your answer.

          EXAMPLE 10.22
        Applying Similar Triangles
        A person who is 5 feet tall is standing 50 feet away from the base of a tree (Figure 10.58). The tree casts a 57-foot
        shadow. The person casts a 7-foot shadow. What is the height of the tree?

                                                                                    Figure 10.58
             Solution
        The bigger triangle includes a tree at side and the smaller triangle includes the person at the side labeled 5 ft. These
        two triangles are similar because the smaller triangle fits inside the larger triangle at the smallest angle. It would fit
        inside the larger triangle at either of the other two angles as well. That all angles are equal is one of the criteria for
        similar triangles, so we can solve using proportions:

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3 · Triangles 1029

The tree is 40.7 feet tall.
        YOUR TURN 10.22

  1. A person who is 6 feet tall is standing 100 feet away from the base of a tree. The tree casts a shadow 107.5-foot
      shadow. The person's shadow is 7.5 feet long. How tall is the tree?

  EXAMPLE 10.23
Finding Missing Lengths
At a certain time of day, a radio tower casts a shadow 180 feet long (Figure 10.59). At the same time, a 9-foot truck casts
a shadow 15 feet long. What is the height of the tower?

                                                                            Figure 10.59
     Solution
These are similar triangles and the problem can be solved by using proportions:

The height of the tower is 108 ft.
        YOUR TURN 10.23

  1. A tree casts a shadow of 180 feet early in the morning. A 10-foot high garage casts a shadow of 30 feet at the
1030 10 · Geometry

               same time in the morning. What is the height of the tree?

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

          Thales of Miletus
          Thales of Miletus, sixth century BC, is considered one of the greatest mathematicians and philosophers of all time.
          Thales is credited with being the first to discover that the two angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are equal,
          and that the two angles formed by intersecting lines are equal--that is, vertical or opposite angles, are equal. Thales
          is also known for devising a method for measuring the height of the pyramids by similar right triangles. Figure 10.60
          shows his method. He measured the length of the shadow cast by the pyramid at the precise time when his own
          shadow ended at the same place.

                                          Figure 10.60 Thales and Similarity

He equated the vertical height of the pyramid with his own height; the horizontal distance from the pyramid to the tip

of its shadow with the distance from himself and the tip of his own shadow; and finally, the length of the shadow cast

off the top of the pyramid with length of his own shadow cast off the top of his head. Using proportions, as shown in

Figure 10.60, he essentially discovered the properties of similarity for right triangles. That is,  is similar to

Note that to be similar, all corresponding angles between the two triangles must be equal, and the

proportions from one side to another side within each triangle, as well as the proportions of the corresponding sides

between the two triangles must be equal.

Thales is also credited with discovering a method of determining the distance of a ship from the shoreline. Here is
how he did it, as illustrated in Figure 10.61.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3 · Triangles 1031

                                                        Figure 10.61 Thales and Similar Triangles
  Thales walked along the shoreline pointing a stick at the ship until it formed a angle to the shore. Then he walked
  along the shot and placed the stick in the ground at point . He continued walking until he reached point . Then, he
  turned and walked away from the shore at a angle until the stick he placed in the ground at point lined up with
  the ship, point . This is how he created similar triangles and estimated the distance of the ship to the shore by using
  proportions.

Check Your Understanding

17. Find the measure of the missing angle in the given figure.
18. Find the measure of the missing angle in the given figure.
19. In the isosceles triangle shown, find the missing angles.

20. In the figure shown given is parallel to , find and .
1032 10 · Geometry

21. Find and in the given figure.

SECTION 10.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, classify the triangle with the listed angle measurements as acute, right, or obtuse.

1.                  ,  ,

2.                  ,  ,

3.                  ,  ,

4.                  ,  ,

5. Find the missing angles in the given figure.

6. What are the measurements of each angle in the given figure?

7. Find the angle measurements in the given figure.

 8. Find the angle measurements in the given figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                        10.3 · Triangles 1033

For the following exercises, determine which congruence theorem is used to show that the two triangles are
congruent.

     9.
    10.

    11.
12. Are these triangles similar? If so, what is the common proportion or the scaling factor?

13. Are the images in the given figure similar? If so, what is the common proportion or the scaling factor?

14. In the figure shown, given is parallel to  find and .
1034 10 · Geometry

        15. Find and in the given figure.
        16. In the given figure, find the proportions and solve for and .

        17. In the given figure, find the proportions and solve for .

        18. A triangular plot of land has a perimeter of 2,400 ft. The longest side is 200 ft less than twice the shortest side. The
              middle side is 200 ft less than the longest side. Find the lengths of the three sides.

        19. The Orange Tree Hotel in Charleston, North Carolina has a fountain in the shape of a cylinder with a circular
              foundation. The circumference of the foundation is 6 times the radius increased by 12.88 ft. Find the radius of the
              circular foundation. (Use 3.14 as an approximation for .)

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1035

10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference

Figure 10.62 Geometric patterns are often used in fabrics due to the interest the shapes create. (credit: "Triangles" by
Brett Jordan/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify polygons by their sides.
 2. Identify polygons by their characteristics.
 3. Calculate the perimeter of a polygon.
 4. Calculate the sum of the measures of a polygon's interior angles.
 5. Calculate the sum of the measures of a polygon's exterior angles.
 6. Calculate the circumference of a circle.
 7. Solve application problems involving perimeter and circumference.
In our homes, on the road, everywhere we go, polygonal shapes are so common that we cannot count the many uses.
Traffic signs, furniture, lighting, clocks, books, computers, phones, and so on, the list is endless. Many applications of
polygonal shapes are for practical use, because the shapes chosen are the best for the purpose.
Modern geometric patterns in fabric design have become more popular with time, and they are used for the beauty they
lend to the material, the window coverings, the dresses, or the upholstery. This art is not done for any practical reason,
but only for the interest these shapes can create, for the pure aesthetics of design.
When designing fabrics, one has to consider the perimeter of the shapes, the triangles, the hexagons, and all polygons
used in the pattern, including the circumference of any circular shapes. Additionally, it is the relationship of one object to
another and experimenting with different shapes, changing perimeters, or changing angle measurements that we find
the best overall design for the intended use of the fabric. In this section, we will explore these properties of polygons,
the perimeter, the calculation of interior and exterior angles of polygons, and the circumference of a circle.

Identifying Polygons

A polygon is a closed, two-dimensional shape classified by the number of straight-line sides. See Figure 10.63 for some
examples. We show only up to eight-sided polygons, but there are many, many more.
1036 10 · Geometry

                                                                        Figure 10.63 Types of Polygons
        If all the sides of a polygon have equal lengths and all the angles are equal, they are called regular polygons. However,
        any shape with sides that are line segments can classify as a polygon. For example, the first two shapes, shown in Figure
        10.64 and Figure 10.64, are both pentagons because they each have five sides and five vertices. The third shape Figure
        10.64 is a hexagon because it has six sides and six vertices. We should note here that the hexagon in Figure 10.64 is a
        concave hexagon, as opposed to the first two shapes, which are convex pentagons. Technically, what makes a polygon
        concave is having an interior angle that measures greater than . They are hollowed out, or cave in, so to speak.
        Convex refers to the opposite effect where the shape is rounded out or pushed out.

                                                                              Figure 10.64 Polygons
        While there are variations of all polygons, quadrilaterals contain an additional set of figures classified by angles and
        whether there are one or more pairs of parallel sides. See Figure 10.65.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1037

                        Figure 10.65 Types of Quadrilaterals

  EXAMPLE 10.24
Identifying Polygons
Identify each polygon.
 1.

 2.

 3.

 4.
1038 10 · Geometry

         5.

         6.

             Solution
         1. This shape has six sides. Therefore, it is a hexagon.
         2. This shape has four sides, so it is a quadrilateral. It has two pairs of parallel sides making it a parallelogram.
         3. This shape has eight sides making it an octagon.
         4. This is an equilateral triangle, as all three sides are equal.
         5. This is a rhombus; all four sides are equal.
         6. This is a regular octagon, eight sides of equal length and equal angles.

                YOUR TURN 10.24
          Identify the shape.

              1.

              2.

              3.

              4.

          EXAMPLE 10.25
        Determining Multiple Polygons
        What polygons make up Figure 10.66?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1039

                                                                            Figure 10.66
     Solution
Shapes 1 and 5 are hexagons; shapes 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 are triangles; shapes 8 and 17 are
parallelograms; and shape 11 is a trapezoid.

        YOUR TURN 10.25
  1. What polygons make up the figure shown?

Perimeter

Perimeter refers to the outside measurements of some area or region given in linear units. For example, to find out how
much fencing you would need to enclose your backyard, you will need the perimeter. The general definition of
perimeter is the sum of the lengths of the sides of an enclosed region. For some geometric shapes, such as rectangles
and circles, we have formulas. For other shapes, it is a matter of just adding up the side lengths.

A rectangle is defined as part of the group known as quadrilaterals, or shapes with four sides. A rectangle has two sets
of parallel sides with four angles. To find the perimeter of a rectangle, we use the following formula:

FORMULA

The formula for the perimeter of a rectangle is            , twice the length plus twice the width .

For example, to find the length of a rectangle that has a perimeter of 24 inches and a width of 4 inches, we use the
formula. Thus,

The length is 8 units.

The perimeter of a regular polygon with sides is given as  . For example, the perimeter of an equilateral

triangle, a triangle with three equal sides, and a side length of 7 cm is  .
1040 10 · Geometry

          EXAMPLE 10.26
        Finding the Perimeter of a Pentagon
        Find the perimeter of a regular pentagon with a side length of 7 cm (Figure 10.67).

             Figure 10.67

Solution

A regular pentagon has five equal sides. Therefore, the perimeter is equal to                  .

        YOUR TURN 10.26
  1. Find the perimeter of a square table that measures 30 inches across from one side to its opposite side.

  EXAMPLE 10.27
Finding the Perimeter of an Octagon
Find the perimeter of a regular octagon with a side length of 14 cm (Figure 10.68).

             Figure 10.68

Solution

A regular octagon has eight sides of equal length. Therefore, the perimeter of a regular octagon with a side length of 14

cm is     .

      YOUR TURN 10.27
1. Find the perimeter of a regular heptagon with a side length of 3.2 as shown in the figure.

Sum of Interior and Exterior Angles

To find the sum of the measurements of interior angles of a regular polygon, we have the following formula.
  FORMULA
  The sum of the interior angles of a polygon with sides is given by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1041

For example, if we want to find the sum of the interior angles in a parallelogram, we have
Similarly, to find the sum of the interior angles inside a regular heptagon, we have

To find the measure of each interior angle of a regular polygon with sides, we have the following formula.
  FORMULA
  The measure of each interior angle of a regular polygon with sides is given by

For example, find the measure of an interior angle of a regular heptagon, as shown in Figure 10.69. We have

                                      Figure 10.69 Interior Angles

EXAMPLE 10.28

Calculating the Sum of Interior Angles
Find the measure of an interior angle in a regular octagon using the formula, and then find the sum of all the interior
angles using the sum formula.

Solution

An octagon has eight sides, so  .

Step 1: Using the formula          :

So, the measure of each interior angle in a regular octagon is .
Step 2: The sum of the angles inside an octagon, so using the formula:

Step 3: We can test this, as we already know the measure of each angle is . Thus,  .
1042 10 · Geometry

                 YOUR TURN 10.28
          1. Find the measure of each interior angle of a regular pentagon and then find the sum of the interior angles.

          EXAMPLE 10.29
        Calculating Interior Angles
        Use algebra to calculate the measure of each interior angle of the five-sided polygon (Figure 10.70).

                                                         Figure 10.70

Solution

Step 1: Let us find out what the total of the sum of the interior angles should be. Use the formula for the sum of the

angles in a polygon with sides:                   . So,                .

Step 2: We add up all the angles and solve for :

Step 3: We can then find the measure of each interior angle:

        YOUR TURN 10.29
  1. Find the sum of the measures of the interior angles and then find the measure of each interior angle in the

      figure shown.

An exterior angle of a regular polygon is an angle formed by extending a side length beyond the closed figure. The

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1043

measure of an exterior angle of a regular polygon with sides is found using the following formula:
  FORMULA
  To find the measure of an exterior angle of a regular polygon with sides we use the formula

In Figure 10.71, we have a regular hexagon  . By extending the lines of each side, an angle is formed on the

exterior of the hexagon at each vertex. The measure of each exterior angle is found using the formula,        .

                                            Figure 10.71 Exterior Angles

Now, an important point is that the sum of the exterior angles of a regular polygon with sides equals   This implies

that when we multiply the measure of one exterior angle by the number of sides of the regular polygon, we should get

For the example in Figure 10.71, we multiply the measure of each exterior angle, , by the number of sides, six.

Thus, the sum of the exterior angles is

EXAMPLE 10.30

Calculating the Sum of Exterior Angles
Find the sum of the measure of the exterior angles of the pentagon (Figure 10.72).

     Solution                                             Figure 10.72
Each individual angle measures              Then, the sum of the exterior angles is

      YOUR TURN 10.30
1. Find the sum of the measures of the exterior angles in the figure shown.
1044 10 · Geometry

Circles and Circumference

The perimeter of a circle is called the circumference. To find the circumference, we use the formula      where is

the diameter, the distance across the center, or         where is the radius.

FORMULA

The circumference of a circle is found using the formula  where is the diameter of the circle, or
where is the radius.

The radius is ½ of the diameter of a circle. The symbol   is the ratio of the circumference to the

diameter. Because this ratio is constant, our formula is accurate for any size circle. See Figure 10.73.

                                                         Figure 10.73 Circle Diameter and Radius
Let the radius be equal to 3.5 inches. Then, the circumference is

  EXAMPLE 10.31
Finding Circumference with Diameter
Find the circumference of a circle with diameter 10 cm.

     Solution
If the diameter is 10 cm, the circumference is

        YOUR TURN 10.31
  1. Find the circumference of a circle with a radius of 2.25 cm.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1045

  EXAMPLE 10.32

Finding Circumference with Radius
Find the radius of a circle with a circumference of 12 in.

     Solution
If the circumference is 12 in, then the radius is

        YOUR TURN 10.32
  1. Find the radius of a circle with a circumference of

  EXAMPLE 10.33
Calculating Circumference for the Real World
You decide to make a trim for the window in Figure 10.74. How many feet of trim do you need to buy?

                                                 Figure 10.74

     Solution
The trim will cover the 6 feet along the bottom and the two 12-ft sides plus the half circle on top. The circumference of a
semicircle is ½ the circumference of a circle. The diameter of the semicircle is 6 ft. Then, the circumference of the
semicircle would be

Therefore, the total perimeter of the window is                You need to buy 39.4 ft of trim.

      YOUR TURN 10.33

1. To make a trim for the window in the figure shown, you need the perimeter. How many feet of trim do you need
    to buy?
1046 10 · Geometry

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Archimedes

          Figure 10.75 Archimedes (credit: "Archimedes" Engraving from the book Les vrais pourtraits et vies des hommes
          illustres grecz, latins et payens (1586)/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
          The overwhelming consensus is that Archimedes (287-212 BCE) was the greatest mathematician of classical antiquity,
          if not of all time. A Greek scientist, inventor, philosopher, astronomer, physicist, and mathematician, Archimedes
          flourished in Syracuse, Sicily. He is credited with the invention of various types of pulley systems and screw pumps
          based on the center of gravity. He advanced numerous mathematical concepts, including theorems for finding
          surface area and volume. Archimedes anticipated modern calculus and developed the idea of the "infinitely small" and
          the method of exhaustion. The method of exhaustion is a technique for finding the area of a shape inscribed within a
          sequence of polygons. The areas of the polygons converge to the area of the inscribed shape. This technique evolved
          to the concept of limits, which we use today.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1047

One of the more interesting achievements of Archimedes is the way he estimated the number pi, the ratio of the
circumference of a circle to its diameter. He was the first to find a valid approximation. He started with a circle having
a diameter of 1 inch. His method involved drawing a polygon inscribed inside this circle and a polygon circumscribed
around this circle. He knew that the perimeter of the inscribed polygon was smaller than the circumference of the
circle, and the perimeter of the circumscribed polygon was larger than the circumference of the circle. This is shown
in the drawing of an eight-sided polygon. He increased the number of sides of the polygon each time as he got closer
to the real value of pi. The following table is an example of how he did this.

Sides Inscribed Perimeter Circumscribed Perimeter

4                                          2.8284  4.00

8                                          3.0615  3.3137

16                                         3.1214  3.1826

32                                         3.1365  3.1517

64                                         3.1403  3.1441

Archimedes settled on an approximation of          after an iteration of 96 sides. Because pi is an irrational

number, it cannot be written exactly. However, the capability of the supercomputer can compute pi to billions of

decimal digits. As of 2002, the most precise approximation of pi includes 1.2 trillion decimal digits.

      WHO KNEW?

The Platonic Solids

The Platonic solids (Figure 10.76) have been known since antiquity. A polyhedron is a three-dimensional object
constructed with congruent regular polygonal faces. Named for the philosopher, Plato believed that each one of the
solids is associated with one of the four elements: Fire is associated with the tetrahedron or pyramid, earth with the
cube, air with the octahedron, and water with the icosahedron. Of the fifth Platonic solid, the dodecahedron, Plato
said, "... God used it for arranging the constellations on the whole heaven."
1048 10 · Geometry

                                                                          Figure 10.76 Platonic Solids
          Plato believed that the combination of these five polyhedra formed all matter in the universe. Later, Euclid proved that
          exactly five regular polyhedra exist and devoted the last book of the Elements to this theory. These ideas were
          resuscitated by Johannes Kepler about 2,000 years later. Kepler used the solids to explain the geometry of the
          universe. The beauty and symmetry of the Platonic solids have inspired architects and artists from antiquity to the
          present.

     Check Your Understanding

        In the following exercises, identify the regular polygons.

            22.

            23.

            24.
        25. Find the perimeter of the regular pentagon with side length of 6 cm.
        26. Find the sum of the interior angles of a regular hexagon.
        27. Find the measure of each interior angle of a regular hexagon.
        28. Find the measurements of each angle in the given figure.

        29. Find the circumference of the circle with radius equal to 3 cm.

             SECTION 10.4 EXERCISES

        In the following exercises, identify the polygons.

              1.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1049

2.

3.

4. Find the perimeter of a regular hexagon with side length equal to 12 cm.

5. A regular quadrilateral has a perimeter equal to 72 in. Find the length of each side.

6. The perimeter of an equilateral triangle is 72 cm. Find the length of each side.

7. Find the dimensions of a rectangular region with perimeter of 34 m, where the shorter side is 13 less than twice

the longer side. Let  . Then, the shorter side is

8. Find the perimeter of the figure shown.

 9. Find the perimeter of a fenced-in area where the length is 22 m, and the width is ½ of the length plus 3.
10. You have 140 ft of fencing to enclose a rectangular region that borders a river. You do not have to fence in the side

      that borders the river. The width is equal to , and the length is equal to six times the width less 10. Find the
      dimensions of the region to be fenced.

11. What is the measure of each interior angle of a regular hexagon?
12. What is the sum of the interior angles of a triangle?
13. Use algebra to find the measure of each angle of the quadrilateral shown.

14. Find the missing sides and angles of the parallelogram shown.
1050 10 · Geometry

        15. Find the sum of the interior and exterior angles of the regular pentagon shown.

        16. What is the measure of each exterior angle of a regular hexagon?
        17. What is the sum of the exterior angles of a triangle?
        18. What is the sum of the exterior angles of an octagon?
        19. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 5.
        20. Find the circumference of a circle with a diameter of 7.
        21. Find the perimeter of the window in the figure shown.

        22. Find the circumference of a circle with a radius of 1.25 cm.
        23. The hands of a clock vary in length. If the hour hand is 5 inches long and the minute hand is 7 inches long, how far

              does each hand travel in 12 hours?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            10.4 · Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference 1051

24. A bicycle tire has a radius of 12 in. How many revolutions will the tire make if the bicycle travels approximately 377
      ft?

25. When Chicago installed its Centennial Ferris wheel at Navy Pier in 1995, there was much discussion about how big
      it could be. The city wanted it to be as high as possible because the incredible views of the city would surely draw
      the tourists. It was decided that the height of the wheel could safely reach 150 ft. If the wheel begins 10 ft above
      ground level, what is the circumference of the Ferris wheel?

26. Find the perimeter of an equilateral triangle with side length equal to 21 cm.
27. What is the diameter of a circle whose circumference is 39.6 cm?
1052 10 · Geometry

    10.5 Tessellations

        Figure 10.77 Penrose tiling represents one type of tessellation. (credit: "Penrose Tiling" by Inductiveload/Wikimedia
        Commons, Public Domain)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Apply translations, rotations, and reflections.
         2. Determine if a shape tessellates.
        The illustration shown above (Figure 10.77) is an unusual pattern called a Penrose tiling. Notice that there are two types
        of shapes used throughout the pattern: smaller green parallelograms and larger blue parallelograms. What's interesting
        about this design is that although it uses only two shapes over and over, there is no repeating pattern.
        In this section, we will focus on patterns that do repeat. Repeated patterns are found in architecture, fabric, floor tiles,
        wall patterns, rug patterns, and many unexpected places as well. It may be a simple hexagon-shaped floor tile, or a
        complex pattern composed of several different motifs. These two-dimensional designs are called regular (or periodic)
        tessellations. There are countless designs that may be classified as regular tessellations, and they all have one thing in
        common--their patterns repeat and cover the plane.
        We will explore how tessellations are created and experiment with making some of our own as well. The topic of
        tessellations belongs to a field in mathematics called transformational geometry, which is a study of the ways objects
        can be moved while retaining the same shape and size. These movements are termed rigid motions and symmetries.

                 WHO KNEW?
          M. C. Escher
          A good place to start the study of tessellations is with the work of M. C. Escher. The Dutch graphic artist was famous
          for the dimensional illusions he created in his woodcuts and lithographs, and that theme is carried out in many of his
          tessellations as well. Escher became obsessed with the idea of the "regular division of the plane." He sought ways to
          divide the plane with shapes that would fit snugly next to each other with no gaps or overlaps, represent beautiful
          patterns, and could be repeated infinitely to fill the plane. He experimented with practically every geometric shape
          imaginable and found the ones that would produce a regular division of the plane. The idea is similar to dividing a
          number by one of its factors. When a number divides another number evenly, there are no remainders, like there are
          no gaps when a shape divides or fills the plane.
          Escher went far beyond geometric shapes, beyond triangles and polygons, beyond irregular polygons, and used
          other shapes like figures, faces, animals, fish, and practically any type of object to achieve his goal; and he did achieve

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               10.5 · Tessellations 1053

it, beautifully, and left it for the ages to appreciate.

VIDEO
M.C. Escher: How to Create a Tessellation (https://openstax.org/r/create_tessellation)
The Mathematical Art of M.C. Escher (https://openstax.org/r/mathematical_art)

Tessellation Properties and Transformations

A regular tessellation means that the pattern is made up of congruent regular polygons, same size and shape, including
some type of movement; that is, some type of transformation or symmetry. Here we consider the rigid motions of
translations, rotations, reflections, or glide reflections. A plane of tessellations has the following properties:

· Patterns are repeated and fill the plane.
· There are no gaps or overlaps. Shapes must fit together perfectly. (It was Escher who determined that a proper

    tessellation could have no gaps and no overlaps.)
· Shapes are combined using a transformation.
· All the shapes are joined at a vertex. In other words, if you were to draw a circle around a vertex, it would include a

    corner of each shape touching at that vertex.
· For a tessellation of regular congruent polygons, the sum of the measures of the interior angles that meet at a

    vertex equals

In Figure 10.78, the tessellation is made up of squares. There are four squares meeting at a vertex. An interior angle of a

square is and the sum of four interior angles is          In Figure 10.79, the tessellation is made up of regular

hexagons. There are three hexagons meeting at each vertex. The interior angle of a hexagon is  and the sum of

three interior angles is  Both tessellations will fill the plane, there are no gaps, the sum of the interior angle

meeting at the vertex is  and both are achieved by translation transformations. These tessellations work because all

the properties of a tessellation are present.

                          Figure 10.78 Tessellation - Squares

                                                           Figure 10.79 Tessellation - Hexagons
The movements or rigid motions of the shapes that define tessellations are classified as translations, rotations,
1054 10 · Geometry

reflections, or glide reflections. Let's first define these movements and then look at some examples showing how these
transformations are revealed.

Translation

A translation is a movement that shifts the shape vertically, horizontally, or on the diagonal. Consider the trapezoid

in Figure 10.80. We have translated it 3 units to the right and 3 units up. That means every corner is moved by

the number of units and in the direction specified. Mathematicians will indicate this movement with a vector, an arrow

that is drawn to illustrate the criteria and the magnitude of the translation. The location of the translated trapezoid is

marked with the vertices,        but it is still the exact same shape and size as the original trapezoid  .

                                                                    Figure 10.80 Translation

  EXAMPLE 10.34

Creating a Translation
Suppose you have a hexagon on a grid as in Figure 10.81. Translate the hexagon 5 units to the right and 3 units up.

                                                                            Figure 10.81  . Once translated, the points become

     Solution
The best way to do this is by translating the individual points

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.5 · Tessellations 1055

      YOUR TURN 10.34                 Figure 10.82
1. Translate the hexagon with points              6 units down.

Rotation

The rotation transformation occurs when you rotate a shape about a point and at a predetermined angle. In Figure
10.83, the triangle is rotated around the rotation point by and then translated 7 units up and 4 units over to the
right. That means that each corner is translated to the new location by the same number of units and in the same
direction.
1056 10 · Geometry

We can see that     is mapped to                Figure 10.83 Rotation                        , the triangle would
be upside down.                   by a rotation of up and to the right. If rotated again by

EXAMPLE 10.35

Applying a Rotation
Figure 10.84 illustrates a tessellation begun with an equilateral triangle. Explain how this pattern is produced.

                                                                            Figure 10.84
     Solution
A rotation to the right or to the left around the vertex by six times, produces the hexagonal shape. The sixth rotation
brings the triangle back to its original position. Then, a reflection up and another one on the diagonal will reproduce the
pattern. When a shape returns to its original position by a rotation, we say that it has rotational symmetry.

        YOUR TURN 10.35
  1. Starting with the triangle in the figure shown, explain how the pattern on the right was achieved.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   10.5 · Tessellations 1057

Reflection

A reflection is the third transformation. A shape is reflected about a line and the new shape becomes a mirror image.
You can reflect the shape vertically, horizontally, or on the diagonal. There are two shapes in Figure 10.85. The
quadrilateral is reflected horizontally; the arrow shape is reflected vertically.

                                                                     Figure 10.85 Reflection

Glide Reflection

The glide reflection is the fourth transformation. It is a combination of a reflection and a translation. This can occur by
first reflecting the shape and then gliding or translating it to its new location, or by translating first and then reflecting.
The example in Figure 10.86 shows a trapezoid, which is reflected over the dashed line, so it appears upside down. Then,
we shifted the shape horizontally by 6 units to the right. Whether we use the glide first or the reflection first, the end
result is the same in most cases. However, the tessellation shown in the next example can only be achieved by a
reflection first and then a translation.
1058 10 · Geometry

                                                                 Figure 10.86 Glide Reflection

  EXAMPLE 10.36

Applying the Glide Reflection
An obtuse triangle is reflected about the dashed line, and the two shapes are joined together. How does the tessellation
shown in Figure 10.87 materialize?

                          Figure 10.87

Solution

The new shape is reflected horizontally and joined with the original shape. It is then translated vertically and horizontally

to make up the tessellation. Notice the blank spaces next to the vertical pattern. These areas are made up of the exact

original shape rotated    but with no line up the center. These rotated shapes are translated horizontally and

vertically, and thus, the plane is tessellated with no gaps. This is an example of a glide reflection where the order of the

transformations matters.

      YOUR TURN 10.36
1. Explain how this tessellation of equilateral triangles could be produced.

  EXAMPLE 10.37
Applying More Than One Tessellation
Show how this tessellation (Figure 10.88) can be achieved.

Access for free at openstax.org
                    10.5 · Tessellations 1059

                                                                            Figure 10.88
     Solution
This is a tessellation that has one color on the front of the trapezoid and a different color on the back. There is a
translation on the diagonal, and a reflection vertically. These are two separate transformations resulting in two new
placements of the trapezoid. We can call this a combination of two transformations or a glide reflection.

        YOUR TURN 10.37

  1. How does this tessellation of the squares come about?

Interior Angles

The sum of the interior angles of a tessellation is . In Figure 10.89, the tessellation is made of six triangles formed

into the shape of a hexagon. Each angle inside a triangle equals , and the six vertices meet the sum of those interior

angles,          .
1060 10 · Geometry

                    Figure 10.89 Interior Angles at the Vertex of Triangles

In Figure 10.90, the tessellation is made up of trapezoids, such that two of the interior angles of each trapezoid equals

and the other two angles equal . Thus, the sum of the interior angles where the vertices of four trapezoids meet

equals              .

                                              Figure 10.90 Interior Angles at the Vertex of Trapezoids
These tessellations illustrate the property that the shapes meet at a vertex where the interior angles sum to .

Tessellating Shapes

We might think that all regular polygons will tessellate the plane by themselves. We have seen that squares do and
hexagons do. The pattern of squares in Figure 10.91 is a translation of the shape horizontally and vertically. The
hexagonal pattern in Figure 10.92, is translated horizontally, and then on the diagonal, either to the right or to the left.
This particular pattern can also be formed by rotations. Both tessellations are made up of congruent shapes and each
shape fits in perfectly as the pattern repeats.

                                                 Figure 10.91 Translation Horizontally and Vertically

                                            Figure 10.92 Translation Horizontally and Slide Diagonally

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   10.5 · Tessellations 1061

We have also seen that equilateral triangles will tessellate the plane without gaps or overlaps, as shown in Figure 10.93.
The pattern is made by a reflection and a translation. The darker side is the face of the triangle and the lighter side is the
back of the triangle, shown by the reflection. Each triangle is reflected and then translated on the diagonal.

                                                     Figure 10.93 Reflection and Glide Translation
Escher experimented with all regular polygons and found that only the ones mentioned, the equilateral triangle, the
square, and the hexagon, will tessellate the plane by themselves. Let's try a few other regular polygons to observe what
Escher found.

  EXAMPLE 10.38
Tessellating the Plane
Do regular pentagons tessellate the plane by themselves (Figure 10.94)?

                                                                            Figure 10.94
     Solution
We can see that regular pentagons do not tessellate the plane by themselves. There is a gap, a gap in the shape of a
parallelogram. We conclude that regular pentagons will not tessellate the plane by themselves.

        YOUR TURN 10.38
  1. Do regular heptagons tessellate the plane by themselves?

  EXAMPLE 10.39
Tessellating Octagons
Do regular octagons tessellate the plane by themselves (Figure 10.95)?
1062 10 · Geometry

                                                                                    Figure 10.95
             Solution
        Again, we see that regular octagons do not tessellate the plane by themselves. The gaps, however, are squares. So, two
        regular polygons, an octagon and a square, do tessellate the plane.

                 YOUR TURN 10.39
          1. Do regular dodecagons (12-sided regular polygons) tessellate the plane by themselves?

        Just because regular pentagons do not tessellate the plane by themselves does not mean that there are no pentagons
        that tessellate the plane, as we see in Figure 10.96.

                                                                  Figure 10.96 Tessellation of Pentagons
        Another example of an irregular polygon that tessellates the plane is by using the obtuse irregular triangle from a
        previous example. What transformations should be performed to produce the tessellation shown in Figure 10.97?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   10.5 · Tessellations 1063

                                             Figure 10.97 Tessellating with Obtuse Irregular Triangles
First, the triangle is reflected over the tip at point , and then translated to the right and joined with the original triangle
to form a parallelogram. The parallelogram is then translated on the diagonal and to the right and to the left.

Naming

A tessellation of squares is named by choosing a vertex and then counting the number of sides of each shape touching
the vertex. Each square in the tessellation shown in Figure 10.98 has four sides, so starting with square , the first
number is 4, moving around counterclockwise to the next square meeting the vertex, square , we have another 4,
square adds another 4, and finally square adds a fourth 4. So, we would name this tessellation a 4.4.4.4.
The hexagon tessellation, shown in Figure 10.99 has six sides to the shape and three hexagons meet at the vertex. Thus,
we would name this a 6.6.6. The triangle tessellation, shown in Figure 10.100 has six triangles meeting the vertex. Each
triangle has three sides. Thus, we name this a 3.3.3.3.3.3.

                                                                       Figure 10.98 4.4.4.4

                                                                         Figure 10.99 6.6.6

                                                                    Figure 10.100 3.3.3.3.3.3
  EXAMPLE 10.40
Creating Your Own Tessellation
Create a tessellation using two colors and two shapes.
1064 10 · Geometry

             Solution
        We used a parallelogram and an isosceles triangle. The parallelogram is reflected vertically and horizontally so that only
        every other corner touches. The triangles are reflected vertically and horizontally and then translated over the
        parallelogram. The result is alternating vertical columns of parallelograms and then triangles (Figure 10.101).

                                                                                    Figure 10.101
                 YOUR TURN 10.40
          1. Create a tessellation using polygons, regular or irregular.

     Check Your Understanding

        30. What are the properties of repeated patterns that let them be classified as tessellations?
        31. Explain how the using the transformation of a translation is applied to the movement of this shape starting with

              point .

        32. Starting with the triangle with vertex , describe how the transformation in this drawing is achieved.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   10.5 · Tessellations 1065

33. Starting with a triangle with a darker face and a lighter back, describe how this pattern came about.

34. Name the tessellation in the figure shown.

        SECTION 10.5 EXERCISES

 1. What type of movements are used to change the orientation and placement of a shape?
 2. What is the name of the motion that renders a shape upside down?
 3. What do we call the motion that moves a shape to the right or left or on the diagonal?
 4. If you are going to tessellate the plane with a regular polygon, what is the sum of the interior angles that surround

      a vertex?
 5. Does a regular heptagon tesselate the plane by itself?
 6. What are the only regular polygons that will tessellate the plane by themselves?
 7. What is the transformation called that revolves a shape about a point to a new position?
 8. Transformational geometry is a study of what?
 9. Describe how to achieve a rotation transformation.
10. Construct a rotation of the triangle shown.
1066 10 · Geometry

        11. Shapes can be rotated around a point of rotation or a ____________.
        12. What is the name of the transformation that involves a reflection and a translation?
        13. What can a tessellation not have between shapes?
        14. Describe the transformation shown.

        15. What do we call a transformation that produces a mirror image?
        16. Sketch the reflection of the shape about the dashed line.

        17. Sketch the reflection of the shape about the dashed line.

        18. Sketch the translation of the shape 3 units to the right and 3 units vertically.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   10.5 · Tessellations 1067

19. Rotate the shape about the rotation point using point as your guide.
20. Do regular pentagons tessellate the plain by themselves?
21. What do regular tessellations have in common?
22. How would we name a tessellation of squares as shown in the figure?
23. How do we name a tessellation of octagons and squares as shown in the figure?
24. How would we name a tessellation of trapezoids as shown in the figure?
1068 10 · Geometry

    10.6 Area

Figure 10.102 The area of a regulation baseball diamond must adhere to specific measurements to be legal. (credit:
"Diagram of Regulation Diamond" by Erica Fischer from "Baseball" The World Book, 1920/Flickr, Public Domain, CC BY
2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate the area of triangles.
 2. Calculate the area of quadrilaterals.
 3. Calculate the area of other polygons.
 4. Calculate the area of circles.

Some areas carry more importance than other areas. Did you know that in a baseball game, when the player hits the ball
and runs to first base that he must run within a 6-foot wide path? If he veers off slightly to the right, he is out. In other
words, a few inches can be the difference in winning or losing a game. Another example is real estate. On Manhattan
Island, one square foot of real estate is worth far more than real estate in practically any other area of the country. In
other words, we place a value on area. As the context changes, so does the value.

Area refers to a region measured in square units, like a square mile or a square foot. For example, to purchase tile for a
kitchen floor, you would need to know how many square feet are needed because tile is sold by the square foot.
Carpeting is sold by the square yard. As opposed to linear measurements like perimeter, which in in linear units. For
example, fencing is sold in linear units, a linear foot or yard. Linear dimensions refer to an outline or a boundary. Square
units refer to the area within that boundary. Different items may have different units, but either way, you must know the
linear dimensions to calculate the area.

Many geometric shapes have formulas for calculating areas, such as triangles, regular polygons, and circles. To calculate

areas for many irregular curves or shapes, we need calculus. However, in this section, we will only look at geometric

shapes that have known area formulas. The notation for area, as mentioned, is in square units and we write sq in or sq

cm, or use an exponent, such as or  Note that linear measurements have no exponent above the units or we can

say that the exponent is 1.

Area of Triangles

The formula for the area of a triangle is given as follows.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.6 · Area 1069

FORMULA                             where represents the base and represents the height.
The area of a triangle is given as

For example, consider the triangle in Figure 10.103.

                                                                    Figure 10.103 Triangle 1
The base measures 4 cm and the height measures 5 cm. Using the formula, we can calculate the area:

In Figure 10.104, the triangle has a base equal to 7 cm and a height equal to 3.5 cm. Notice that we can only find the
height by dropping a perpendicular to the base. The area is then

                                                                    Figure 10.104 Triangle 2

  EXAMPLE 10.41

Finding the Area of a Triangle
Find the area of this triangle that has a base of 4 cm and the height is 6 cm (Figure 10.105).

                                                      Figure 10.105

     Solution
Using the formula, we have
1070 10 · Geometry

                 YOUR TURN 10.41
          1. Find the area of the triangle with a base equal to 4 cm and the height equal to 4 cm.

Area of Quadrilaterals

A quadrilateral is a four-sided polygon with four vertices. Some quadrilaterals have either one or two sets of parallel
sides. The set of quadrilaterals include the square, the rectangle, the parallelogram, the trapezoid, and the rhombus. The
most common quadrilaterals are the square and the rectangle.

Square

In Figure 10.106, a              grid is represented with twelve               squares across each row, and twelve

        squares down each column. If you count the little squares, the sum equals 144 squares. Of course, you do not

have to count little squares to find area--we have a formula. Thus, the formula for the area of a square, where

                     , is        . The area of the square in Figure 10.106 is

FORMULA                                  Figure 10.106 Area of a Square
The formula for the area of a square is        or

Rectangle

Similarly, the area for a rectangle is found by multiplying length times width. The rectangle in Figure 10.107 has width
equal to 5 in and length equal to 12 in. The area is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         10.6 · Area 1071

                                     Figure 10.107 Area of a Rectangle

FORMULA
The area of a rectangle is given as

Many everyday applications require the use of the perimeter and area formulas. Suppose you are remodeling your home
and you want to replace all the flooring. You need to know how to calculate the area of the floor to purchase the correct
amount of tile, or hardwood, or carpet. If you want to paint the rooms, you need to calculate the area of the walls and
the ceiling to know how much paint to buy, and the list goes on. Can you think of other situations where you might need
to calculate area?

EXAMPLE 10.42

Finding the Area of a Rectangle
You have a garden with an area of 196 square feet. How wide can the garden be if the length is 28 feet?

     Solution                        Letting the width equal :
The area of a rectangular region is

      YOUR TURN 10.42
1. Find the area of a rectangular region with a length of 18 feet and a width 1/3 of the length.

EXAMPLE 10.43

Determining the Cost of Floor Tile
Jennifer is planning to install vinyl floor tile in her rectangular-shaped basement, which measures 29 ft by 16 ft. How
many boxes of floor tile should she buy and how much will it cost if one box costs $50 and covers

Solution

The area of the basement floor is                             We will divide this area by  Thus,         Therefore,

Jennifer will have to buy 24 boxes of tile at a cost $1,200.

        YOUR TURN 10.43

  1. You remodel your kitchen and decide to change out the tile floor. The floor measures 30 ft by 15 ft. One box of
      tile costs $45 and covers 10 ft2. How many boxes of tile should you buy, and what will it cost?

Parallelogram

The area of a parallelogram can be found using the formula for the area of a triangle. Notice in Figure 10.108, if we cut a
diagonal across the parallelogram from one vertex to the opposite vertex, we have two triangles. If we multiply the area
1072 10 · Geometry

        of a triangle by 2, we have the area of a parallelogram:

                                          Figure 10.108 Area of a Parallelogram

FORMULA
The area of a parallelogram is

For example, if we have a parallelogram with the base be equal to 10 inches and the height equal to 5 inches, the area
will be

EXAMPLE 10.44

Finding the Area of a Parallelogram                               find the exact area of the parallelogram.
In the parallelogram (Figure 10.109), if

                                          Figure 10.109

     Solution                    we have
Using the formula of

      YOUR TURN 10.44
1. Find the area of the parallelogram.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       10.6 · Area 1073

  EXAMPLE 10.45

Finding the Area of a Parallelogram Park
The boundaries of a city park form a parallelogram (Figure 10.110). The park takes up one city block, which is contained
by two sets of parallel streets. Each street measures 55 yd long. The perpendicular distance between streets is 39 yd.
How much sod, sold by the square foot, should the city purchase to cover the entire park and how much will it cost? The
sod is sold for $0.50 per square foot, installation is $1.50 per square foot, and the cost of the equipment for the day is
$100.

                                                        Figure 10.110

     Solution
Step 1: As sod is sold by the square foot, the first thing we have to do is translate the measurements of the park from
yards to feet. There are 3 ft to a yard, so 55 yd is equal to 165 ft, and 39 yd is equal to 117 ft.

Step 2: The park has the shape of a parallelogram, and the formula for the area is  :

Step 3: The city needs to purchase  of sod. The cost will be $0.50 per square foot for the sod and $1.50 per

square foot for installation, plus $100 for equipment:

      YOUR TURN 10.45

1. Suppose your city has a park just like the one in Example 10.45. The length of each street is 49 yd, and the
    perpendicular distance between streets is 31 yd. How much sod, sold by the square foot at $0.45 per square foot
    plus $1.00 per square foot for installation, and a flat $50 fee for equipment, should be purchased and what will
    the cost be?
1074 10 · Geometry

     Trapezoid

        Another quadrilateral is the trapezoid. A trapezoid has one set of parallel sides or bases. The formula for the area of a
        trapezoid with parallel bases and and height is given here.

          FORMULA
          The formula for the area of a trapezoid is given as

        For example, find the area of the trapezoid in Figure 10.111 that has base equal to 8 cm, base equal to 6 cm, and
        height equal to 6 cm.

The area is                            Figure 10.111 Area of a Trapezoid
                                 .

  EXAMPLE 10.46                                         Find the exact perimeter of    , and then find the area.

Finding the Area of a Trapezoid
           (Figure 10.112) is a regular trapezoid with

                                                        Figure 10.112

Solution

The perimeter is the measure of the boundary of the shape, so we just add up the lengths of the sides. We have

                                 Then, the area of the trapezoid using the formula is                                              .

      YOUR TURN 10.46
1. Find the area of the trapezoid shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              10.6 · Area 1075

Rhombus

The rhombus has two sets of parallel sides. To find the area of a rhombus, there are two formulas we can use. One
involves determining the measurement of the diagonals.

FORMULA

The area of a rhombus is found using one of these formulas:

·              where and are the diagonals.

·             where is the base and is the height.

For our purposes here, we will use the formula that uses diagonals. For example, if the area of a rhombus is

and the measure of  find the measure of To solve this problem, we input the known values into the formula

and solve for the unknown. See Figure 10.113.

                                        Figure 10.113 Area of a Rhombus

We have that

EXAMPLE 10.47

Finding the Area of a Rhombus           if the area of the rhombus is    and the measure of
Find the measurement of the diagonal

     Solution
Use the formula with the known values:
1076 10 · Geometry

      YOUR TURN 10.47             , the measure of  . Find the measure of .
1. A rhombus has an area of

EXAMPLE 10.48

Finding the Area of a Rhombus

You notice a child flying a rhombus-shaped kite on the beach. When it falls to the ground, it falls on a beach towel

measuring           by           You notice that one of the diagonals of the kite is the same length as the  width of the

towel. The second diagonal appears to be 2 in longer. What is the area of the kite (Figure 10.114)?

                                  Figure 10.114

     Solution
Using the formula, we have:

      YOUR TURN 10.48             If one of the diagonals measures 25 in, what is the length of the other

1. You have a kite that measures
    diagonal?

Area of Polygons

To find the area of a regular polygon, we need to learn about a few more elements. First, the apothem of a regular
polygon is a line segment that starts at the center and is perpendicular to a side. The radius of a regular polygon is also
a line segment that starts at the center but extends to a vertex. See Figure 10.115.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              10.6 · Area 1077

                        Figure 10.115 Apothem and Radius of a Polygon

FORMULA

The area of a regular polygon is found with the formula           where is the apothem and is the perimeter.

For example, consider the regular hexagon shown in Figure 10.116 with a side length of 4 cm, and the apothem
measures

                                          Figure 10.116 Area of a Hexagon

We have the perimeter,                    We have the apothem as           Then, the area is:

  EXAMPLE 10.49

Finding the Area of a Regular Octagon
Find the area of a regular octagon with the apothem equal to 18 cm and a side length equal to 13 cm (Figure 10.117).

     Solution                             Figure 10.117
Using the formula, we have the perimeter                 Then, the area is

      YOUR TURN 10.49
1. Find the area of the regular pentagon with the apothem equal to 5.5 cm and the side length equal to 7 cm.
1078 10 · Geometry

Changing Units

Often, we have the need to change the units of one or more items in a problem to find a solution. For example, suppose
you are purchasing new carpet for a room measured in feet, but carpeting is sold in terms of yards. You will have to
convert feet to yards to purchase the correct amount of carpeting. Or, you may need to convert centimeters to inches, or
feet to meters. In each case, it is essential to use the correct equivalency.

EXAMPLE 10.50

Changing Units
Carpeting comes in units of square yards. Your living room measures 21 ft wide by 24 ft long. How much carpeting do
you buy?

Solution

We must convert feet to yards. As there are 3 ft in 1 yd, we have     and           Then,

      YOUR TURN 10.50

1. You want to carpet your bedroom, which measures 15 ft wide by 18 ft long. Carpeting is sold by the square yard,
    so you must convert your measurements to yards. How much carpeting do you buy?

Area of Circles

Just as the circumference of a circle includes the number so does the formula for the area of a circle. Recall that is a

non-terminating, non-repeating decimal number:                     . It represents the ratio of the circumference to the

diameter, so it is a critical number in the calculation of circumference and area.

FORMULA

The area of a circle is given as  where is the radius.

For example, to find the of the circle with radius equal to 3 cm, as shown in Figure 10.118, is found using the formula

                                  Figure 10.118 Circle with Radius 3

We have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  10.6 · Area 1079

  EXAMPLE 10.51

Finding the Area of a Circle
Find the area of a circle with diameter of 16 cm.

     Solution
The formula for the area of a circle is given in terms of the radius, so we cut the diameter in half. Then, the area is

      YOUR TURN 10.51
1. Find the area of the circle with a radius of 3 cm.

EXAMPLE 10.52

Determining the Better Value for Pizza
You decide to order a pizza to share with your friend for dinner. The price for an 8-inch diameter pizza is $7.99. The price
for 16-inch diameter pizza is $13.99. Which one do you think is the better value?

Solution

The area of the 8-inch diameter pizza is               The area of the 16-inch diameter pizza is

                 Next, we divide the cost of each pizza by its area in square inches. Thus,       per

square inch and  per square inch. So clearly, the 16-inch pizza is the better value.

        YOUR TURN 10.52

  1. You can buy a 9-inch diameter pizza for $10.99, or a 15-inch diameter pizza for $14.99. Which pizza is the better
      value?

  EXAMPLE 10.53

Applying Area to the Real World
You want to purchase a tinted film, sold by the square foot, for the window in Figure 10.119. (This problem should look
familiar as we saw it earlier when calculating circumference.) The bottom part of the window is a rectangle, and the top
part is a semicircle. Find the area and calculate the amount of film to purchase.
1080 10 · Geometry

                                    Figure 10.119

Solution

First, the rectangular portion has  . For the top part, we have a semicircle with a diameter of 5 ft, so

the radius is 2.5 ft. We want one half of the area of a circle with radius 2.5 ft, so the area of the top semicircle part is

                         Add the area of the rectangle to the area of the semicircle. Then, the total area to be covered

with the window film is

      YOUR TURN 10.53

1. You decide to install a new front door with a semicircle top as shown in the figure. How much area will the new
    door occupy?

Area within Area

Suppose you want to install a round hot tub on your backyard patio. How would you calculate the space needed for the
hot tub? Or, let's say that you want to purchase a new dining room table, but you are not sure if you have enough space
for it. These are common issues people face every day. So, let's take a look at how we solve these problems.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                               10.6 · Area 1081

  EXAMPLE 10.54

Finding the Area within an Area
The patio in your backyard measures 20 ft by 10 ft (Figure 10.120). On one-half of the patio, you have a 4-foot diameter
table with six chairs taking up an area of approximately 36 sq feet. On the other half of the patio, you want to install a
hot tub measuring 6 ft in diameter. How much room will the table with six chairs and the hot tub take up? How much
area is left over?

                                                     Figure 10.120

Solution

The hot tub has a radius of 3 ft. That area is then                  The total square feet taken up with the

table and chairs and the hot tub is                         The area left over is equal to the total area of the patio,

minus the area for the table and chairs and the hot tub. Thus, the area left over is

      YOUR TURN 10.54
1. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

EXAMPLE 10.55

Finding the Cost of Fertilizing an Area                                                                  and costs
A sod farmer wants to fertilize a rectangular plot of land 150 ft by 240 ft. A bag of fertilizer covers
$200. How much will it cost to fertilize the entire plot of land?

Solution

The plot of land is  It will take 7.2 bags of fertilizer to cover the land area. Therefore, the farmer will have to

purchase 8 bags of fertilizer at $200 a bag, which comes to $1,600.
1082 10 · Geometry

YOUR TURN 10.55

1. You want to install sod on one-half of your parallelogram-shaped backyard as shown. The patio covers the other

half. Sod costs $50 a bag and covers  How much will it cost to buy the sod?

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Heron of Alexandria

Figure 10.121 Heron of Alexandria (credit: "Heron of Alexandria" from 1688 German translation of Hero's Pneumatics/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Heron of Alexandria, born around 20 A.D., was an inventor, a scientist, and an engineer. He is credited with the

invention of the Aeolipile, one of the first steam engines centuries before the industrial revolution. Heron was the

father of the vending machine. He talked about the idea of inserting a coin into a machine for it to perform a specific

action in his book, Mechanics and Optics. His contribution to the field of mathematics was enormous. Metrica, a

series of three books, was devoted to methods of finding the area and volume of three-dimensional objects like

pyramids, cylinders, cones, and prisms. He also discovered and developed the procedures for finding square roots

and cubic roots. However, he is probably best known for Heron's formula, which is used for finding the area of a

triangle based on the lengths of its sides. Given a triangle  (Figure 10.122),

  Heron's formula is                       Figure 10.122
                                      where is the semi-perimeter calculated as
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            10.6 · Area 1083

Check Your Understanding

35. Find the area of the triangle with base equal to 3 cm and height equal to 5 cm.

36. The area of the sail in the sailboat is  The shortest length is 10 ft. What is the height of the sail?

37. Find the area of this parallelogram.

38. Find the area of a regular hexagon with side length of 5 and apothem equal to 4.3.

39. Find the area of circle with a diameter of 16 in.
40. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

41. A round tray sits on top of the dining room table. The radius of the tray is 15 in. What is the area taken up by the
      tray?

SECTION 10.6 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, find the area of the figure with the given measurements.

1. Area of a triangle with base equal to 10 cm, and height equal to 15 cm.

2. Area of right triangle with base 54 cm, and height equal to 72 cm.

3. A triangle has an area of                 If the base equals 5 cm, find the height.

4. Find the area of the triangle with base equal to 2.5 in, height equal to 0.7 in as shown.
1084 10 · Geometry

5. Find the area of the trapezoid with    , and  as shown.
6. Find the area of the trapezoid shown.

 7. Find the area of a parallelogram with base equal to 50 cm and height equal to 35 cm as shown.

 8. Find the area of a parallelogram with base equal to 20 in, and height equal to 22 in.
 9. Find the area of the rhombus shown.

10. Find the area of the regular pentagon with the apothem equal to 5.5 in and the side length equal to 6 in as shown.

11. Find the area of the regular octagon with apothem equal to 7 cm and the side length is 3.5 cm as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                               10.6 · Area 1085

12. Find the area of a regular pentagon with apothem equal 1.5 in, and the sides are equal to 3 in as shown.

13. Find the area of a circle with radius of 3 cm as shown.

14. You are installing a countertop in the shape of a trapezoid with a round sink as shown in the figure. After the sink
      is installed, how much area is left on the countertop?

15. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

16. You have a structural post in the corner of your kitchen. The adjacent room is the family room and the two rooms
      are separated by a transparent glass wall. To camouflage the post, you decide to have five shelves built that will fill
      the corner, as shown in the figure. The rectangular shelves are 26 inches wide and 24 inches deep. The diameter of
      the post is 6 inches. How much shelf area will be available after the shelves are built around the post? The laminate
      material for the shelves runs $25 per square foot. How much will the laminate shelves cost?
1086 10 · Geometry

        17. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

        18. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

        19. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure. All measurements in centimeters.

        20. Your property measures 2 miles wide by 2.5 miles long. You want to landscape it but the landscaper charges by the
              square foot. How many square feet need to be landscaped?

        21. Find the area of the window shown.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1087

22. What is the area of a major league baseball diamond enclosed by the baselines if it forms a square with 90ft
      between bases?

10.7 Volume and Surface Area

Figure 10.123 Volume is illustrated in this 3-dimensional view of an interior space. This gives a buyer a more realistic
interpretation of space. (credit: "beam render 10 with sun and cat tree" by monkeywing/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Calculate the surface area of right prisms and cylinders.
 2. Calculate the volume of right prisms and cylinders.
 3. Solve application problems involving surface area and volume.
Volume and surface area are two measurements that are part of our daily lives. We use volume every day, even though
we do not focus on it. When you purchase groceries, volume is the key to pricing. Judging how much paint to buy or how
many square feet of siding to purchase is based on surface area. The list goes on. An example is a three-dimensional
rendering of a floor plan. These types of drawings make building layouts far easier to understand for the client. It allows
the viewer a realistic idea of the product at completion; you can see the natural space, the volume of the rooms. This
section gives you practical information you will use consistently. You may not remember every formula, but you will
remember the concepts, and you will know where to go should you want to calculate volume or surface area in the
future.
We will concentrate on a few particular types of three-dimensional objects: right prisms and right cylinders. The adjective
"right" refers to objects such that the sides form a right angle with the base. We will look at right rectangular prisms,
1088 10 · Geometry

        right triangular prisms, right hexagonal prisms, right octagonal prisms, and right cylinders. Although, the principles
        learned here apply to all right prisms.

     Three-Dimensional Objects

        In geometry, three-dimensional objects are called geometric solids. Surface area refers to the flat surfaces that
        surround the solid and is measured in square units. Volume refers to the space inside the solid and is measured in cubic
        units. Imagine that you have a square flat surface with width and length. Adding the third dimension adds depth or
        height, depending on your viewpoint, and now you have a box. One way to view this concept is in the Cartesian
        coordinate three-dimensional space. The -axis and the -axis are, as you would expect, two dimensions and suitable for
        plotting two-dimensional graphs and shapes. Adding the -axis, which shoots through the origin perpendicular to the

            -plane, and we have a third dimension. See Figure 10.124.

                                                                 Figure 10.124 Three-Dimensional Space
        Here is another view taking the two-dimensional square to a third dimension. See Figure 10.125.

                                                Figure 10.125 Going from Two Dimensions to Three Dimensions
        To study objects in three dimensions, we need to consider the formulas for surface area and volume. For example,
        suppose you have a box (Figure 10.126) with a hinged lid that you want to use for keeping photos, and you want to cover
        the box with a decorative paper. You would need to find the surface area to calculate how much paper is needed.
        Suppose you need to know how much water will fill your swimming pool. In that case, you would need to calculate the
        volume of the pool. These are just a couple of examples of why these concepts should be understood, and familiarity
        with the formulas will allow you to make use of these ideas as related to right prisms and right cylinders.

                                                                                    Figure 10.126

     Right Prisms

        A right prism is a particular type of three-dimensional object. It has a polygon-shaped base and a congruent, regular
        polygon-shaped top, which are connected by the height of its lateral sides, as shown in Figure 10.127. The lateral sides
        form a right angle with the base and the top. There are rectangular prisms, hexagonal prisms, octagonal prisms,
        triangular prisms, and so on.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1089

                                                              Figure 10.127 Pentagonal Prism

Generally, to calculate surface area, we find the area of each side of the object and add the areas together. To calculate
volume, we calculate the space inside the solid bounded by its sides.

FORMULA

The formula for the surface area of a right prism is equal to twice the area of the base plus the perimeter of the base

times the height,    where is equal to the area of the base and top, is the perimeter of the base, and

is the height.

FORMULA

The formula for the volume of a rectangular prism, given in cubic units, is equal to the area of the base times the

height,              where is the area of the base and is the height.

  EXAMPLE 10.56

Calculating Surface Area and Volume of a Rectangular Prism
Find the surface area and volume of the rectangular prism that has a width of 10 cm, a length of 5 cm, and a height of 3
cm (Figure 10.128).

                     Figure 10.128

     Solution
The surface area is

The volume is

      YOUR TURN 10.56

1. A rectangular solid has a width of 6 cm, length of 15 cm, and height or depth of 6 cm. Find the surface area and
    the volume.

In Figure 10.129, we have three views of a right hexagonal prism. The regular hexagon is the base and top, and the
lateral faces are the rectangular regions perpendicular to the base. We call it a right prism because the angle formed by
1090 10 · Geometry

        the lateral sides to the base is See Figure 10.127.

                                    Figure 10.129 Right Hexagonal Prism

The first image is a view of the figure straight on with no rotation in any direction. The middle figure is the base or the
top. The last figure shows you the solid in three dimensions. To calculate the surface area of the right prism shown in
Figure 10.129, we first determine the area of the hexagonal base and multiply that by 2, and then add the perimeter of

the base times the height. Recall the area of a regular polygon is given as            where is the apothem and is the

perimeter. We have that

Then, the surface area of the hexagonal prism is

To find the volume of the right hexagonal prism, we multiply the area of the base by the height using the formula

The base is                      and the height is 20 . Thus,

  EXAMPLE 10.57

Calculating the Surface Area of a Right Triangular Prism
Find the surface area of the triangular prism (Figure 10.130).

                                                             Figure 10.130

Solution

The area of the triangular base is                              . The perimeter of the base is

                                    Then, the surface area of the triangular prism is

      YOUR TURN 10.57
1. Find the surface area of the triangular prism shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1091

  EXAMPLE 10.58

Finding the Surface Area and Volume
Find the surface area and the volume of the right triangular prism with an equilateral triangle as the base and height
(Figure 10.131).

     Solution                       Figure 10.131
The area of the triangular base is                      . Then, the surface area is

The volume formula is found by multiplying the area of the base by the height. We have that

      YOUR TURN 10.58
1. Find the surface area and the volume of the octagonal figure shown.

  EXAMPLE 10.59

Determining Surface Area Application
Katherine and Romano built a greenhouse made of glass with a metal roof (Figure 10.132). In order to determine the
heating and cooling requirements, the surface area must be known. Calculate the total surface area of the greenhouse.
1092 10 · Geometry

                                    Figure 10.132

Solution

The area of the long side measures                   Multiplying by 2 gives                    The front (minus the

triangular area) measures           Multiplying by 2 gives  The floor measures

                    Each triangular region measures                          Multiplying by 2 gives  Finally,

one side of the roof measures                        Multiplying by 2 gives                    Add them up and we have

        YOUR TURN 10.59

  1. Calculate the surface area of a greenhouse with a flat roof measuring 12 ft wide, 25 ft long, and 8 ft high.

Right Cylinders

There are similarities between a prism and a cylinder. While a prism has parallel congruent polygons as the top and the
base, a right cylinder is a three-dimensional object with congruent circles as the top and the base. The lateral sides of a
right prism make a angle with the polygonal base, and the side of a cylinder, which unwraps as a rectangle, makes a

     angle with the circular base.

Right cylinders are very common in everyday life. Think about soup cans, juice cans, soft drink cans, pipes, air hoses, and
the list goes on.

In Figure 10.133, imagine that the cylinder is cut down the 12-inch side and rolled out. We can see that the cylinder side
when flat forms a rectangle. The formula includes the area of the circular base, the circular top, and the area of the
rectangular side. The length of the rectangular side is the circumference of the circular base. Thus, we have the formula
for total surface area of a right cylinder.

                                                                 Figure 10.133 Right Cylinder
  FORMULA
  The surface area of a right cylinder is given as
To find the volume of the cylinder, we multiply the area of the base with the height.
  FORMULA
  The volume of a right cylinder is given as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1093

  EXAMPLE 10.60
Finding the Surface Area and Volume of a Cylinder
Given the cylinder in Figure 10.133, which has a radius of 5 inches and a height of 12 inches, find the surface area and
the volume.

     Solution
Step 1: We begin with the areas of the base and the top. The area of the circular base is

Step 2: The base and the top are congruent parallel planes. Therefore, the area for the base and the top is

Step 3: The area of the rectangular side is equal to the circumference of the base times the height:

Step 4: We add the area of the side to the areas of the base and the top to get the total surface area. We have
                                                                                                         .

Step 5: The volume is equal to the area of the base times the height. Then,

        YOUR TURN 10.60
  1. Find the surface area and volume of the cylinder with a radius of 7cm and a height of 5 cm.

Applications of Surface Area and Volume

The following are just a small handful of the types of applications in which surface area and volume are critical factors.
Give this a little thought and you will realize many more practical uses for these procedures.

  EXAMPLE 10.61
Applying a Calculation of Volume
A can of apple pie filling has a radius of 4 cm and a height of 10 cm. How many cans are needed to fill a pie pan (Figure
10.134) measuring 22 cm in diameter and 3 cm deep?
1094 10 · Geometry

                                                Figure 10.134

Solution

The volume of the can of apple pie filling is                  The volume of the pan is

                                 To find the number of cans of apple pie filling, we divide the volume of the pan by the

volume of a can of apple pie filling. Thus,                 We will need 2.3 cans of apple pie filling to fill the pan.

      YOUR TURN 10.61

1. You are making a casserole that includes vegetable soup and pasta. The size of your cylindrical casserole dish
    has a diameter of 10 inches and is 4 inches high. The pasta will consume the bottom portion of the casserole
    dish about 1 inch high. The soup can has a diameter of 3 inches and is 4 inches high. After the pasta is added,
    how many cans of soup can you add?

Optimization

Problems that involve optimization are ones that look for the best solution to a situation under some given conditions.
Generally, one looks to calculus to solve these problems. However, many geometric applications can be solved with the
tools learned in this section. Suppose you want to make some throw pillows for your sofa, but you have a limited amount
of fabric. You want to make the largest pillows you can from the fabric you have, so you would need to figure out the
dimensions of the pillows that will fit these criteria. Another situation might be that you want to fence off an area in your
backyard for a garden. You have a limited amount of fencing available, but you would like the garden to be as large as
possible. How would you determine the shape and size of the garden? Perhaps you are looking for maximum volume or
minimum surface area. Minimum cost is also a popular application of optimization. Let's explore a few examples.

EXAMPLE 10.62

Maximizing Area
Suppose you have 150 meters of fencing that you plan to use for the enclosure of a corral on a ranch. What shape would
give the greatest possible area?

Solution

So, how would we start? Let's look at this on a smaller scale. Say that you have 30 inches of string and you experiment

with different shapes. The rectangle in Figure 10.135 measures 12 in long by 3 in wide. We have a perimeter of

                    and the area calculates as                 The rectangle in Figure 10.135, measures 8 in

long and 7 in wide. The perimeter is                        and the area is                   In Figure 10.135, the

square measures 7.5 in on each side. The perimeter is then                   and the area is

If you want a circular corral as in Figure 10.135, we would consider a circumference of       which gives a radius of

                    and an area of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1095

                                                                           Figure 10.135
We see that the circular shape gives the maximum area relative to a circumference of 30 in. So, a circular corral with a
circumference of 150 meters and a radius of 23.87 meters gives a maximum area of

        YOUR TURN 10.62

  1. You have 25 ft of rope to section off a rectangular-shaped garden. What dimensions give the maximum area that
      can be roped off?

  EXAMPLE 10.63
Designing for Cost
Suppose you want to design a crate built out of wood in the shape of a rectangular prism (Figure 10.136). It must have a
volume of 3 cubic meters. The cost of wood is $15 per square meter. What dimensions give the most economical design
while providing the necessary volume?

                                                                           Figure 10.136
     Solution
To choose the optimal shape for this container, you can start by experimenting with different sizes of boxes that will hold
3 cubic meters. It turns out that, similar to the maximum rectangular area example where a square gives the maximum
area, a cube gives the maximum volume and the minimum surface area.
As all six sides are the same, we can use a simplified volume formula:

where is the length of a side. Then, to find the length of a side, we take the cube root of the volume.
We have

The surface area is equal to the sum of the areas of the six sides. The area of one side is  So,

the surface area of the crate is  . At $15 a square meter, the cost comes to

Checking the volume, we have      .
1096 10 · Geometry

                 YOUR TURN 10.63
          1. Suppose you want to a build a container to hold 2 cubic feet of fabric swatches. You want to cover the container

               in laminate costing $10 per square foot. What are the dimensions of the container that is the most economical?
               What is the cost?

     Check Your Understanding

        42. Find the surface area of the equilateral triangular prism shown.

43. Find the surface area of the octagonal prism shown.

44. Find the volume of the octagonal prism shown with the apothem equal to the side length equal to and
      the height equal to

45. Determine the surface area of the right cylinder where the radius of the base is  , and the height is .

46. Find the volume of the cylinder where the radius of the base is  , and the height is .

47. As an artist, you want to design a cylindrical container for your colored art pencils and another rectangular
      container for some other tools. The cylindrical container will be 8 inches high with a diameter of 6 inches. The
      rectangular container measures 10 inches wide by 8 inches deep by 4 inches high and has a lid. You found some
      beautiful patterned paper to use to wrap both pieces. How much paper will you need?

SECTION 10.7 EXERCISES

1. Find the volume of the right triangular prism with the two side legs of the base equal to 10 m, the hypotenuse

equal to  , and the height or the length, depending on your viewpoint, is equal to 15 m.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.7 · Volume and Surface Area 1097

2. Find the surface area of the right triangular prism in the Exercise 1 with the two legs of the base equal to 10 m, and
    the height equal to 15 m.

3. Find the surface area of the right trapezoidal prism with side  , side  , the height is 10 cm, the
    slant length is 12 cm, and the length is 24 cm.

4. Find the volume of the trapezoidal prism in the exercise above where the base and top have the following

measurements: side  , side  , the slant lengths are each                   , and the height of the trapezoidal

base =  . The height or length of the three-dimensional solid is   .

5. Find the surface area of the octagonal prism. The base and top are regular octagons with the apothem equal to
    10 m, a side length equal to 12 m, and a height of 30 m.

     6. Find the volume for the right octagonal prism, with the apothem equal to 10 m, the side length of the base is
          equal to 12 m, and the height equal to 30 m.

 7. You decide to paint the living room. You will need the surface area of the 4 walls and the ceiling. The room
      measures 20 ft long and 14 ft wide, and the ceiling is 8 ft high.

For the following exercises, find the surface area of each right cylinder.
     8.
     9.
    10.
    11.
    12.
    13.

For the following exercises, find the volume of each right cylinder to the nearest tenth.
    14.
    15.
    16.
    17.
    18.

19. You have remodeled your kitchen and the exhaust pipe above the stove must pass through an overhead cabinet as
1098 10 · Geometry

              shown in the figure. Find the volume of the remaining space in the cabinet.

    10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry

Figure 10.137 In the lower left corner of the fresco The School of Athens by Raphael, the figure in white writing in the
book represents Pythagoras. Alongside him, to the right, the figure with the long, light-brown hair is said to depict
Archimedes. (credit: modification of work "School of Athens" by Raphael (1483-1520), Vatican Museums/Wikimedia,
Public Domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:

1. Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the missing sides of a right triangle.

2. Apply the                     and  right triangle relationships to find the missing sides of a triangle.

3. Apply trigonometric ratios to find missing parts of a right triangle.

4. Solve application problems involving trigonometric ratios.

This is another excerpt from Raphael's The School of Athens. The man writing in the book represents Pythagoras, the
namesake of one of the most widely used formulas in geometry, engineering, architecture, and many other fields, the
Pythagorean Theorem. However, there is evidence that the theorem was known as early as 1900-1100 BC by the
Babylonians. The Pythagorean Theorem is a formula used for finding the lengths of the sides of right triangles.

Born in Greece, Pythagoras lived from 569-500 BC. He initiated a cult-like group called the Pythagoreans, which was a
secret society composed of mathematicians, philosophers, and musicians. Pythagoras believed that everything in the
world could be explained through numbers. Besides the Pythagorean Theorem, Pythagoras and his followers are
credited with the discovery of irrational numbers, the musical scale, the relationship between music and mathematics,
and many other concepts that left an immeasurable influence on future mathematicians and scientists.

The focus of this section is on right triangles. We will look at how the Pythagorean Theorem is used to find the
unknown sides of a right triangle, and we will also study the special triangles, those with set ratios between the lengths
of sides. By ratios we mean the relationship of one side to another side. When you think about ratios, you should think
about fractions. A fraction is a ratio, the ratio of the numerator to the denominator. Finally, we will preview trigonometry.
We will learn about the basic trigonometric functions, sine, cosine and tangent, and how they are used to find not only
unknown sides but unknown angles, as well, with little information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1099

Pythagorean Theorem

The Pythagorean Theorem is used to find unknown sides of right triangles. The theorem states that the sum of the
squares of the two legs of a right triangle equals the square of the hypotenuse (the longest side of the right triangle).

  FORMULA
  The Pythagorean Theorem states

  where and are two sides (legs) of a right triangle and is the hypotenuse, as shown in Figure 10.138.

                              Figure 10.138 Pythagorean Right Triangle

For example, given that side  and side  we can find the measure of side using the Pythagorean Theorem.
Thus,

  EXAMPLE 10.64

Using the Pythagorean Theorem
Find the length of the missing side of the triangle (Figure 10.139).

                                        Figure 10.139

     Solution
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we have
1100 10 · Geometry

        When we take the square root of a number, the answer is usually both the positive and negative root. However, lengths
        cannot be negative, which is why we only consider the positive root.

                YOUR TURN 10.64
          1. Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the missing side of the right triangle shown.

Distance

The applications of the Pythagorean Theorem are countless, but one especially useful application is that of distance. In
fact, the distance formula stems directly from the theorem. It works like this:

In Figure 10.140, the problem is to find the distance between the points            and  We call the length from

point  to point                  side , and the length from point         to point       side . To find side , we use the

distance formula and we will explain it relative to the Pythagorean Theorem. The distance formula is

                                 such that  is a substitute for in the Pythagorean Theorem and is equal to

       and                       is a substitute for in the Pythagorean Theorem and is equal to       When we

plug in these numbers to the distance formula, we have

Thus,  , the hypotenuse, in the Pythagorean Theorem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1101

                                                                     Figure 10.140 Distance
  EXAMPLE 10.65
Calculating Distance Using the Distance Formula
You live on the corner of First Street and Maple Avenue, and work at Star Enterprises on Tenth Street and Elm Drive
(Figure 10.141). You want to calculate how far you walk to work every day and how it compares to the actual distance (as
the crow flies). Each block measures 200 ft by 200 ft.

                                                                           Figure 10.141
     Solution
You travel 7 blocks south and 9 blocks west. If each block measures 200 ft by 200 ft, then

                                                                    .
As the crow flies, use the distance formula. We have

        YOUR TURN 10.65
  1. How far is it to your workplace (as the crow flies) if the blocks in the previous example measure 100 ft by 100 ft?
1102 10 · Geometry

          EXAMPLE 10.66
        Calculating Distance with the Pythagorean Theorem
        The city has specific building codes for wheelchair ramps. Every vertical rise of 1 in requires that the horizontal length be
        12 inches. You are constructing a ramp at your business. The plan is to make the ramp 130 inches in horizontal length
        and the slanted distance will measure approximately 132.4 inches (Figure 10.142). What should the vertical height be?

                                                                                   Figure 10.142
             Solution
        The Pythagorean Theorem states that the horizontal length of the base of the ramp, side a, is 130 in. The length of c, or
        the length of the hypotenuse, is 132.4 in. The length of the height of the triangle is side b.
        Then, by the Pythagorean Theorem, we have:

If you construct the ramp with a 25 in vertical rise, will it fulfill the building code? If not, what will have to change?

The building code states 12 in of horizontal length for each 1 in of vertical rise. The vertical rise is 25 in, which means

that the horizontal length has to be  So, no, this will not pass the code. If you must keep the vertical rise

at 25 in, what will the other dimensions have to be? Since we need a minimum of 300 in for the horizontal length:

The new ramp will look like Figure 10.143.

                                                                           Figure 10.143

        YOUR TURN 10.66
  1. If 10 in is the maximum possible vertical rise as shown in the figure, how long would the ramp have to be to pass

      the building code rule of 12 horizontal inches to 1 vertical inch?

Triangles

In geometry, as in all fields of mathematics, there are always special rules for special circumstances. An example is the

perfect square rule in algebra. When expanding an expression like  we do not have to expand it the long way:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1103

If we know the perfect square formula, given as

we can skip the middle step and just start writing down the answer. This may seem trivial with problems like

However, what if you have a problem like                     That is a different story. Nevertheless, we use the same

perfect square formula. The same idea applies in geometry. There are special formulas and procedures to apply in

certain types of problems. What is needed is to remember the formula and remember the kind of problems that fit.

Sometimes we believe that because a formula is labeled special, we will rarely have use for it. That assumption is

incorrect. So, let us identify the        triangle and find out why it is special. See Figure 10.144.

                                          Figure 10.144 The

We see that the shortest side is opposite the smallest angle, and the longest side, the hypotenuse, will always be

opposite the right angle. There is a set ratio of one side to another side for the  triangle given as

or                Thus, you only need to know the length of one side to find the other two sides in a         triangle.

EXAMPLE 10.67

Finding Missing Lengths in a              Triangle

Find the measures of the missing lengths of the triangle (Figure 10.145).

                                                     Figure 10.145

    Solution

We can see that this is a           triangle because we have a right angle and a angle. The remaining angle,

therefore, must equal Because this is a special triangle, we have the ratios of the sides to help us identify the

missing lengths. Side is the shortest side, as it is opposite the smallest angle and we can substitute              The

ratios are                 We have the hypotenuse equaling 10, which corresponds to side , and side is equal to 2 .

Now, we must solve for :

Side is equal to  or                The lengths are
1104 10 · Geometry

                YOUR TURN 10.67
          1. Find the lengths of the missing sides in the given figure.

EXAMPLE 10.68

Applying           Triangle to the Real World

A city worker leans a 40-foot ladder up against a building at a          angle to the ground (Figure 10.146). How far up the

building does the ladder reach?

     Solution                                                   Figure 10.146
We have a
                     triangle, and the hypotenuse is 40 ft. This length is equal to 2 , where is the shortest side. If
           , then  . The ladder is leaning on the wall 20 ft up from the ground.

      YOUR TURN 10.68

1. You want to repair a window on the second floor of your home. If you place the ladder at a angle to the
    ground, the ladder just about reaches the window. How far from the wall should you place the ladder? How far
    up will the ladder reach? Make a sketch as an aid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1105

               Triangles

The  triangle is another special triangle such that with the measure of one side we can find the measures of

all the sides. The two angles adjacent to the angle are equal, and each measures If two angles are equal, so are

their opposite sides. The ratio among sides is  or                       as shown in Figure 10.147.

                              Figure 10.147                     Triangles

EXAMPLE 10.69

Finding Missing Lengths of a  Triangle

Find the measures of the unknown sides in the triangle (Figure 10.148).

                                                Figure 10.148

     Solution                      triangle, we know that the two legs are equal in length and the hypotenuse is a product
Because we have a           One leg measures 3, so the other leg, , measures 3. Remember the ratio of
of one of the legs and  , equals
Then, the hypotenuse,

      YOUR TURN 10.69
1. Find the measures of the unknown sides in the given figure.

Trigonometry Functions

Trigonometry developed around 200 BC from a need to determine distances and to calculate the measures of angles in
the fields of astronomy and surveying. Trigonometry is about the relationships (or ratios) of angle measurements to side
lengths in primarily right triangles. However, trigonometry is useful in calculating missing side lengths and angles in
other triangles and many applications.

      NOTE: You will need either a scientific calculator or a graphing calculator for this section. It must have the capability
      to calculate trigonometric functions and express angles in degrees.

Trigonometry is based on three functions. We title these functions using the following abbreviations:
1106 10 · Geometry

·
·
·

Letting             which is the hypotenuse of a right triangle, we have Table 10.1. The functions are given in terms

of , , and , and in terms of sides relative to the angle, like opposite, adjacent, and the hypotenuse.

                                           Table 10.1 Trigonometric Ratios

We will be applying the sine function, cosine function, and tangent function to find side lengths and angle
measurements for triangles we cannot solve using any of the techniques we have studied to this point. In Figure 10.149,
we have an illustration mainly to identify and the sides labeled and .

                                                                      Figure 10.149 Angle

An angle sweeps out in a counterclockwise direction from the positive -axis and stops when the angle reaches the
desired measurement. That ray extending from the origin that marks is called the terminal side because that is where
the angle terminates. Regardless of the information given in the triangle, we can find all missing sides and angles using
the trigonometric functions. For example, in Figure 10.150, we will solve for the missing sides.

                                        Figure 10.150 Solving for Missing Sides

Let's use the trigonometric functions to find the sides and . As long as your calculator mode is set to degrees, you do
not have to enter the degree symbol. First, let's solve for .

We have             and          Then,

Next, let's find . This is the cosine function. We have  Then,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1107

Now we have all sides,  You can also check the sides using the                         ratio of  Table 10.2 is a list

of common angles, which you should find helpful.

                                                             Table 10.2 Common Angles

  EXAMPLE 10.70
Using Trigonometric Functions
Find the lengths of the missing sides for the triangle (Figure 10.151).

                                                  Figure 10.151

     Solution
We have a angle, and the length of the triangle on the -axis is 6 units.

Step 1: To find the length of , we can use the cosine function, as                     We manipulate this equation a bit to solve
for :

Step 2: We can use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of . Prove that your answers are correct by using other
trigonometric ratios:

Step 3: Now that we have , we can use the sine function to prove that is correct. We have
1108 10 · Geometry

                YOUR TURN 10.70
          1. Find the lengths of the missing sides in the given figure.

To find angle measurements when we have two side measurements, we use the inverse trigonometric functions

symbolized as                    or  The -1 looks like an exponent, but it means inverse. For example, in the previous

example, we had  and                  To find what angle has these values, enter the values for the inverse cosine

function         in your calculator:

You can also use the inverse sine function and enter the values of       in your calculator given  and
               We have

Finally, we can also use the inverse tangent function. Recall            We have

  EXAMPLE 10.71                                     and                  (Figure 10.152).

Solving for Lengths in a Right Triangle
Solve for the lengths of a right triangle in which

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1109

                                                        Figure 10.152

     Solution
Step 1: To find side , we use the sine function:

Step 2: To find , we use the cosine function:

Step 3: Since this is a           triangle and side should equal       if we input 3 for , we have  Put this in
your calculator and you will get

      YOUR TURN 10.71
1. Find the missing side and angles in the figure shown.

EXAMPLE 10.72

Finding Altitude

A small plane takes off from an airport at an angle of    to the ground. About two-thirds of a mile (3,520 ft) from the

airport is an 1,100-ft peak in the flight path of the plane (Figure 10.153). If the plane continues that angle of ascent, find

its altitude when it is above the peak, and how far it will be above the peak.
1110 10 · Geometry

                                                                           Figure 10.153

     Solution
To solve this problem, we use the tangent function:

The plane's altitude when passing over the peak is 2,140 ft, and it is 1,040 ft above the peak.

      YOUR TURN 10.72                     angle, and 1 mile from the airport is a 1,500-foot peak. At what altitude

1. Suppose that the plane takes off at a
    will the plane pass over the peak?

  EXAMPLE 10.73

Finding Unknown Sides and Angles
Suppose you have two known sides, but do not know the measure of any angles except for the right angle (Figure
10.154). Find the measure of the unknown angles and the third side.

                                                                           Figure 10.154
     Solution
Step 1: We can find the third side using the Pythagorean Theorem:

Now, we have all three sides.
Step 2: To find we will first find

The angle is the angle whose sine is
Step 3: To find , we use the inverse sine function:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1111

Step 4: To find the last angle, we just subtract:  .

      YOUR TURN 10.73

1. You know the lengths of two sides and the right angle as shown in the figure. Find the length of the third side
    and the other angles.

Angle of Elevation and Angle of Depression

Other problems that involve trigonometric functions include calculating the angle of elevation and the angle of
depression. These are very common applications in everyday life. The angle of elevation is the angle formed by a
horizontal line and the line of sight from an observer to some object at a higher level. The angle of depression is the
angle formed by a horizontal line and the line of sight from an observer to an object at a lower level.

  EXAMPLE 10.74
Finding the Angle of Elevation
A guy wire of length 110 meters runs from the top of an antenna to the ground (Figure 10.155). If the angle of elevation
of an observer to the top of the antenna is how high is the antenna?

                                                                           Figure 10.155
     Solution
We are looking for the height of the tower. This corresponds to the -value, so we will use the sine function:

The tower is 75 m high.
1112 10 · Geometry

                YOUR TURN 10.74
         1. You travel to Chicago and visit the observation deck at Willis Tower, 1,450 ft above ground. You can see the

              Magnificent Mile to the northeast 6,864 ft away. What is the angle of depression from the observation deck to
              the Magnificent Mile?

  EXAMPLE 10.75                                                                                            How high above

Finding Angle of Elevation
You are sitting on the grass flying a kite on a 50-foot string (Figure 10.156). The angle of elevation is
the ground is the kite?

                                            Figure 10.156

     Solution
We can solve this using the sine function,

YOUR TURN 10.75

1. You are flying a kite on a 60-foot string. The angle of elevation from the ground to the kite is        . How high above
    the ground is the kite?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1113

PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans

The Pythagorean Theorem is so widely used that most people assume that Pythagoras (570-490 BC) discovered it.
The philosopher and mathematician uncovered evidence of the right triangle concepts in the teachings of the
Babylonians dating around 1900 BC. However, it was Pythagoras who found countless applications of the theorem
leading to advances in geometry, architecture, astronomy, and engineering.

Among his accolades, Pythagoras founded a school for the study of mathematics and music. Students were called the
Pythagoreans, and the school's teachings could be classified as a religious indoctrination just as much as an academic
experience. Pythagoras believed that spirituality and science coexist, that the intellectual mind is superior to the
senses, and that intuition should be honored over observation.

Pythagoras was convinced that the universe could be defined by numbers, and that the natural world was based on
mathematics. His primary belief was All is Number. He even attributed certain qualities to certain numbers, such as
the number 8 represented justice and the number 7 represented wisdom. There was a quasi-mythology that
surrounded Pythagoras. His followers thought that he was more of a spiritual being, a sort of mystic that was all-
knowing and could travel through time and space. Some believed that Pythagoras had mystical powers, although
these beliefs were never substantiated.

Pythagoras and his followers contributed more ideas to the field of mathematics, music, and astronomy besides the

Pythagorean Theorem. The Pythagoreans are credited with the discovery of irrational numbers and of proving that

the morning star was the planet Venus and not a star at all. They are also credited with the discovery of the musical

scale and that different strings made different sounds based on their length. Some other concepts attributed to the

Pythagoreans include the properties relating to triangles other than the right triangle, one of which is that the sum of

the interior angles of a triangle equals  These geometric principles, proposed by the Pythagoreans, were proven

200 years later by Euclid.

      WHO KNEW?

A Visualization of the Pythagorean Theorem

In Figure 10.157, which is one of the more popular visualizations of the Pythagorean Theorem, we see that square is
attached to side ; square is attached to side ; and the largest square, square , is attached to side . Side
measures 3 cm in length, side measures 4 cm in length, and side measures 5 cm in length. By definition, the area
of square measures 9 square units, the area of square measures 16 square units, and the area of square
measures 25 square units. Substitute the values given for the areas of the three squares into the Pythagorean
Theorem and we have

Thus, the sum of the squares of the two legs of a right triangle is equal to the square of the hypotenuse, as stated in
the Pythagorean Theorem.
1114 10 · Geometry

                                                  Figure 10.157

Check Your Understanding                          triangle shown..

48. Find the lengths of the unknown sides of the

49. Find the missing lengths of the  triangle shown.

50. Use the Pythagorean theorem to find the missing length in the triangle shown.

51. The sun casts a shadow over the roof of a house that ends 105 ft from the front door as shown in the figure. How
      high is the house to the tip of the roof?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        10.8 · Right Triangle Trigonometry 1115

52. Find the measure of side in the given figure.

53. Find the measure of side in the given figure.

        SECTION 10.8 EXERCISES                                          represent two legs of a right triangle, and

Use the Pythagorean theorem to answer the following exercises. Let and
let represent the hypotenuse. Find the lengths of the missing sides.

1.

     2.       and       , find .
     3. If       and       , find .
     4. If         and         , find .
     5. If
                        triangle shown for the following exercises.
Refer to the

     6. If    , find and
     7. If          , find and .
     8. If
     9. If       , find and
    10. If     , find and .

Refer to the     , find and

                          triangle shown in the following exercises.
1116 10 · Geometry

11. If                , find .
12. If                 , find .
13. If
14. If                   , find .
                    , find .
15. If
                       , find .

16. In the provided figure given   , find the unknown sides and angles.

Evaluate the expressions in the following exercises.
    17.

    18.
    19.

20. Use the figure shown to solve for all missing sides and angles given  .

21. Use the figure shown to solve for all missing sides and angles given     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             10 · Chapter Summary 1117

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

10.1 Points, Lines, and Planes

  · line segment
  · plane
  · union
  · intersection
  · parallel
  · perpendicular

10.2 Angles

  · vertex
  · right angle
  · acute angle
  · obtuse angle
  · straight angle
  · complementary
  · supplementary

10.3 Triangles

  · acute
  · obtuse
  · isosceles
  · equilateral
  · hypotenuse
  · congruence
  · similarity
  · scaling factor

10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference

  · perimeter
  · polygon
  · pentagon
  · hexagon
  · heptagon
  · octagon
  · quadrilateral
  · trapezoid
  · parallelogram
  · circumference

10.5 Tessellations

  · tessellation
  · translation
  · reflection
  · rotation
  · glide reflection

10.6 Area

  · triangle
  · square
  · rectangle
  · rhombus
  · apothem
  · radius
  · circle
1118 10 · Chapter Summary

10.7 Volume and Surface Area

· surface area
· volume
· right prism
· right cylinder

10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry

· right triangle
· sine
· cosine
· tangent

Key Concepts

10.1 Points, Lines, and Planes

· Modern-day geometry began in approximately 300 BCE with Euclid's Elements, where he defined the principles
    associated with the line, the point, and the plane.

· Parallel lines have the same slope. Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each other.
· The union of two sets, and , contains all points that are in both sets and is symbolized as
· The intersection of two sets and includes only the points common to both sets and is symbolized as

10.2 Angles

· Angles are classified as acute if they measure less than obtuse if they measure greater than and less than
            right if they measure exactly and straight if they measure exactly

· If the sum of angles equals , they are complimentary angles. If the sum of angles equals , they are
    supplementary.

· A transversal crossing two parallel lines form a series of equal angles: alternate interior angles, alternate exterior
    angles, vertical angles, and corresponding angles

10.3 Triangles

· The sum of the interior angles of a triangle equals
· Two triangles are congruent when the corresponding angles have the same measure and the corresponding side

    lengths are equal.
· The congruence theorems include the following: SAS, two sides and the included angle of one triangle are

    congruent to the same in a second triangle; ASA, two angles and the included side of one triangle are congruent to
    the same in a second triangle; SSS, all three side lengths of one triangle are congruent to the same in a second
    triangle; AAS, two angles and the non-included side of one triangle are congruent to the same in a second triangle.
· Two shapes are similar when the proportions between corresponding angles, sides or features of two shapes are
    equal, regardless of size.

10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference

· Regular polygons are closed, two-dimensional figures that have equal side lengths. They are named for the number

of their sides.

· The perimeter of a polygon is the measure of the outline of the shape. We determine a shape's perimeter by

calculating the sum of the lengths of its sides.

· The sum of the interior angles of a regular polygon with sides is found using the formula                   The

measure of a single interior angle of a regular polygon with sides is determined using the formula

· The sum of the exterior angles of a regular polygon is  The measure of a single exterior angle of a regular

polygon with sides is found using the formula

· The circumference of a circle is  where is the radius, or  and is the diameter.

10.5 Tessellations

· A tessellation is a particular pattern composed of shapes, usually polygons, that repeat and cover the plane with no
    gaps or overlaps.

· Properties of tessellations include rigid motions of the shapes called transformations. Transformations refer to
    translations, rotations, reflections, and glide reflections. Shapes are transformed in such a way to create a pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          10 · Chapter Summary 1119

10.6 Area

· The area of a triangle is found with the formula                where is the base and is the height.

· The area of a parallelogram is found using the formula          where is the base and is the height.
· The area of a rectangle is found using the formula        where is the length and is the width.
· The area of a trapezoid is found using the formula
                                                                           where is the height, is the length of one

base, and is the length of the other base.

· The area of a rhombus is found using the formula                 where is the length of one diagonal and is the

    length of the other diagonal.                                       where is the apothem and is the perimeter.
· The area of a regular polygon is found using the formula

· The area of a circle is found using the formula         where is the radius.

10.7 Volume and Surface Area

· A right prism is a three-dimensional object that has a regular polygonal face and congruent base such that that

lateral sides form a angle with the base and top. The surface area of a right prism is found using the

formula             where is the area of the base, is the perimeter of the base, and is the height. The

volume of a right prism is found using the formula                  where is the area of the base and is the height.

· A right cylinder is a three-dimensional object with a circle as the top and a congruent circle is the base, and the side

forms a angle to the base and top. The surface area of a right cylinder is found using the formula

                    where is the radius and is the height. The volume is found using the formula

where is the radius and is the height.

10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry

· The Pythagorean Theorem is applied to right triangles and is used to find the measure of the legs and the

hypotenuse according the formula                   where c is the hypotenuse.

· To find the measure of the sides of a special angle, such as a             triangle, use the ratio         where

each of the three sides is associated with the opposite angle and 2 is associated with the hypotenuse, opposite the

angle.

· To find the measure of the sides of the second special triangle, the          triangle, use the ratio

where each of the three sides is associated with the opposite angle and         is associated with the hypotenuse,
opposite the angle.

· The primary trigonometric functions are                               and

· Trigonometric functions can be used to find either the length of a side or the measure of an angle in a right triangle,
    and in applications such as the angle of elevation or the angle of depression formed using right triangles.

Videos

10.5 Tessellations

· M.C. Escher: How to Create a Tessellation (https://openstax.org/r/create_tessellation)
· The Mathematical Art of M.C. Escher (https://openstax.org/r/mathematical_art)

Formula Review

10.2 Angles

To translate an angle measured in degrees to radians, multiply by

To translate an angle measured in radians to degrees, multiply by

10.4 Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference

The formula for the perimeter of a rectangle is             , twice the length plus twice the width .

The sum of the interior angles of a polygon with sides is given by

The measure of each interior angle of a regular polygon with sides is given by
1120 10 · Chapter Summary

To find the measure of an exterior angle of a regular polygon with sides we use the formula

The circumference of a circle is found using the formula       where is the diameter of the circle, or     where
  is the radius.

10.6 Area

The area of a triangle is given as          where represents the base and represents the height.

The formula for the area of a square is           or

The area of a rectangle is given as

The area of a parallelogram is

The formula for the area of a trapezoid is given as

The area of a rhombus is found using one of these formulas:

·               where and are the diagonals.

·               where is the base and is the height.

The area of a regular polygon is found with the formula        where is the apothem and is the perimeter.

The area of a circle is given as         where is the radius.

10.7 Volume and Surface Area

The formula for the surface area of a right prism is equal to twice the area of the base plus the perimeter of the base

times the height,                   where is equal to the area of the base and top, is the perimeter of the base, and

is the height.

The formula for the volume of a rectangular prism, given in cubic units, is equal to the area of the base times the height,
               where is the area of the base and is the height.

The surface area of a right cylinder is given as

The volume of a right cylinder is given as

10.8 Right Triangle Trigonometry

The Pythagorean Theorem states

where and are two sides (legs) of a right triangle and is the hypotenuse.

Projects

 1. One of the reasons so many formulas in geometry were discovered was because of the importance in finding
      measurements of lengths, areas, perimeter, and angles. Find at least five examples of how geometry can be used in
      practical applications today.

 2. Who were the Pythagoreans? Why did this society exist? Explore what they did and discuss some of their beliefs.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        10 · Chapter Summary 1121

Chapter Review

Points, Lines, and Planes
Use the figure shown for the following exercises.

1. Find  .

2. Find  .

3. Name the points in the set  .

Angles
 4. Given that and are parallel lines, solve the angle measurements for all the angles in the figure shown.

 5. Find the measure of the vertical angles in the figure shown.

 6. Classify the angle as acute, right, or obtuse: .
 7. Use the given figure to solve for the angles.

 8. Use the given figure to solve for the angle measurements.

Triangles
 9. Use the given figure to find the measure of the unknown angles.

10. Use algebra to find the measure of the angles in the figure shown.
1122 10 · Chapter Summary

11. The two triangles shown are congruent by what theorem?
12. The two triangles shown are congruent by what theorem?

13. The two triangles shown are congruent by what theorem?
14. Are the two figures shown similar?
15. Are the two triangles shown similar?

    16. Find the scaling factor of the two similar triangles in the given figure.
    17. Find the length of in the figure shown.
Polygons, Perimeter, and Circumference
Identify the polygons.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    10 · Chapter Summary 1123

    18.

    19.

    20.
21. Find the perimeter of a regular hexagon with side length 5 cm.
22. The perimeter of a triangle is 18 in the given figure. Find the length of the sides.

23. What is the measure of an interior angle of a regular heptagon?
24. What is the measure of an interior angle of a regular octagon?
25. Calculate the measure of each interior angle in the figure shown.

26. Find the measure of an exterior angle of a regular pentagon.
27. What is the sum of the measures of the exterior angles of a regular heptagon?
28. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 3.2 cm.
29. Find the diameter of a circle with a circumference of 35.6 in.
Tessellations
30. In what field of mathematics does the topic of tessellations belong?
31. Tessellations can have no _______or _________.
32. What type of transformation moves an object over horizontally by some number of units?
33. What type of transformation results in a mirror image of the shape?
34. Which regular polygons will tessellate the plane by themselves?
35. The sum of the interior angles of the shapes meeting at a vertex is equal to how many degrees?
36. How would you name this tessellation?
1124 10 · Chapter Summary

Area
37. What is the area of a triangle with a base equal to 5 cm and a height equal to 12 cm?

38. If the area of a triangle equals   and the base equals 8, what is the height?

39. Find the area of the parallelogram shown.

40. If the area of a trapezoid equals  ,            , and the height equals                , find the length of .

41. Find the area of an octagon if the apothem equals 10 cm and the side length is 12 cm.

42. The area of a circle is  . What is the radius?

43. You want to install a tinted protective shield on this window. How many square feet do you order?

44. Find the area of the shaded region in the given figure.

Volume and Surface Area
45. Find the surface area of a hexagonal prism with side length 5 cm, apothem 3.1 cm, and height 15 cm.
A triangular prism has an equilateral base and side lengths of 15 in, triangle height of 10 in, and prism length of 25 in.

    46. Find the surface area of the triangular prism.
    47. Find the volume of the triangular prism.
48. Find the volume of a right cylinder with radius equal to 1.5 cm and height equal to 5 cm.
A right cylinder has a radius of 6 cm and a height of 10 cm.
    49. Find the surface area of the right cylinder.
    50. Find the volume of the right cylinder.
Right Triangle Trigonometry
51. Find the lengths of the missing sides in the figure shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         10 · Chapter Summary 1125

52. Find the measure of the unknown side and angle.

Chapter Test

Use the given figure for the following exercises.

1. Find     .

2. Find  .

3. Use the given figure to find the angle measurements.

4. Given that and are parallel lines, solve the angle measurements for all the angles in the given figure.

5. Find the angle measurements in the given figure.
1126 10 · Chapter Summary

 6. The two triangles shown are congruent by what theorem?

 7. Find the sum of the interior angles of a regular heptagon.
 8. Determine the scaling factor between these two similar triangles.

 9. Find the measure of the missing angles in the figure shown.

10. Calculate the perimeter of a regular octagon with a side length of 5 cm.
11. Find the measurement of an interior angle of a regular heptagon.
12. Find the sum of the interior angles of a regular pentagon.
13. Find the measure of an exterior angle of a regular pentagon.
14. Find the circumference of the circle with a radius of 3.5 cm.
15. What are the four transformations that are used to produce tessellations?
16. Find the surface area of the triangular prism shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                10 · Chapter Summary 1127

17. Find the volume of the right cylinder in the given figure.

18. Find the missing length in the given figure.
19. Find the missing length in the given figure.
20. Find the length of side in the given figure.
21. Find the length of side in the given figure.
22. Find the measure of in the given figure.
1128 10 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                              11 · Introduction 1129

11  VOTING AND APPORTIONMENT

Figure 11.1 Voters cast their ballots in one of the world's many democracies. (credit: "Governor Votes Early" by Maryland
GovPics/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  11.1 Voting Methods
  11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods
  11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem
  11.4 Apportionment Methods
  11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods

      Introduction

Suppose a friend asked you, "When did you last vote?" What would your answer be? Maybe you would tell your friend
that the last time you voted was during the last presidential election, or perhaps you would tell your friend that you
prefer not to vote. When thinking about voting, presidential campaigns or advertisements for reelections may come to
mind, but you can cast your vote in many ways. Have you liked a post, followed a creator, friended a stranger, or clicked a
heart online today? In the digital age, it's possible to vote several times a day. Voting systems are not only the machines
that drive every democracy on Earth, but they are also the engines driving social media and many other aspects of life. A
deeper understanding of these voting systems will enhance your ability to successfully engage with the world in which
we live.

In this chapter, you will become one of the founders of the new democratic country of Imaginaria. You have a great
responsibility to the people of this fledgling democracy. You have been tasked with writing the portion of the
constitution that lays out voting procedures. In preparation for this important task, you will explore the various types of
voting systems, from school board elections to Twitter wars. You will see how these types are alike, how they differ, and
how they might be applied in Imaginaria. Most importantly, you will learn about the mathematically inherent advantages
and disadvantages of various voting systems so that you can make informed choices to better the lives of the
Imaginarians.
1130 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    11.1 Voting Methods

      Figure 11.2 President Barack Obama votes in the 2012 election. (credit: Pete Souza/White House, Public Domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Apply plurality voting to determine a winner.
 2. Apply runoff voting to determine a winner.
 3. Apply ranked-choice voting to determine a winner.
 4. Apply Borda count voting to determine a winner.
 5. Apply pairwise comparison and Condorcet voting to determine a winner.
 6. Apply approval voting to determine a winner.
 7. Compare and contrast voting methods to identify flaws.

Today is the day that you begin your quest to collaborate on the constitution of Imaginaria! Let's begin by thinking about
the selection of a leader who can serve as president. It seems straightforward; if the majority of citizens prefer a
particular candidate, that candidate should win. But not all votes are decided by a simple majority. Why not? What are
the options?

Majority versus Plurality Voting

When an election involves only two options, a simple majority is a reasonable way to determine a winner. A majority is a
number equaling more than half, or greater than 50 percent of the total.

Let's take a look at the outcomes of U.S. presidential elections to understand more. Table 11.1 displays the results of the
2000 U.S. presidential election. Like most presidential elections, this election involved more than two options. If that is
the case, is it possible that no single candidate will receive more than half of the votes cast?

                                    Candidate (Party Label)                Popular Vote Total

                                    Al Gore (Democrat)                     50,999,897

                                 George W. Bush (Republican)               50,456,002

                                    Ralph Nader (Green)                    2,882,955

                                 Patrick J. Buchanan (Reform/Independent)  448,895

                                 Table 11.1 Results of the Popular Vote for the 2000 U.S. Presidential
                                 Election (source: https://www.fec.gov/introduction-campaign-
                                 finance/election-and-voting-information/federal-elections-2000/
                                 president2000/)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       11.1 · Voting Methods 1131

Candidate (Party Label)         Popular Vote Total

Harry Browne (Libertarian)      384,431

Howard Phillips (Constitution)  98,020

Other                           134,900

Total:                          105,405,100

Table 11.1 Results of the Popular Vote for the 2000 U.S. Presidential
Election (source: https://www.fec.gov/introduction-campaign-
finance/election-and-voting-information/federal-elections-2000/
president2000/)

  EXAMPLE 11.1

Majority of Popular Vote in the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election
Refer back to Table 11.1. Did any single candidate secure the majority of popular votes?

     Solution
Step 1: Calculate 50 percent of 105,405,100 by multiplying the decimal form of 50 percent, which is 0.50, by 158,394,605:

Step 2: Determine the minimum number of votes needed to have a majority. The minimum number of votes required is
the lowest counting number that is larger than 50 percent of the votes. To have a majority, an individual candidate must
have more than 52,702,550; so, a majority candidate must have 52,702,551 votes or more.

Step 3: Compare the number of votes each candidate received to 52,702,551. According to the data in Table 11.1, none
of the candidates secured a majority.

        YOUR TURN 11.1

  1. According to the Cook Political Report, a total of 158,394,605 votes were cast in the 2020 U.S. presidential
      election. Of those, 81,281,502 were cast for Joe Biden, 74,222,593 for Donald Trump, and 2,890,510 for other
      candidates. Although U.S. presidential elections are not determined by popular vote, did either Joe Biden or
      Donald Trump secure a majority of the votes?

Unlike in the 2000 U.S. presidential election, a candidate won the majority of votes in the 2020 election (see Table 11.1). It
is a common occurrence for no single candidate to receive a majority of the votes in an election with more than two
candidates. When this occurs, the candidate with the largest portion of the votes is said to have a plurality.

  EXAMPLE 11.2

Plurality of Popular Vote in the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election
Refer again to Table 11.1. In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, which candidate had a plurality of popular votes?

     Solution
Al Gore secured 50,999,897 votes which was more than any other single candidate. Therefore, he had a plurality of the
popular votes.

Your plans for Imaginarian elections will likely include primary elections, or preliminary elections to select candidates for
a principal or general election. Table 11.2 displays the results of the 2018 U.S. Senate Republican primary for Maryland.
1132 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Top Four Republican Candidates Votes Percentage of Party Votes

                                    Cambell, Tony            51,426   29.22%

                                    Chaffee, Chris           42,328   24.05%

                                    Grigorian, Christina J.  30,756   17.48%

                                    Graziani, John R.        15,435   8.77%

                                    Total Votes              175,981  100%

Table 11.2 (source: https://ballotpedia.org/
United_States_Senate_election_in_Maryland_( June_26,_2018_Republican_primary))

      YOUR TURN 11.2

1. Consider the results of the 2018 U.S. Senate primary for Maryland. Determine which candidate won the primary
    for the Republicans (R). Did the candidate win a majority or a plurality of Republican votes?

Consider how election by plurality, not majority, is the most common method of selecting candidates for public office.

        WHO KNEW?

  The U.S. Electorial College: Winning the Presidency without a Plurality

  In the 2000 U.S. presidential election, Al Gore had a plurality of the popular votes, but he did not win the election.
  Why? This occurred because the U.S. president and vice president are elected by electors rather than a direct vote by
  the citizens. The electors are part of the Electoral College, a body of people representing the states. Why was the
  Electoral College created? The Electoral College was created as a compromise between those authors of the U.S.
  Constitution who believed Congress should elect the president, and those who believed the citizens should vote
  directly. The popular vote was not recorded until the presidential election of 1824. Since then, only five presidents
  have been elected without winning a plurality of the popular vote: John Quincy Adams in 1824, Rutherford B. Hayes in
  1876, Grover Cleveland in 1888, George Bush in 2000, and Donald Trump in 2016.

Runoff Voting

Has your family ever debated what to have for dinner? Suppose your family is deciding on a restaurant and exactly half
of you want to have pizza but the other half want hamburgers. How do you decide when the result is a tie? You need a
tiebreaker!

Will the new democracy of Imaginaria need tiebreakers? When no candidate satisfies the requirements to win the
election, a runoff election, or second election, is held to determine a winner.

How would runoff voting work in Imaginaria? There are many types of runoff voting systems, which are voting systems
that utilize a runoff election when the first round does not result in a winner. The method for implementing a runoff
election can vary widely, particularly in the criteria used to determine whether a candidate will be on the ballot in the
second election. For example, a two-round system is a runoff voting system in which only the top candidates advance to
the runoff election. In some two-round systems, only the top two candidates are on the second ballot, or it may be any
candidate who secures a certain percentage of the vote will advance. The Hare Method is another runoff voting system
in which only the candidate(s) with the very least votes are eliminated. This can potentially result in several rounds of
runoff elections.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  11.1 · Voting Methods 1133

  EXAMPLE 11.3

Runoff Election for Condominium Association President
A condominium association elects a new president every two years by a two-round system of voting. If none of the
candidates receive a majority, the association charter states that the top two candidates will be eligible to participate in a
runoff election. In a particular year, five residents were nominated. The results of the first round are given in the table
below.

                          Candidate Votes in First Round

                          Abou       18

                          Baiocchi   10

                          Campana    5

                          Dali       11

                          Eugene     4

1. Is there a winner based on the first round? Why or why not?
2. If there is a winner, who won? If there should be a runoff, who will advance to the second round?

    Solution
1. A majority of 48 total votes is required to win. Begin by finding 50 percent of 48, which is calculated as follows:

                         . A majority is 25 or more. No candidate has a majority, so there is no winner based on the first round.
2. Abou and Dali advance to the second round.

YOUR TURN 11.3

The student government bylaws of a particular college require that a new president is elected annually by plurality
voting. In the event of a tie, the bylaws require the candidate(s) with the fewest votes to be removed from the ballot
and a runoff election to be held with the remaining candidates. This process is repeated until a single candidate
receives a plurality and wins the election. The results of two voting rounds are given in the table below.

                Candidate Votes in First Round Votes in Second Round

                Ferguson        158      168

                Garcia          103      104

                Hearn           157      180

                Isaac           123      123

                Jackman         58       Eliminated

                Kelly           72       74

                Lim             158      180

1. Which two candidates tied in the second round? Does this mean there will be a third election?
1134 11 · Voting and Apportionment

2. If there was a winner, who won? If there should be a runoff, who must be removed from the ballot?

Steps to Determine Winner by Plurality or Majority Election with Runoff

To determine the winner by plurality or when a majority election with runoff occurs, we take these three steps:

Step 1: If a majority is required to win the election, determine the number of votes needed to achieve a majority. This is
the least whole number greater than 50 percent of the total votes. If a majority is not required, move to Step 2.

Step 2: Count the number of votes for each candidate in the current round of voting. If a single candidate has enough
votes to win a plurality, or a majority as appropriate, then you are done! Otherwise, eliminate a predetermined number
of candidates based on the rules of the election. Elimination conditions may vary. For example, the rules may state that
the candidate(s) with the fewest votes will be eliminated (as in the Hare method), or that only the candidates meeting a
certain threshold will move on (as in a two-round system). Once the appropriate candidates are eliminated, move on to
Step 3.

Step 3: Hold a runoff election. If the runoff is simulated using a list of voter's preferences, renumber the preferences to
reflect the remaining number of options in such a way that the original order of preference is retained. Then repeat Step
2.

Note: The second and third steps may be repeated as many times as necessary for voting procedures that allow multiple
runoffs.

  EXAMPLE 11.4

Family Dinner Night
The five members of the Chionilis family--Annette, Rene, Seema, Titus, and Galen--have decided to get takeout for
dinner. They are trying to decide on a restaurant. The options are Rainbow China, Dough Boys Pizza, Taco City, or
Caribbean Flavor. They will use majority election with runoffs where the restaurant with the fewest votes is eliminated in
each round. The preferences of each family member are listed by first initial in the table below. An entry of 1 represents
the person's first choice; 2, their second; and so on. For example, Annette's second choice is Dough Boys Pizza.

                                    Options               ARS TG

                                    Rainbow China 1 3 3 1 3

                                    Dough Boys Pizza 2 2 1 2 1

                                    Taco City             34242

                                    Caribbean Flavor 4 1 4 3 4

Use the information in the table to answer the following questions.

1. Which common type of runoff voting method is this?
2. List the results of each round of voting based on this information and determine which restaurant was ultimately

     chosen.

Solution

1. the Hare Method

2. Step 1: Determine the number of votes necessary to have a majority. There are five family members, so 50 percent

of 5 is             . A majority is three or more votes.

Step 2: Count the number of votes for each restaurant in the first election. In a list of voter preferences, the 1s

represent the top choice of each voter, which corresponds to their vote in the first round.

Results of Round 1:
 Rainbow China -- 2 votes
 Dough Boys -- 2 votes
 Taco City -- 0 votes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 11.1 · Voting Methods 1135

 Caribbean Flavor -- 1 vote

No restaurant received a majority. Eliminate Taco City, which has the fewest first place votes:

                             Options  ARS TG

                             Rainbow China 1 3 3 1 3

                             Dough Boys Pizza 2 2 1 2 1

                             Caribbean Flavor 4 1 4 3 4

Step 3: Hold a runoff election. In other words, hold a second round. Since we have a list of the voters' preferences
with the eliminated option removed, we will renumber the preferences as first, second, and third so that we keep
the original order of preference. The result is that we will count the second-place vote of any voter whose first
choice was eliminated.

                             Options  ARS TG

                             Rainbow China 1 3 2 1 2

                             Dough Boys Pizza 2 2 1 2 1

                             Caribbean Flavor 3 1 3 3 3

Step 4: Repeat the process from Step 2. Count the number votes for each restaurant in the first-round election.

Since we are using a list of preferences, we need to count the number of 1s received by each restaurant.

Results of Round 2:
 Rainbow China -- 2 votes
 Dough Boys -- 2 votes
 Caribbean Flavor -- 1 vote

No single restaurant has three votes. Eliminate Caribbean Flavor, which has the fewest first place votes.

                             OPTIONS  ARS TG

                             Rainbow China 1 3 2 1 2

                             Dough Boys Pizza 2 2 1 2 1

Step 5: Repeat the process from Step 3. Hold another runoff election. This will be Round 3. Renumber the voters'
preferences as first and second this time.

                             Options  ARS TG

                             Rainbow China 1 2 2 1 2

                             Dough Boys Pizza 2 1 1 2 1
1136 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    Step 6: Repeat the process from Step 2 one last time. Count the number of first place votes for each remaining
    restaurant.
    Results of Round 3:
     Rainbow China -- 2 votes
     Dough Boys -- 3 votes

    Determine whether any one choice has a majority. Yes! Dough Boys has three votes, so it is the winner!

      YOUR TURN 11.4

1. There are six members on the board of a Parent Teacher Association (PTA) at a local elementary school: the
    president (P), the vice president (V), the recording secretary (R), the liaison to the administration (L), the treasurer
    (T), and the chief fundraiser (C). The board must decide which equipment to purchase for the classrooms with
    moneys from their annual fundraisers. The preferences of the board members are shown in the table below.
                                                                            PVR L T C

                                                           Option A 3 4 1 3 4 1

                                                           Option B 1 3 2 1 3 2

                                                           Option C 2 2 3 2 1 4

                                                           Option D 4 1 4 4 2 3

The board uses plurality method and a runoff in the event of a tie, such that the option(s) with the least votes will
be eliminated in each round. Which option will be chosen?

Ranked-Choice Voting

In Example 11.4 and Your Turn 11.4, you were given a list that ordered each voter's preferences. This ordering is called a
preference ranking. A ballot in which a voter is required to give an ordering of their preferences is a ranked ballot, and
any voting system in which a voter uses a ranked ballot is referred to as ranked voting.

The vote for the Academy Awards uses a ranked ballot. The table below provides an example of a ranked ballot for the
2020 Academy Award nominees for Best Director.

Candidate for Best Director                       Rank top choice as 1, next choice as 2, and so on.

Martin Scorsese, The Irishman                     1  2  3  4  5

Todd Phillips, Joker                              1  2  3  4  5

Sam Mendes, 1917                                  1  2  3  4  5

Quentin Tarantino, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood  1  2  3  4  5

Bong Joon-ho, Parasite                            1  2  3  4  5

As you decide on the voting methods that will be used in your new democracy, budget must be a consideration. You

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.1 · Voting Methods 1137

might consider a particular type of ranked voting called ranked-choice voting (RCV), which simulates a series of runoff
elections without the usual time and expense involved when voters must repeatedly return to the polls, like we did in
Example 11.4.

The method of ranked-choice voting (RCV), also called instant runoff voting (IRV), is a version of the Hare Method,
using preference ranking so that, if no single candidate receives a majority, the least popular selections can be
eliminated and the results can be recounted, without the need for more elections.

      Ranked voting can be confused with ranked-choice voting, but ranked voting is a more general category which
      includes ranked-choice voting and several other voting methods.

As we explore examples of ranked voting, we will summarize the voters' preference rankings using a table in which the
top row shows the number of ballots that ranked the options in the same order. Let's practice interpreting the
information in this type of table.

  EXAMPLE 11.5

Interpreting the Sample Preference Summary
Refer to the table below containing voters' preference rankings to answer the following questions.

                     Number of Ballots 100 200 150 75

                                     Option A  1             4          34

                                     Option B  2             3          42

                                     Option C  4             2          11

                                     Option D  3             1          23

1. How many voters ranked the options in the following order: Option A in fourth place, Option B in second place,
     Option C in first place, and Option D in third place?

2. How many ballots in total were collected?
3. How many voters indicated that Option C was their first choice?

Solution

1. The column farthest to the right displays this ordering. The top entry in this column is 75; so, there were 75 voters

who ranked the options in this way.

2. The sum of the top row gives the total number of ballots collected:      . So, there were 525

ballots collected.

3. In the Option C row, there are two entries of 1 which indicate a first choice for that option. These occur in the last

two columns. The sum of the top entries in these columns is             . So, 225 voters indicated Option C as

their first choice.

      YOUR TURN 11.5

A kindergarten class votes on their favorite colors using a ranked ballot. Use the results in the following table to
answer the questions.
1138 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

                                    Red     2625

                                    Blue    1214

                                    Green   6552

                                    Yellow  5463

                                    Purple  4341

                                    Pink    3136

      1. How many students voted in total?
      2. How many students voted for yellow as their favorite color?
      3. How many students in the class indicated that blue was their favorite color while green was their least favorite

           color?

Now that we've covered how to read a summary of preference rankings, let's practice using the ranked-choice method to
determine the winner of an election. Recall that ranked-choice voting is still the Hare Method where the candidate with
the very least number of votes is eliminated each round until a majority is attained. The difference here is that the voters
have completed a ranked ballot, so they don't have to visit the polls multiple times. Here are the steps for ranked-choice
voting.

Steps to Determine Winner by Ranked-Choice Voting

To determine the winner when ranked-choice voting occurs, we take these three steps:
Step 1: Determine the number of votes needed to achieve a majority. This is the least whole number greater than 50
percent of the total votes.
Step 2: Count the number of first place votes for each candidate. If a candidate has a majority, that candidate wins the
election and we are done! Otherwise, eliminate the candidate(s) with the fewest votes and complete Step 3.
Step 3: Reallocate the votes to the remaining candidates, and repeat Step 2.

      Be methodical to avoid arithmetic errors. Make sure that each time you count the number of first place votes they
      sum to the number of ballots.

       VIDEO

      How Does Ranked-Choice Voting Work? (https://openstax.org/r/ranked-choice_voting1)

  EXAMPLE 11.6

Most Popular Color in Kindergarten
Let's review the kindergarten class color preferences again, and this time determine which color would be selected based
on these results using the ranked-choice method.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        11.1 · Voting Methods 1139

             Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

             Red     2625

             Blue    1214

             Green   6552

             Yellow  5463

             Purple  4341

             Pink    3136

     Solution
Step 1: Determine whether any candidate received a majority. There were 21 ballots. Fifty percent of 21 is

                      . A majority is 11.

Step 2: Count the number of first place votes for each candidate. If a candidate has a majority, that candidate wins the
election. Otherwise, eliminate the candidate(s) with the fewest votes.

· Red: 0
· Blue:
· Green: 0
· Yellow: 0
· Purple: 7
· Pink: 6

Notice that  , which is the total number of ballots. Confirming this helps to catch any arithmetic or

counting errors. No candidate has a majority with 11 or more votes. We must eliminate red, green, and yellow which had

the fewest votes with 0 each. The remaining votes that must be counted for Round 2 are given in the table below.

             Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

             Blue    1214

             Purple  4341

             Pink    3136

Step 3: Reallocate the votes to the remaining candidates. We can do this by numbering the choices as 1, 2, and 3 in such
a way that the order of preference is retained as seen in the table below:

             Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

             Blue    1212

             Purple  3331

             Pink    2123

Step 4: Repeat the process from Step 2. Count the number of first place votes for each candidate. If a candidate has a
majority, that candidate wins the election. Otherwise, eliminate the candidate(s) with the fewest votes.
1140 11 · Voting and Apportionment

· Blue:
· Purple: 7
· Pink: 6

Confirm that                        . Great! No candidate has 11 or more votes. We must eliminate pink which had the fewest

votes with 6. The remaining votes that must be counted for Round 2 are shown in the table below.

                                    Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

                                                   Blue    1212

                                                   Purple  3331

Step 5: Repeat the process from Step 3. Reallocate the votes to the remaining candidates. We can do this by numbering
the choices as 1 and 2;

                                    Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

                                                   Blue    1112

                                                   Purple  2221

Step 6: Repeat the process from Step 2 one last time. Count the number of first place votes for each candidate. If a
candidate has a majority, that candidate wins the election. Otherwise, eliminate the candidate(s) with the fewest votes.

  · Blue:
  · Purple: 7

Blue has a majority and wins the election!

VIDEO

Determine Winner of Election by Ranked-Choice Method (aka Instant Runoff) (https://openstax.org/r/ranked-
choice_voting2)

YOUR TURN 11.6

1. Suppose that 58 Star Wars fans were asked to vote for their favorite Star Wars character. They were given a
    ranked ballot, and the results are shown in the following table. Use ranked-choice voting to determine the
    winner.

                                      Number of Ballots 7 6 10 8 4 5 6 7 2 3

                                    Han Solo       35 1 3242214

                                    Princess Leia  21 3 6433132

                                    Luke Skywalker 6 6 6 1 5 5 5 4 6 1

                                    Chewbacca      44 5 4616545

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.1 · Voting Methods 1141

              Number of Ballots 7 6 10 8 4 5 6 7 2 3

              Yoda                         12 4 2321323

              R2-D2                        53 2 5164656

Borda Count Voting

Ranked-choice voting is one type of ranked voting that simulates multiple runoffs based on ranked ballots. Another type
of ranked voting is the Borda count method, which uses ranked ballots that award candidates points corresponding to
the number of candidates ranked lower on each ballot.

To understand how this works, let's review the favorite colors of our kindergarten class from the table below. Let's focus
on the votes represented by the first column of the preference summary.

                                      Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

                                           Red     2625

                                           Blue    1214

                                           Green   6552

                                           Yellow  5463

                                           Purple  4341

                                           Pink    3136

Each student had six options. This first column tells us that four students ranked blue as their first choice, red as their

second choice, pink as their third choice, purple as their fourth choice, yellow as their fifth choice, and green as their

sixth choice. Blue was ranked higher than  other colors. For each of the four students who completed their

ballot in this way, blue would receive five points. Since there were four ballots with this ordering, blue would receive

points from the first column. To determine the total points for each candidate, we have to find the sum of the

points they received in each column.

To determine the winner of a contest using the Borda count method, we must compare total number of points earned by
each candidate. The candidate with the most points is the winner. Each row of the preference summary corresponds to a
single candidate. To find the number of points received by a particular candidate in the preference summary, or their
Borda score, we will need to focus on the row in which that candidate appears.

Before we practice determining the winner of a Borda count election, let's examine how to find the Borda score for a
single candidate.

EXAMPLE 11.7

Most Popular Color in Kindergarten Revisited
Let's review the ballots from the kindergarten class again, as shown in the table below. This time, let's determine the
Borda score received by the color purple.
1142 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Number of Ballots 4 6 4 7

                                    Red     2625

                                    Blue    1214

                                    Green   6552

                                    Yellow  5463

                                    Purple  4341

                                    Pink    3136

     Solution
Step 1: Find the number of points received by the candidate in each column.
Column 1:
Column 2:
Column 3:
Column 4:
Step 2: Find the sum of the points received in each column. This is the total number of points received by this candidate:

This process can also be combined into one step as shown here.

Purple received 69 points in this election.

      When calculating a Borda score in one step, be careful to use the correct order of operations. Perform the
      subtraction inside each pair of parentheses first, then perform each multiplication, and then perform each addition.

        YOUR TURN 11.7
  1. Consider the color preferences of the kindergarten class once more. Using the Borda count method, determine

      the total number of points the color blue received.

Now let's determine the winner of an election by comparing the Borda scores for each of the candidates.
  EXAMPLE 11.8

Determine the Winner by Two Ranked Voting Methods
Use the table below, which displays a sample preference summary, to answer the questions that follow.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 11.1 · Voting Methods 1143

                               Number of Ballots 95 90 110 115

                               Option A     44 1                   1

                               Option B     22 2                   2

                               Option C     31 3                   4

                               Option D     13 4                   3

1. Use the ranked-choice voting method to determine the winner of the election.
2. Use the Borda count method to determine the winner of the election.

Solution

1. Step 1: Determine the number of votes needed to achieve a majority. The number of ballots is

                . Fifty percent of 410 is                          . So, 206 votes or more is a majority.

Step 2: Count the number of first place votes for each candidate.

 Option A has
 Option B has 0
 Option C has 90
 Option D has 95

Since Option A has a majority, Option A is the winner by the ranked-choice method.

2. The Borda scores would be:
      Option A:
      Option B:
      Option C:
      Option D:

Since Option B has a Borda score of 820 points, Option B is the winner by the Borda count method.

YOUR TURN 11.8

Answer the following questions using the table below, which summarizes Imaginarian voter preferences.

                               Number of Ballots 12 19 27 29 31 21

                               Candidate A  112233

                               Candidate B  231312

                               Candidate C  323121

      1. Use the ranked-choice voting method to determine the winner of the election.
      2. Use the Borda count method to determine the winner of the election.
      3. Compare the results of the two methods. Did the same candidate win? What observations can you make

           about the results?

The Borda count method may seem too complicated to even consider using for Imaginaria, but each voting method has
its own pros and cons. The Borda count method, for example, favors compromise candidates over divisive candidates. A
compromise candidate is not the first choice of most of the voters, but is more acceptable to the population as a whole
1144 11 · Voting and Apportionment

        than the other candidates. A divisive candidate is simultaneously the first choice of a large portion of the voters and the
        last choice of another large portion of the voters.
        In Example 11.8, Candidate A was ranked first by 225 voters, but was ranked last by 185 voters. No voters ranked
        Candidate A as second or third. It appears that, although Candidate A had the majority of first place votes, there was a
        significant minority who strongly disliked them. Candidate A was a divisive candidate. Candidate B, on the other hand,
        was the second choice of every voter, making Candidate B a good compromise. The Borda count method chose
        Candidate B, a compromise candidate, that was more acceptable to the population as a whole. This scenario is cited by
        both opponents and proponents of the Borda count method.

               VIDEO
              Determine Winner of Election by Borda Count Method (https://openstax.org/r/Borda_count_method)

     Pairwise Comparison and Condorcet Voting

        We have discussed two kinds of ranked voting methods so far: ranked-choice and Borda count. A third type of ranked
        voting is the pairwise comparison method, in which the candidates receive a point for each candidate they would beat
        in a one-on-one election and half a point for each candidate they would tie. If one candidate earns more points than the
        others, then that candidate wins. This method is one of several Condorcet voting methods, which are methods in which
        candidates are ranked and then compared pairwise to each other, a candidate having to beat all others in order to win.
        These methods vary in the way candidates are scored, and there is not always a clear winner. A candidate who wins each
        possible pairing is known as a Condorcet candidate. These terms are named after the Marquis de Condorcet, a French
        philosopher and mathematician who preferred the pairwise comparison method to the Hare method and made public
        arguments in its favor.

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

          Marquis de Condorcet
          Condorcet voting methods are named for the Marquis de Condorcet, a French philosopher and mathematician known
          for, among other accomplishments, writing "Sur l'admission des femmes au droit de Cité" ("On the Admission of
          Women to the Rights of Citizenship"), in 1789, the first published essay on the political rights of women.
          For more details visit this Web site.

        If you include a Condorcet voting method in the constitution of Imaginaria, the election supervisors may want to use a
        pairwise comparison matrix like the one in Figure 11.3. It's a tool used to list the number of wins associated with each
        pairing of two candidates. Each candidate will receive a point for each win and a half a point for each tie. Each pairing is
        listed twice, once for the number of wins of a candidate over a particular challenger and once for the number of wins of
        the challenger over that candidate.

                                                  Figure 11.3 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Three Candidates

     Steps to Determine a Winner by Pairwise Comparison Method Using a Matrix

        To determine the winner when the pairwise comparison method is used, we take these three steps:
        Step 1: On the matrix, indicate a losing matchup by crossing out a box, , and tie match ups by drawing a slash

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     11.1 · Voting Methods 1145

through the box, .
Step 2: Award each candidate 1 point for a win, half a point for a tie, and 0 points for a loss.
Step 3: Identify the winner, which is the candidate with the most points.

       VIDEO
      Determine Winner of Election by Using the Pairwise Comparison Method (https://openstax.org/r/
      pairwise_comparison_method)

Before you decide on the pairwise comparison method for Imaginaria, review what's involved in constructing a pairwise
comparison matrix from a summary of ranked ballots. Then we can use the matrix to determine the winner of the
election. Does the winner using the Borda method still win?

  EXAMPLE 11.9

Construct and Use a Pairwise Comparison Matrix
Consider the summary of ranked ballots shown in the table below. Determine the winner of an election using the
pairwise comparison method.

Number of Ballots 95 90 110 115

Option A  44 1  1

Option B  22 2  2

Option C  31 3  4

Option D  13 4  3

 1. Construct a pairwise comparison matrix for the sample summary of ranked ballots in the table above.
 2. Use the pairwise comparison method to determine a winner.
 3. Recall that in Example 11.8, Candidate A won by the ranked-ballot method, and Candidate B won by the Hare

      method. Did the same candidate win using the pairwise comparison method?
 4. Is the winner a Condorcet candidate?

     Solution
There are four candidates on the ballots. We will need a row and a column for each candidate in addition to the
headings, so we will draw a five by five matrix.

                                         Figure 11.4 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Four Candidates
1. Step 1: Refer to Figure 11.4 to determine the values that belong in each cell.
1146 11 · Voting and Apportionment

 A over B: A is preferred to B in columns 3 and 4. So, A scores                    points.

 A over C: A is preferred to C in columns 3 and 4. So, A scores 225 points again.

 A over D: Similarly, A scores 225 points.

 B over A: B is preferred to A in columns 1 and 2. So, B scores  points.

Step 2: Continuing in this way, we complete the pairwise comparison matrix, as shown in Figure 11.5.

                                Figure 11.5 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Four Candidates with Vote Counts

2. Step 1: Losing pairings are crossed off with an . In the event of a tie, we will draw a slash, .
     Step 2: Determine the number of points for each candidate by analyzing their row of wins. Each win is 1 point, each
     loss, , is 0 points, and each tie, , is half a point. Construct an additional column for each candidate's points.

           Figure 11.6 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Four Candidates with Pairwise Winners and Points Column Added
      Step 3: The winner by the pairwise comparison method is Option A with 3 points.
 3. Option A was not the winner by the Hare method.
 4. The winner, Option A, is a Condorcet candidate because Option A won each pairwise comparison.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             11.1 · Voting Methods 1147

Notice that the pairwise vote totals are not used to determine the points. Vote totals are only used to determine a
win or a loss. Avoid the common error of adding the values in each row to get the points.

YOUR TURN 11.9

According to Variety magazine, there were 8,469 eligible Oscar voters in 2020. To make our matrix easier to work
with, we've rounded this number up to 8,700. We'd never do this in a real voting situation. Suppose that the voter
preferences for the ballot for Best Director had been as shown in the table below.

                Number of Ballots       2,400 2,100 1,900 1,200 1,100

Martin Scorsese, The Irishman           3           1  4  5  2

                Todd Phillips, Joker    1           4  5  2  4

                Sam Mendes, 1917        5           5  3  4  5

Quentin Tarantino, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood 4  2  1  3  3

                Bong Joon-ho, Parasite  2           3  2  1  1

  Refer to the table to answer each question.

      1. Construct a pairwise comparison matrix for the Best Director ballots.
      2. Who is the "Best Director" according to the pairwise comparison method?
      3. Is the winner a Condorcet candidate?

Three Key Questions

Before you decide if you want to use the pairwise comparison method for Imaginarian elections, let's consider three
questions that might affect your decision.

  I. Is there always a winner?
 II. If there is a winner, is the winner always a Condorcet candidate?
III. If there is a Condorcet candidate, does that candidate always win?

Let's think about why these questions might be important to you if you chose the pairwise comparison method. First, if
no candidate meets the criteria to win an election, you will need a backup plan such as a runoff election. Second, if the
winner is not a Condorcet candidate, then there is at least one candidate who beat the winner in a pairwise matchup and
the supporters of that candidate might question the validity of the election. Finally, if there is a Condorcet candidate who
beat every other candidate in a pairwise matchup, it is reasonable to conclude that it would be unfair for anyone else to
win. The rest of the examples in this section should illustrate these key concepts.

  EXAMPLE 11.10

Rock, Paper, Scissors by Pairwise Comparison
Suppose that three people are playing the game Rock, Paper, Scissors. On the count of three, each person shows a hand
signal for rock, paper, or scissors. Each hand signal beats another hand signal. The group keeps having a tie because
Person A always picks rock, Person B always picks paper which beats rock, and Person C always picks scissors which
beats paper, and is beaten by rock! This leads to a disagreement about which choice is best. They decide to use the
pairwise comparison method determine the winner. Their preference rankings are given in the following table.
1148 11 · Voting and Apportionment        Voters  ABC

             Solution                     Rock (R) 1 3 2
        Construct the comparison matrix:
                                          Paper (P) 2 1 3

                                          Scissors (S) 3 2 1

                                          Figure 11.7 Rock, Paper, Scissors Pairwise Comparison Matrix
There is a tie! There is no winner.
Example 11.10 illustrates the answer to the first key question. The pairwise comparison method does not always result in
a winner. For example, much like the game of Rock, Paper, Scissors, it is possible for a cyclic pattern to emerge in which
each candidate beats the next until the last candidate who beats the first.

                                                   Figure 11.8 Rock, Paper, Scissors Cyclic Outcome
        YOUR TURN 11.10
  1. A pairwise comparison matrix is given. Determine the winner by the pairwise comparison method. If there is not
      a winner, explain why. If there is a winner, tell whether the winner is a Condorcet candidate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               11.1 · Voting Methods 1149

                                                                 A Pairwise Comparison Matrix

Now, you have the answer to the second key question. The pairwise comparison matrix in YOUR TURN 11.10 is an
example of a scenario where a winner is not a Condorcet candidate.
The answer to the third question is not as clear. If there is a Condorcet candidate, does that candidate win? So far, we
have not come across a contradictory example where the Condorcet candidate didn't win, but we cannot know with
certainty that it is not possible by looking at examples. Instead, we will need to use some reasoning. Let's review some
particular cases of elections with a certain number of candidates, and then we will try to generalize the scenario to an
election with candidates.

  EXAMPLE 11.11
Does the Condorcet Candidate Win?
 1. Suppose there is an election with five candidates--A, B, C, D, and E--and that Candidate C is a Condorcet candidate.

      How many points did Candidate C win?
 2. What is the greatest number of points that any one of the other candidates could win?
 3. Is it possible for Candidate C to lose or tie?

     Solution
 1. In any pairwise election with five candidates, each candidate must compete against four other candidates. It follows

      that the most points a single candidate can win is four points, which would occur if the candidate won every
      matchup. As a Condorcet candidate, Candidate C won all the pairwise matchups against Candidates A, B, D, and E,
      earning four points.
 2. The rest of the candidates lost to Candidate C. The most points a particular candidate could win if they won
      matchups with each of the other three candidates is three points.
 3. Since Candidate C has four points and the rest of the candidates have three points or less, Candidate C is the winner.
      Therefore, it is not possible for Candidate C to tie or lose.

        YOUR TURN 11.11
  Suppose there is an election with 26 candidates, A through Z, and that Candidate C is a Condorcet candidate.

      1. How many points did Candidate C win?
      2. What is the greatest number of points that any one of the other candidates could win?
      3. Is it possible for Candidate C to lose or tie?
1150 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Let's consider a general case where there are candidates. One of the candidates is a Condorcet candidate. Since the

Condorcet candidate wins all matchups, the Condorcet candidate wins        points. Since each of the other candidates

lost to the Condorcet candidate, the most a single candidate could win is  . Since the Condorcet candidate won

points and each other candidate won  points or fewer, the Condorcet candidate is the winner. You have your answer

to the third key question! If there is a Condorcet candidate, that candidate is always the winner.

Approval Voting

The last type of voting system you will consider for your budding democracy is an approval voting system. In this
system, each voter may approve any number of candidates without rank or preference for one over another (among the
approved candidates), and the candidate approved by the most voters wins. This voting system has aspects in common
with plurality voting and Condorcet voting methods, but it has characteristics that distinguish it from both. An approval
voting ballot lists the candidates and provides the option to approve or not approve each candidate.

The term "approval voting" was not used until the 1970s Brams, Steven J.; Fishburn, Peter C. (2007), Approval Voting,
Springer-Verlag, p. xv, ISBN 978-0-387-49895-9, although its use has been documented as early as the 13th century
(Brams, Steven J. (April 1, 2006). The Normative Turn in Public Choice (PDF) (Speech). Presidential Address to Public
Choice Society. New Orleans, Louisiana.) Approval voting has the appeal of being simpler than ranked voting methods. It
also allows an individual voter to support more than one candidate equally. This has appeal for those who do not want a
split vote among a few mainstream candidates to lead to the election of a fringe candidate. It also has appeal for those
who want an underdog to have a chance of success because voters will not worry about wasting their vote on a
candidate who is not believed likely to win.

EXAMPLE 11.12

Rock, Paper, Scissors, Lizard, Spock
Suppose that Person A/B/C were just about to give up on their game of Rock, Paper, Scissors when they were joined by
Person D who reminded them that their updated version, Rock, Paper, Scissors, Lizard, Spock was a far superior game
with the added rules that Lizard eats Paper, Paper disproves Spock, Spock vaporizes Rock, Rock crushes Lizard, Lizard
poisons Spock, Spock smashes Scissors, and Scissors decapitates Lizard.

                                            Figure 11.9 Rock, Paper, Scissors, Lizard, Spock Dominance
Person D encourages their friends to hold a new election. This time, for the sake of simplicity, the group decides to use
approval voting to determine the best move in the game. The summary of approval ballots for Rock, Paper, Scissors,
Lizard, Spock is given in the table below.

                                                              Voters A B C D
                                                               Rock Yes No No No
                                                              Paper No Yes No No
                                                             Scissors No No Yes No

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.1 · Voting Methods 1151

                                                              Voters A B C D

                                                              Lizard No No No Yes

                                                              Spock Yes Yes Yes Yes

     Solution
Count the number of approval votes for each candidate by counting the number of "Yes" votes in each row of the table.

  · Rock: 1
  · Paper: 1
  · Scissors: 1
  · Lizard: 1
  · Spock: 4
Spock is the winning candidate, approved by four voters!

YOUR TURN 11.12

1. The Chionilis family is trying to decide on a restaurant again, but now they don't want to deal with multiple
    runoffs or even ranking. They will use the approval voting method shown in the following table. Each family
    member will approve their top two choices. Rainbow China won when multiple runoffs were used. Find the
    winner for tonight's dinner.

                 Options    A  R  S  T  G  E  MD

                 Rainbow China Yes No No Yes No No Yes Yes

                 Dough Boys Pizza Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes

                 Taco City  No No Yes No Yes Yes No No

                 Caribbean Flavor No Yes No No Yes No Yes No

  EXAMPLE 11.13

The Chionilis Family Is Hungry Again!
The eight members of the Chionilis family--Annette, Rene, Seema, Titus, Galen, Elena, Max and Demitri--have another
decision to make. Approval voting worked out nicely the last time. They are going to use it again, but this time, Annette,
Rene, Seema, and Galen are feeling a little indecisive. They can't narrow their choice down to two. They will approve their
three top choices, but the other family members will only approve two. These choices are reflected in the following table.
Determine the restaurant that will be chosen.

                 Options    A  R  S  T  G  E  MD

                 Rainbow China Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes

                 Dough Boys Pizza Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes
1152 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Options      A      R   S      T  G           E  MD

                                    Taco City    Yes No Yes No Yes Yes No No

                 Caribbean Flavor No Yes No No Yes No Yes No

     Solution
Count the number of approval votes for each restaurant by counting the number of "Yes" votes in each row.

  · Rainbow China: 7
  · Dough Boys Pizza: 6
  · Taco City: 4
  · Caribbean Flavor: 3

This time, Rainbow China won!

YOUR TURN 11.13

1. What would be the outcome of the election if every member of the Chionilis family approved their top three
    choices from the table below?

                                                 Options       ARS TG

                                               Rainbow China 1 3 3 1 3

                                               Dough Boys Pizza 2 2 1 2 1

                                                 Taco City     34242

                                               Caribbean Flavor 4 1 4 3 4

Compare and Contrast Voting Methods to Identify Flaws

Wow! We have covered a lot of options for the voting methods. Now, you need to decide which one is best for
Imaginaria. Imaginarians might consider characteristics of certain voting systems desirable and others undesirable. In
some cases, voters may consider these undesirable traits to be flaws in a voting system that are significant enough to
motivate them to reject that system. If you are feeling a bit overwhelmed by this decision, maybe it would help to read
about the experiences of others who have faced similar questions.

Consider the 2000 U.S. presidential election in which Green Party candidate Ralph Nader and Reform Party candidate Pat
Buchanan were on the ballet running against the mainstream candidates, Democrat Al Gore and Republican George W.
Bush. The voting results for Florida are given in Table 11.3.

                                    Candidate               Party     Votes Percentage

                                    (G) George W. Bush      Republican 2,912,790     48.85%

                                    (A) Al Gore             Democrat 2,912,253       48.84%

                 Table 11.3 Florida Results in the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election
                 (source: https://www.fec.gov/resources/cms-content/documents/
                 FederalElections2000_PresidentialGeneralElectionResultsbyState.pdf)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                11.1 · Voting Methods 1153

                           Candidate               Party        Votes Percentage

                           (R) Ralph Nader         Green        97,488           1.63%

                           (P) Pat Buchanan        Reform       17,484           0.29%

                           (H) Harry Brown         Libertarian 16,415            0.28%

                           (O) 7 Other Candidates  Other        6,680            0.11%

                                                   Total        5,963,110

                           Table 11.3 Florida Results in the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election
                           (source: https://www.fec.gov/resources/cms-content/documents/
                           FederalElections2000_PresidentialGeneralElectionResultsbyState.pdf)

In more than one state, Buchanan was able to split the Republican vote enough to allow Gore to win that state. Nader
split the Democrat vote in Florida and New Hampshire by enough votes to prevent Gore from winning those states. Had
Gore won either state, he would have had enough electoral votes to win the election. Instead, Bush won. This is an
example of a flaw in the plurality system of voting: the spoiler.

A spoiler is a less popular candidate who takes votes from a more popular candidate with similar positions, swinging the
race to another candidate with vastly different views that they would not support. This encourages voters not to vote for
the candidate that they perceive to be the best, but instead for the candidate they can live with who they perceive to
have a better chance of winning. Some voters may prefer a method such as approval voting, which does not have this
trait in common with plurality voting.

EXAMPLE 11.14

The Spoiler Controversy
Because the vote counts for George W. Bush and Al Gore differed by only 537 votes, many Democrats blamed Ralph
Nader and the Green Party for their loss. Let's consider how the election results might have differed if the approval
voting method had been used.

Use Table 11.3 and the following assumptions to extrapolate the results of an approval method election:

· 100 percent of Pat Buchanan supporters would approve George W. Bush.
· 100 percent of Ralph Nader supporters would approve Al Gore.
· 72 percent of Libertarians would approve George W. Bush.
· 28 percent of Libertarians would approve Al Gore (as was roughly the known percentage at the time according to

    the Cato Institute).
· 50 percent of the supporters of other candidates would approve George Bush while 50 percent would approve Al

    Gore.

Solution

Step 1: Create a summary of approval ballots based on the given assumptions. For the Libertarian candidate, 72 percent

of 16,415 of the votes is                    and 28 percent is                   . For the other candidates, 50

percent of the votes is               .

Number of Votes            2,912,790  2,912,253    97,488       17,484  11,819    4,596          3,340    3,340
                               (G)        (A)        (R)          (B)   (72% H)  (28% H)        (50% O)  (50% O)

(G) George W. Bush         Yes           No        No           Yes     Yes      No             No       Yes

(A) Al Gore                No            Yes       Yes          No      No       Yes            Yes      No
1154 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Number of Votes                     2,912,790  2,912,253  97,488  17,484  11,819    4,596    3,340    3,340
                                        (G)        (A)      (R)     (B)   (72% H)  (28% H)  (50% O)  (50% O)

(R) Ralph Nader                     No         No         Yes     No      No       No       No       No

(P) Pat Buchanan                    No         No         No      Yes     No       No       No       No

(H) Harry Brown                     No         No         No      No      Yes      Yes      No       No

(O) 7 Other Candidates              No         No         No      No      No       No       Yes      Yes

Step 2: Count the number of approval votes for each candidate.

  · George W. Bush:
  · Al Gore:
  · Ralph Nader:
  · Pat Buchanan:
  · Harry Brown:
  · Other Candidates:

In this scenario, Al Gore is the winner.

        YOUR TURN 11.14

  1. Extrapolate the results of an approval method election using Table 11.3, the assumptions from Example 11.14,
      and the additional assumptions that the supporters of Al Gore would all approve Ralph Nader and that half of
      the supporters of George Bush would approve Pat Buchanan while half would approve Harry Brown.

The results in Example 11.14 and Your Turn 11.14 highlight one of the characteristics of approval voting. Ralph Nader
moved up from a distant third place finish to a close second place finish when Al Gore's supporters approved him on
their ballots. In this way, fringe candidates have a better chance of winning, which some voters consider a flaw but
others consider a benefit.

Another aspect of approval voting systems that is a concern to many voters is that candidates in approval elections
might encourage their loyal supporters to approve them and only them to avoid giving support to any other candidate.
If this occurred, the election in effect becomes a traditional plurality election. This is a flaw that cannot occur in an
instant runoff system since all candidates are ranked.

  EXAMPLE 11.15

Three Habitable Planets
In the future, humans have explored distant solar systems and found three habitable planets which could be colonized.
Since it will take all available resources to colonize one planet, humans must agree on the planet. Planet A has the most
comfortable climate and most plentiful resources, but it is the farthest from Earth making travel to the planet a
challenge. Planet B is half the distance but will require more resources to make comfortable. Planet C is the least suitable
of the three and terraforming will be required, but it is close enough to make travel between Earth and Planet C possible
on a more regular basis. The table below provides the voter preferences for the colonization of each planet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              11.1 · Voting Methods 1155

                 Percentage of Voters 45% 15% 40%

                 Planet A                          1  3    3

                 Planet B                          2  1    2

                 Planet C                          3  2    1

If the entire population were able to vote, determine the winning planet using each of the methods listed below.

 1. Plurality
 2. Ranked-choice method
 3. Borda count

     Solution
 1. The plurality method only considers the top choice of each voter. By this system, Planet A has 45 percent of the vote,

      Planet B has 15 percent of the vote, and Planet C has 40 percent of the vote. Planet A wins.
 2. Using either instant runoff or a two-round system, Planet B with only 15 percent of the vote will be eliminated in the

      first round. In Round 2, the 15 percent that voted for Planet B would vote for their second choice, Planet C. This
      leaves Planet A with 45 percent and Planet C with 55 percent. Planet C has a majority and wins the election.
 3. To find the Borda score for each candidate, imagine there are exactly 100 voters. Then the summary of ranked
      ballots looks like:

                 Out of 100 Voters 45 15 40

                 Planet A                             133

                 Planet B                             212

                 Planet C                             321

The Borda score for each candidate is as follows:
Planet A:
Planet B:
Planet C:
Planet B wins.

YOUR TURN 11.15

The juniors at a high school in Central Florida are voting for a theme park to visit for an end of the year field trip. The
options are Disney's four theme parks: Animal Kingdom, Magic Kingdom, EPCOT Center, or Hollywood Studios.

                                                   Percentage of Voters 35% 25% 30%

                 Animal Kingdom                    1  3  4

                 Magic Kingdom                     2  1  3
1156 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Percentage of Voters 35% 25% 30%

                                    Epcot Center       3  4  1

                                    Hollywood Studios  4  2  2

  Determine the outcome of the vote by each of the given voting methods.
      1. Plurality
      2. Ranked-choice method
      3. Borda count

The election in Example 11.15 involves a scenario in which there are two extreme candidates, Planet A and Planet B, and
a moderate candidate, Planet C. The supporters of the extreme candidates prefer the moderate candidate to the other
extremist ones. This makes Planet C a compromise candidate. In this case, both the plurality method and ranked-choice
voting resulted in the election of one of the extreme candidates, but the Borda count method elected the compromise
candidate in this scenario. Depending on a person's perspective, this may be perceived as a flaw in either ranked-choice
and plurality systems, or the Borda count method.
In Fairness in Voting Methods, we will analyze the fairness of each voting system in greater detail using objective
measures of fairness.

          TECH CHECK

  Voting Calculators
  It is possible to create Excel spreadsheets that complete the calculations necessary to determine the winner of an
  election by various voting methods. In some cases, this work has already been done and posted online. As you
  practice applying the various voting methods that could be used in Imaginaria, quick Internet search will lead to sites
  such as Ms. Hearn Math (https://openstax.org/r/calculators) with free specialty calculators.
  These sites can be a great way to check your results!

Check Your Understanding

 1. Name three voting methods that use a ranked ballot.
 2. Determine whether the following statement is true or false: The same ranked ballots may result in a different

      winner depending on which voting method is used.
 3. Determine whether the following statement is true or false. A majority candidate is always a Condorcet candidate.
 4. The _______________ method is a system of voting using ranked ballots in which each candidate is awarded points

      corresponding to the number of candidates ranked lower on each ballot.
 5. The ________________ method is a system of voting using ranked ballots (or multiple elections) in which each

      candidate receives a point for each candidate they would beat in a one-on-one election and half a point for each
      candidate they would tie.
 6. The __________________ method is a runoff voting system in which only the candidate(s) with the very least votes are
      eliminated.
 7. Explain the differences between two-round voting and ranked-choice voting.

        SECTION 11.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, identify the winning candidate based on the described voter profile, if possible. If it is not
possible, state so. Explain your reasoning.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11.1 · Voting Methods 1157

     1. In a plurality election, the candidates have the following vote counts: A 125, B 132, C 149, D 112.
     2. In the first round of a ranked-choice election with three candidates--A, B, and C. Candidate A received 55 first

          place rankings; Candidate B received 25; and Candidate C received 30.
     3. The pairwise matchup points for each candidate were: A 1, B , D .

     4. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 15, B 11, C 12, D 16.
     5. There is a pairwise comparison election with candidates A, B, and C. Candidate A had the most first choice

          rankings, Candidate B has the highest Borda score, and Candidate C is a Condorcet candidate.
     6. In the first round of a ranked-choice election with three candidates--A, B, and C--Candidate A received 20 first

          place rankings, Candidate B received 25, and Candidate C received 30.

For the following exercises, use the table.

O'Malley De La Fuente Clinton       Sanders  Other

110,227  67,331          17,174,432 13,245,671 322,276

Popular Vote in the 2016 U.S. Democratic Presidential Primary
(source: Federal Election Commission, Federal Elections 2016 Report)

     7. Calculate the number of votes required to have a majority of the popular vote in the 2016 U.S. Democratic
          Presidential Primary.

     8. Which candidate had a plurality? Did this candidate have a majority?

For the following exercises, use the given table.

         Candidate       Votes

                 Bush    281,189

         Trump 13,783,037

                 Cruz    7,455,780

                 Rubio   3,354,067

         Carson          822,242

                 Kasich  4,198,498

                 Other   337,714

         Popular Vote in the 2016
         U.S. Republican Presidential
         Primary (source: Federal
         Election Commission,
         Federal Elections 2016
         Report)

     9. Calculate the number of votes required to have a majority of the popular vote in the 2016 U.S. Republican
          Presidential Primary.

    10. Which candidate had a plurality? Did this candidate have a majority?

For the following exercises, use Table 11.4 and Table 11.5.
    11. Suppose the Republican Primary in 2016 was a two-round system. Would there be a second round? Why or why
          not? If so, which candidates would advance to the second round?
    12. Suppose the Democratic Primary in 2016 was a two-round system. Would there be a second round? Why or why
          not? If so, which candidates would advance to the second round?
1158 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    13. Suppose the Democratic Primary in 2016 used the Hare method. Would there be a second round? Why or why
          not?

    14. Suppose the Republican Primary in 2016 used the Hare method. Would there be a second round? Why or why
          not?

For the following exercises, use the following table and the Hare method.

                                                              Options A B C D E

                                                            Candidate 1 1 3 3 1 3

                                                            Candidate 2 2 1 1 2 4

                                                            Candidate 3 3 4 2 4 1

                                                            Candidate 4 4 2 4 3 2

    15. How many votes are needed to win by the Hare method?
    16. How many votes does each candidate receive in Round 1?
    17. Which candidates advance to Round 2?
    18. How many votes does each remaining candidate receive in Round 2?
    19. Will there be a third round? Why or why not?
    20. Which candidate wins the election?

For the following exercises, use the sample summary of ranked ballots in the given table.

                                    Number of Ballots 10 20 15 5

                                    Option A  1 4 34

                                    Option B  2 3 42

                                    Option C  4 2 13

                                    Option D  3 1 21

                                    Sample Summary of Ranked Ballots

    21. How many votes were recorded, and how many are required to have a majority?
    22. How many voters indicated that Option A was their first choice?
    23. How many voters indicated that Option B was their first choice?
    24. How many voters indicated that Option A was their last choice?
    25. How many voters indicated that Option B was their last choice?
    26. Use ranked-choice voting to determine the two candidates in the final round and the number of votes they each

          receive in that round.
    27. Is there a winning candidate? If so, which candidate? Justify your answer.

Suppose that 55 Star Wars fans were asked to vote for their favorite new Star Wars character. They were given a ranked
ballot, and the results are shown in the table. Use this table and ranked-choice voting for the following exercises.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             11.1 · Voting Methods 1159

Number Of Ballots 7 6 10 8 4 5 6 7 2

Finn      35 1 324221

Rey       21 3 243313

Poe       16 4 155542

BB8       42 2 461654

Rose      64 5 632136

Kylo      53 6 516465

Favorite New Heroes in Star Wars Sequels Ballot Preferences

    28. How many votes does each candidate get on the first round of voting?
    29. How many votes are required to get a majority?
    30. Which candidates remain in the final round, and how many votes do they have?
    31. Who is the winner of the election?

Refer to Table 11.6 for the following exercises.
    32. Find the Borda score for each candidate.
    33. Compare your results from question 32 to those from question 26. Compare the winner and the second-place
          candidate using the Borda count method to those using the ranked-choice method. Are they the same?

Refer to Table 11.7 for the following exercises.
    34. Find the Borda score for each candidate.
    35. Compare your results from question 34 to those from question 30. Compare the winner and the second-place
          candidate using the Borda count method to those using the ranked-choice method. Are they the same?

For the following exercises, use the table below.

Number of Ballots 100 80 110 105 55

Option A  114  42

Option B  222  31

Option C  441  14

Option D  333  23

    36. Do any candidates appear to be divisive candidates? Justify your answer.
    37. Do any candidates appear to be compromise candidates? Justify your answer.
    38. How many votes are required for a majority?
    39. Which candidate is eliminated first by the ranked-choice method?
    40. Which candidate is eliminated second by the ranked-choice method?
    41. Which candidate is the winner by the ranked-choice method?
    42. What are the Borda scores for each candidate?
    43. Which candidate is the winner by the Borda count method?
    44. Which method resulted in a win for the compromise candidate: ranked-choice voting or the Borda count

          method or both?

Use the pairwise comparison matrix in the given figure for the following exercises.
1160 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                                     Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Candidates Q, R, S and T
            45. Analyze the pairwise comparison matrix. Display the pairings in a table and indicate the winner of each

                   matchup by marking an through the losing matchups and a single slash through the ties.
            46. Calculate the points received by each candidate in the pairwise comparison matrix.
            47. Determine whether there is a winner of the pairwise comparison election represented by the matrix. If there is

                   a winner, determine whether the winner is a Condorcet candidate.
        Use the pairwise comparison matrix in the given figure for the following exercises.

                                                  Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Candidates U, V, W, X, and Y
            48. Analyze the pairwise comparison matrix. Display the pairings in a table and indicate the winner of each

                   matchup.
            49. Calculate the points received by each candidate in the pairwise comparison matrix.
            50. Determine whether there is a winner of the pairwise comparison election represented by the matrix. If there is

                   a winner, determine whether the winner is a Condorcet candidate and explain your reasoning.
            51. In J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series, Albus Dumbledore was the headmaster of Hogwarts for many years.

                   Imagine that an election is to be held to find his successor. Severus Snape, the head of Slytherin House, will be
                   running against the heads of Gryffindor and Ravenclaw, Minerva McGonagall and Filius Flitwick. Use the
                   preference rankings for each candidate in the following table to construct a pairwise comparison matrix.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11.1 · Voting Methods 1161

Percentage of Vote 25% 40% 35%

                                                   (S) Snape     1       3     3

(M) McGonagall                                                   3       1     2

(F) Flitwick                                                     2       2     1

52. Analyze the pairwise comparison matrix you constructed for question 51. Display the pairings in a table and
      indicate the winner of each matchup.

53. Use the pairwise comparison matrix from questions 51 and 52 to find the number of points earned by each
      candidate. Who is the winner by the pairwise comparison method?

54. Is the winner of the Hogwarts headmaster election a Condorcet candidate? Explain how you know.
55. The women of The Big Bang Theory decide to hold their own approval voting election to determine the best

      option in Rock, Paper, Scissors, Lizard, Spock. Use the summary of their approval ballots in the table below to
      determine the number of votes for each candidate. Determine the winner, or state that there is none.

                                                          Voters Penny Bernadette Amy

Rock                                               Yes              No         No

Paper                                              Yes              Yes        No

Scissors Yes                                                        Yes        Yes

Lizard                                             No               No         No

Spock                                              Yes              No         Yes

For the following exercises, use the table below.

Percentage of Vote 40% 35% 25%

Candidate A                                                   1     3       2

Candidate B                                                   2     1       3

Candidate C                                                   3     2       1

56. Which candidate is the winner by the ranked-choice method?
57. Suppose that they used the approval method and each voter approved their top two choices. Which candidate

      is the winner by the approval method?
58. Which candidate is the winner by the Borda count method?
1162 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods

        Figure 11.10 Citizens strive to ensure their voting system is fair. (credit: "Governor Votes Early" by Maryland GovPics/
        Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Compare and contrast fairness of voting using majority criterion.
         2. Compare and contrast fairness of voting using head-to-head criterion.
         3. Compare and contrast fairness of voting using monotonicity criterion.
         4. Compare and contrast fairness of voting using irrelevant alternatives criterion.
         5. Apply Arrow's Impossibility Theorem when evaluating voting fairness.
        Now that we've covered a variety of voting methods and discussed their differences and similarities, you might be
        leaning toward one method over another. You will need to convince the other founders of Imaginaria that your
        preference will be the best for the country. Before your collaborators approve the inclusion of a voting method in the
        constitution, they will want to know that the voting method is a fair method. In this section, we will formally define the
        characteristics of a fair system. We will analyze each voting previously discussed to determine which characteristics of
        fairness they have, and which they do not. In order to guarantee one ideal, we must often sacrifice others.

     The Majority Criterion

        One of the most fundamental concepts in voting is the idea that most voters should be in favor of a candidate for a
        candidate to win, and that a candidate should not win without majority support. This concept is known as the majority
        criterion.
        With respect to the four main ranked voting methods we have discussed--plurality, ranked-choice, pairwise comparison,
        and the Borda count method--we will explore two important questions:
         1. Which of these voting systems satisfy the majority criterion and which do not?
         2. Is it always "fair" for a voting system to satisfy the majority criterion?
        Keep in mind that this criterion only applies when one of the candidates has a majority. So, the examples we will analyze
        will be based on scenarios in which a single candidate has more than 50 percent of the vote.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                  11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1163

  EXAMPLE 11.16

Roommates Choose Fast Food
It's final exams week and seven college students are hungry. They must get food, but from which drive thru? Their
preferences are listed in the table below. The majority have listed McDonald's as their top choice. Let's calculate what the
results of the election will be using various voting methods.

Voters         ABCDE FG

(M) McDonald's 1 1 1 1 5 5 5

(B) Burger King 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

(T) Taco Bell  4434331

(O) Pollo Tropical 3 5 4 3 4 1 3

(I) Pizza Hut  5355144

1. Which restaurant is the winner using the plurality voting method?
2. Which restaurant is the winner using the ranked-choice voting method?
3. Does the majority criterion apply? If so, for which of voting method(s), if any, did the majority criterion fail?

    Solution
1. For plurality voting, we only need to count the first-place votes for each candidate. In this case, McDonald's has four

     first place votes, which is a majority and wins the election automatically.
2. For ranked-choice voting, McDonald's also wins because it has a majority at the end of Round 1.
3. The majority criterion does apply because one candidate had a majority of the first-place votes. The majority

     criterion did not fail by either method, because in each case the majority candidate won.

        YOUR TURN 11.16

  Use the information in the table to answer the following questions.
                                                               Voters L M N O P

                                                             Option A 2 2 3 2 1

                                                             Option B 1 4 1 4 2

                                                             Option C 3 1 4 1 3

                                                             Option D 4 1 2 3 4

      1. Which option is the winner when using the plurality voting method?
      2. Which option is the winner when using the ranked-choice voting method?
      3. Does the majority criterion apply? If so, for which voting method(s), if any, did the majority criterion fail?

From Example 11.16, it appears that the plurality and ranked-choice voting methods satisfy the majority criterion. In
general, the majority candidate always wins in a plurality election because the candidate that has more than half of the
votes has more votes than any other candidate. The same is true for ranked-choice voting; and there will never be a
need for a second round when there is a majority candidate. Let's examine how some of the other voting methods stand
1164 11 · Voting and Apportionment

up to the majority criterion.

  EXAMPLE 11.17

Roommates Choose Fast Food
Those seven college students are hungry again! Their preferences haven't changed, as shown below. Let's calculate if the
results change when we use different voting methods.

                                    VOTERS         ABCDE FG

                                    (M) McDonald's 1 1 1 1 5 5 5

                                    (B) Burger King 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

                                    (T) Taco Bell  4434331

                                    (O) Pollo Tropical 3 5 4 3 4 1 3

                                    (I) Pizza Hut  5355144

1. Which restaurant is the winner using the pairwise comparison voting method?
2. Which restaurant is the winner using the Borda count voting method?
3. Does the majority criterion apply? If so, for which voting method(s), if any, did the majority criterion fail?

    Solution
1. For pairwise comparison, notice that McDonald's is a Condorcet candidate because it wins every pairwise

     comparison. So, McDonald's is the winner.
2. For the Borda count, we must calculate the Borda score for each candidate: McDonald's is 16, Burger King is 21, Taco

     Bell is 13, Pollo Tropical is 12, Pizza Hut is 8. The winner is Burger King!
3. Yes, the majority criterion applies because McDonald's has the majority of first place votes. The majority criterion

     only fails using the Borda method.

        YOUR TURN 11.17
  Use the information in the following table to find the winner using each of the voting methods in parts 1 and 2, then
  answer the question in part 3.

                                                               Voters L M N O P
                                                             Option A 2 2 3 2 2
                                                             Option B 1 4 1 4 1
                                                             Option C 3 1 4 1 3
                                                             Option D 4 3 2 3 4

      1. Pairwise comparison
      2. Borda count
      3. Does the majority criterion apply? If so, for which voting method(s) did the majority criterion fail?

Example 11.17 demonstrates a concept that we also saw in Borda Count Voting--the Borda method frequently favors the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1165

compromise candidate over the divisive candidate. This can happen even when the divisive candidate has a majority, as
it did in this example. Although a majority of the voters were in favor of McDonald's, a significant minority was strongly
opposed to McDonald's, ranking it last. Since the Borda score includes all rankings, this strong opposition has an impact
on the outcome of the election.

Pairwise comparison will always satisfy the majority criterion because the candidate with the majority of first-place votes
wins each pairwise matchup. While it is possible for the majority candidate to win by the Borda count method, it is not
guaranteed. So, the Borda method fails the majority criterion. A summary of each voting method as it relates to the
majority criterion is found in the following table.

Voting Method        Majority Criterion

Plurality            Satisfies

Ranked-choice        Satisfies

Pairwise comparison  Satisfies

Borda count          Violates

If you prefer the Borda method, you might argue that its failure to satisfy the majority criterion is actually one of its
strengths. As we saw in Example 11.16 and Example 11.17, the majority have the power to vote for their own benefit at
the expense of the minority. While four students were very enthusiastic about McDonald's, three students were strongly
opposed to McDonald's. It is reasonable to say that the better option would be Burger King, the compromise candidate,
which everyone ranked highly and no one strongly opposed. The Borda method is designed to favor a candidate that is
acceptable to the population as a whole. In this way, the Borda method avoids a downfall of strict majority rule known as
the tyranny of the majority, which occurs when a minority of a population is treated unfairly because their situation is
different from the situation of the majority.

The people of Imaginaria should know that the power of the majority to vote their will has serious implications for other
groups. For example, according to the UCLA School of Law Williams Institute, the LGBTQ+ community in the United
States makes up approximately 4.5 percent of the population. When elections occur that include issues that affect the
LGBTQ+ community, members of the LGBTQ+ community depend on the 95.5 percent of the population who do not
identify as LGBTQ+ to consider their perspectives when voting on issues such as same-sex marriage, the use of public
restrooms by transgender people, and adoption by same-sex couples.

                 PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

  Robert Dahl

  In his book, Democracy and Its Critics, Robert Dahl wrote, "If a majority is not entitled to do so, then it is thereby
  deprived of its rights; but if a majority is entitled to do so, then it can deprive the minority of its rights." Dahl was a
  renowned political theorist, but he is also considered to be a mathematician since his work utilizes ideas from an area
  of mathematics known as Game Theory (Mathematics Genealogy Project, NDSU Department of Mathematics with the
  American Mathematical Society).

      WHO KNEW?

Three Branches of Government

Concerns about the consequences of majority rule are not new. In 1788, John Adams warned of the consequences of
majority rule and he argued for three branches of government as a way to temper them. In the early 1800s, a young
French aristocrat named Alexis de Tocqueville toured the United States and wrote Democracy in America, which
focused on the impact of democracy on political and civil societies. He observed, even then, the dominance of the
white majority over the Indigenous people and enslaved people, which was perpetuated by majority rule.
1166 11 · Voting and Apportionment

               VIDEO
              Separation of Powers and Checks and Balances (https://openstax.org/r/separation_of_powers)

     Head-to-Head Criterion

        Another fairness criterion you must consider as you select a voting method for Imaginaria is the Condorcet criterion,
        also known as the head-to-head criterion. An election method satisfies the Condorcet criterion provided that the
        Condorcet candidate wins the election whenever a Condorcet candidate exists. A Condorcet method is any voting
        method that satisfies the Condorcet criterion.
        Recall from Three Key Questions that not every election has a Condorcet candidate; the Condorcet criterion will not apply
        to every election. Also recall that a Condorcet candidate cannot lose an election by pairwise comparison. So, the pairwise
        comparison voting method is said to satisfy the Condorcet criterion.

          EXAMPLE 11.18
        Spending Tax Refund
        A survey asked a random sample of 100 people in the United States to rank their priorities for spending their tax refund.
        The options were (V) go on vacation, (S) put into savings, (D) pay off debt, or (T) other. The pairwise comparison matrix
        for the results is in Figure 11.11. Determine whether the Condorcet criterion applies.

                                              Figure 11.11 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Tax Refund Spending
             Solution
        The Condorcet criterion only applies when there is a Condorcet candidate. "Pay off debt" (D) is a Condorcet candidate
        because D wins every matchup. Yes, the Condorcet criterion applies to this election.

                YOUR TURN 11.18
          1. Determine whether the Condorcet criterion applies based on the summary of ranked ballots given in the table

               below.
                                                                                    Votes 3 2

                                                                                  Option A 1 3
                                                                                  Option B 2 1
                                                                                  Option C 3 2

         Access for free at openstax.org
                              11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1167

  EXAMPLE 11.19

Spending Tax Refund
Let's return to the survey about tax refund spending from Example 11.18. We know that the Condorcet criterion applies
because Option D, "Pay off debt," is a Condorcet candidate, which wins every pairwise match up.

Use the information in the ballot summary from the table below to find the winner and determine whether the
Condorcet criterion is satisfied in this election when each of the following voting methods are used.

Votes             33 32 31 4

On a vacation (V) 1 3 3 2

Put into savings (S) 3 1 2 1

Pay off debt (D)  2 2 14

Other (T)         4 4 43

1. Plurality
2. Ranked-choice voting
3. Borda count

    Solution
1. V wins 33 first place votes; S, 36; D, 31; and T, 0. So candidate S, "Put into savings," has a plurality and wins. Since the

     Condorcet candidate D didn't win, the Condorcet criterion is violated.
2. Use the steps outlined in Ranked-Choice Voting for determining the winner of an election by ranked-choice voting,

     the application of the Hare method in which instant runoffs are used.
     Step 1: The number of votes needed to achieve a majority is 51.

     Step 2: As illustrated in part 1, no candidate has a majority of first-place votes; so the candidate with the fewest
     votes, T, must be eliminated.

     Step 3: Reallocate votes to the remaining candidates for the second round:

Votes             33 32 31 4

On a vacation (V) 1 3 3 2

Put into savings (S) 3 1 2 1

Pay off debt (D)  2 2 13

Step 4: Repeat the process from Step 2. Count the first-place votes for each candidate: V has 33 votes, S has 36
votes, D has 31. votes. Eliminate candidate D, "Pay off debt," for the third round.

Step 5: Repeat the process from Step 3. Reallocate votes to the remaining candidates for the third round:

Votes             33 32 31 4

On a vacation (V) 1 2 2 2

Put into savings (S) 2 1 1 1

Step 6: Repeat the process from Step 2 one last time. Count the first-place votes for each candidate: V has 33, S has
1168 11 · Voting and Apportionment

      67. Candidate S, "Put into savings," has a majority and wins. Since the Condorcet candidate D candidate D, "Pay off
      debt," didn't win, the Condorcet criterion is violated.

 3. Calculate the Borda score for each candidate.
      V:

      S:

      D:

      T:

Candidate D, "Pay off debt," has the highest Borda score and wins. Since D was the Condorcet candidate, this election
satisfies the Condorcet criterion.

      YOUR TURN 11.19
Use the summary of ranked ballots below to find the winner and determine whether the Condorcet criterion is
satisfied when each of the following voting methods are used. Recall that Option A is a Condorcet candidate.

                                                                        Votes 3 2
                                                                     Option A 1 3

                                                                     Option B 2 1

                                                                     Option C 3 2

1. Plurality
2. Ranked-choice voting
3. Borda count

As we have seen, the plurality method, ranked-choice voting, and the Borda count method each fail the Condorcet
criterion in some circumstances. Of the four main ranked voting methods we have discussed, only the pairwise
comparison method satisfies the Condorcet criterion every time. A summary of each voting method as it relates to the
Condorcet criterion is found in the following table.

                                    Voting Method        Condorcet Criterion

                                    Plurality            Violates

                                    Ranked-choice        Violates

                                    Pairwise comparison  Satisfies

                                    Borda count          Violates

Monotonicity Criterion

The citizens of Imaginaria might be surprised to learn that it is possible for a voter to cause a candidate to lose by
ranking that candidate higher on their ballot. Is that fair? Most voters would say, "Absolutely not!!" This is an example of
a violation of the fairness criterion called the monotonicity criterion, which is satisfied when no candidate is harmed by
up-ranking nor helped by down-ranking, provided all other votes remain the same.

Consider a scenario in which voters are permitted a first round that is not binding, and then they may change their vote
before the second round. Such a first round can be called a "straw poll." Now, let's suppose that a particular candidate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1169

won the straw poll. After that, several voters are convinced to increase their support, or up-rank, that winning candidate
and no voters decrease that support. It is reasonable to expect that the winner of the first round will also win the second.
Similarly, if some of the voters decide to decrease their support, or down-rank, a losing candidate, it is reasonable to
expect that candidate will still lose in the second round.

You might be wondering why it's called the monotonicity criterion. In mathematics, the term monotonicity refers to the
quality of always increasing or always decreasing. For example, a person's age is monotonic because it always increases,
whereas a person's weight is not monotonic because it can increase or decrease. If the only changes to the votes for a
particular candidate after a straw poll are in one direction, this change is considered monotonic.

If you are going to make an informed decision about which voting method to use in Imaginaria, you need to know which
of the four main ranked voting methods we have discussed--plurality, ranked-choice, pairwise comparison, and the
Borda count method--satisfy the monotonicity criterion.

  EXAMPLE 11.20

Favorite Dog Breed by Plurality
The local animal shelter is having a vote-by-donation charity event. For a $10 donation, an individual can complete a
ranked ballot indicating their favorite large dog breed: standard poodle, golden retriever, Labrador retriever, or bulldog.
Use the summary of ballots below to answer each question.

Votes        42 53 61 24

(S) Standard Poodle 1 3 2 1

(G) Golden Retriever 3 1 4 4

(L) Labrador Retriever 4 2 1 2

(B) Bulldog  2433

1. Determine the winner of the election by plurality.
2. Suppose that the 53 voters in the second column increased their ranking of the winner by 1. Determine the winner

     by plurality with the new rankings.
3. Does this election violate the monotonicity criterion?
4. Do you think the result of part 3 is also true for plurality voting and the monotonicity criterion in general? Why or

     why not?

    Solution
1. The number of votes for each candidate are: S 66, G 53, L 61, and B 0. The winner is the standard poodle.
2. If the 53 voters in the second column rank S as 2 and L as 3, then the number of votes for each candidate are: S with

     66, G with 53, L with 61, and B with 0. The winner is still the standard poodle.
3. This election does not violate the monotonicity criterion because the winner was not hurt by up-ranking.
4. In general, increasing the ranking for a winner of a plurality election will either leave them with the same or more

     first place votes while leaving the other candidates with the same or fewer first place votes. So a plurality election
     will never violate the monotonicity criterion.

      YOUR TURN 11.20

Use the Favorite Large Dog Breed Ballot Summary to answer each question.
    1. Determine the winner of the election by Borda count.
    2. Suppose that the 61 voters in the third column increased their ranking of the winner by 1. Determine the
         winner by Borda count with the new rankings.
    3. Does this election violate the monotonicity criterion?
    4. Do you think the result of part 3 is true for Borda count and the monotonicity criterion in general? Why or why
1170 11 · Voting and Apportionment

not?

  EXAMPLE 11.21

Favorite Dog Breed by Pairwise Comparison
Earlier, we discovered that the summary of ranked ballots shown in the table below results in the pairwise comparison
matrix in Figure 11.12. Use this information to answer the questions.

                                    Number of Ballots 95 90 110 115

                                    Option A  44 1  1

                                    Option B  22 2  2

                                    Option C  31 3  4

                                    Option D  13 4  3

                     Figure 11.12 Analyzed Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Sample Summary of Ranked Ballots

 1. Determine the winner of the election by the pairwise comparison method.
 2. Suppose that the 95 voters in the first column increased their ranking of the winner by 1. Determine the winner by

      the pairwise comparison method with the new rankings.
 3. Does this election violate the monotonicity criterion?
 4. Do you think the result of part 3 is true for the pairwise comparison method and the monotonicity criterion in

      general? Why or why not?

     Solution
 1. By the pairwise comparison method, Option A wins with three points.
 2. If the 95 voters in the first column of Figure 11.12 increased their ranking of the winner by 1, then C would fall into

      fourth place and A would move up to third place on those ballots. This would only affect the matchup between A
      and C, and the result would be that A would gain 95 votes while C would lose 95 votes. This means A would have 320
      votes and C would have 90. Since A already was ahead of C, this just puts A further ahead and causes no change to
      the election results.
 3. Since the winner A is not hurt by an up-rank, and the loser C is not helped by a down-rank, this election is fair by the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1171

     monotonicity criterion.
4. Yes, the monotonicity criterion would be satisfied by the pairwise comparison method, because an up-rank of the

     winner can never decrease the number of pairwise wins. Similarly, a down-rank can never increase the number of
     pairwise wins.

      YOUR TURN 11.21

Use the Favorite Large Dog Breed Ballot Summary to answer each question.
    1. Determine the winner of the election by the ranked-choice method.
    2. Suppose that the 24 voters in the last column of the table increased their ranking of the winner by 1.
         Determine the winner by the ranked-choice method with the new rankings.
    3. Does this election violate the monotonicity criterion?
    4. Do you think the result in question 3 is true for the ranked-choice method and the monotonicity criterion in
         general? Why or why not?

The last few examples illustrate that the plurality method, pairwise comparison voting, and the Borda count method
each satisfy the monotonicity criterion. Of the four main ranked voting methods we have discussed, only the ranked-
choice method violates the monotonicity criterion. A summary of each voting method as it relates to the Condorcet
criterion is found in the table below.

Voting Method        Monotonicity Criterion

Plurality            Satisfies

Ranked-choice        Violates

Pairwise comparison  Satisfies

Borda count          Satisfies

Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion

We have covered a lot about voting fairness, but there is one more fairness criterion that you and the other Imaginarians
should know. Consider this well-known anecdote that is sometimes attributed to the American philosopher Sidney
Morgenbesser:

A man is told by his waiter that the dessert options this evening are blueberry pie or apple pie. The man orders the apple
pie. The waiter returns and tells him that there is also a third option, cherry pie. The man says, "In that case, I would like
the blueberry pie." (Gaming the Vote: Why Elections Aren't Fair (and What We Can Do About It), William Pound stone, p.
50, ISBN 0-8090-4893-0)

This story illustrates the concept of the Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion, also known as the Independence of Irrelevant
Alternatives Criterion (IIA), which means that the introduction or removal of a third candidate should not change or
reverse the rankings of the original two candidates relative to one another. In particular, if a losing candidate is removed
from the race or if a new candidate is added, the winner of the race should not change.

  EXAMPLE 11.22

Apple, Blueberry, or Cherry?
Suppose that 30 students in a class are going to vote on whether to have apple, blueberry, or cherry pie. Use the
summary of ranked ballots in below to answer each question.
1172 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Number of Ballots 14 12 4

                                    (A) Apple Pie   1 33

                                    (B) Blueberry Pie 2 1 2

                                    (C) Cherry Pie  3 21

1. Determine the winner of the election by plurality.
2. Which candidate would win a plurality election if cherry pie were removed from the ballot?
3. Does this election violate the IIA?

    Solution
1. The number of first place votes for each candidate is: A with 14, B with 12, and C with 4. Apple pie has the most first-

     place votes and wins the election.
2. If cherry pie is removed from the ballot, then the four voters in the third column now rank blueberry pie as their first

     choice. So the four votes for C now belong to B. This means that blueberry pie has 16 votes compared to the 14
     votes for apple pie. Blueberry pie now wins the plurality election.
3. Yes, the election violates the IIA because the removal of a losing candidate from the ballot changed the winner of
     the election.

YOUR TURN 11.22

The local animal shelter is having another vote-by-donation charity event! This time, for a $10 donation, an
individual can complete a ranked ballot indicating their favorite small dog breed, miniature, from the ones provided:
miniature poodle, Yorkshire terrier, or Chihuahua. Use the summary of ballots below to answer each question.

                                    Votes           53 42 24 11

                                    (P) Miniature Poodle 1 3 3 2

                                    (Y) Yorkshire Terrier 2 2 1 1

                                    (C) Chihuahua   3123

      1. Determine the winner of the election by the ranked-choice method.
      2. Determine the winner of the election if poodles are removed from the ballot.
      3. Does this election violate IIA?

  EXAMPLE 11.23

Best Fourth Wall Breaking Stare on The Office
The NBC sitcom The Office ran for nine years and has been one of the most popular streamed television shows of all
time. One of the trademarks of the show was that characters would often break the fourth wall to communicate with the
audience just by staring directly into the camera. In fact, there is a website dedicated to "The Office stares"
(https://openstax.org/r/theofficestaremachine) where you can watch over 700 of these stares! Suppose that 36 fans were
asked which character had the best "The Office stare." Use the ballot summary in below to answer each question.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1173

Number of Ballots                                    9 11 7 6 3

(J) Jim Halpert (John Krasinski)                     1 2 424

(P) Pam Beesly-Halpert (Jenna Fischer) 4 1 2 4 3

(D) Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson)                    2 3 312

(M) Michael Scott (Steve Carell)                     3 4 131

1. Determine the winner of the election by the pairwise comparison method.
2. Determine the winner of the election by the pairwise comparison method if Michael Scott is removed from the

     ballot.
3. Does this election violate IIA?

    Solution
1. Construct and analyze a pairwise comparison matrix:

                                  Figure 11.13 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Jim, Pam, Dwight, and Michael
     Jim Halpert wins with 2 points.
2. If Michael Scott is removed, the summary of ranked ballots becomes:

Number of Ballots                                    9 11 7 6 3

(J) Jim Halpert (John Krasinski)                     1 2 323

(P) Pam Beesly-Halpert (Jenna Fischer) 3 1 1 3 2

(D) Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson)                    2 3 211

Construct and analyze a pairwise comparison matrix:
1174 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                        Figure 11.14 Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Jim, Pam, and Dwight
     Pam wins with points.
3. Yes, this violates the IIA, because the winning candidate was hurt by the elimination of a losing candidate.

      YOUR TURN 11.23

Use the initial ballot summary from Example 11.23 to answer the questions.
    1. Determine the winner of the election by the Borda count method.
    2. Determine the winner of the election by the Borda count method if Michael Scott is removed from the ballot.
    3. Does this election violate IIA?

We have seen that all four of the main voting systems we are working with fail the Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion (IIA).
A summary of each voting method as it relates to the IIA criterion is found in the table below.

                                    Voting Method        Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion

                                    Plurality            Violates

                                    Ranked-choice        Violates

                                    Pairwise comparison  Violates

                                    Borda count          Violates

      WHO KNEW?

Electronic Voting: Does Your Vote Count?

In order for an election to be fair, voting must be accessible to everyone and every vote must be counted. When
hundreds of thousands to millions of votes must be collected and counted in a short period of time, deciding it can be
challenging to be on counting procedures that are accurate and secure. Electronic voting machines or even Internet
voting can speed up the process, but how reliable are these methods? This has been a subject for debate for years.

In a press release on August 3, 2007, California Secretary of State Debra Bowen explained the results of an extensive
review of electronic voting systems in her state. She said that transparency and auditability were key. She went on to
say, "I think voters and counties are the victims of a federal certification process that hasn't done an adequate job of
ensuring that the systems made available to them are secure, accurate, reliable and accessible. Congress enacted the
Help America Vote Act, which pushed many counties into buying electronic systems that--as we've seen for some
time and we saw again in the independent UC review--were not properly reviewed or tested to ensure that they

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1175

protected the integrity of the vote." Secretary Bowden subsequently ordered that voting machines must have tighter
security to be used in California. (DB07:042, Secretary of State Debra Bowen Moves to Strengthen Voter Confidence in
Election Security Following Top-to-Bottom Review of Voting Systems, https://sos.ca.gov/elections.) In some instances,
the use of electronic voting in parliamentary elections has been discontinued completely for security reasons. For
example, according to the National Democratic Institute, the Netherlands returned to all paper ballots and hand
counting in 2006. Will you use voting machines or Internet voting in Imaginaria?

So far, every one of the voting methods we have analyzed has failed one or more of the fairness criteria in one
election or another.

Voting      Majority   Condorcet Criterion (Head-  Monotonicity  (Independence of) Irrelevant
Method      Criterion        to-Head Criterion)       Criterion       Alternatives Criterion

Plurality   Satisfies  Violates                    Satisfies     Violates

Ranked-     Satisfies  Violates                    Satisfies     Violates
 choice

  Pairwise  Satisfies  Satisfies                   Violates      Violates
comparison

Borda count Violates   Violates                    Satisfies     Violates

You might be wondering if there is a voting system you could recommend for Imaginaria that satisfies all the fairness
criteria. If there is one, it remains to be discovered and it is not a voting system that is based solely on preference
rankings. In 1972, Harvard Professor of Economics Kenneth J. Arrow received the Nobel Prize in Economics for proving
Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, which states that any voting system, either existing or yet to be created, in which the
only information available is the preference rankings of the candidates, will fail to satisfy at least one of the following
fairness criteria: the majority criterion, the Condorcet criterion, the monotonicity criterion, and the independence of
irrelevant alternatives criterion. This theorem only applies to a specific category of voting systems--those for which the
preference ranking is the only information collected. There are other types of voting systems to which the Impossibility
Theorem does not apply. For example, there is a class of voting systems called Cardinal voting systems that allow for
rating the candidates in some way.

"Rating" is different from "ranking" because a voter can give different candidates the same rating. Consider the five-star
rating systems used by various industries, or the thumbs up/thumbs down rating system used on YouTube. Could there
be a Cardinal voting system that does not violate any of the fairness criteria we have discussed? It's possible, but more
research must be done in order to prove it.

                 PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

  Kenneth J. Arrow

  In 1972, Kenneth J. Arrow, a Harvard Professor of Economics, received the Nobel Prize in Economics jointly with Sir
  John Hicks, another world renowned economist, for their contributions to economic theory. In particular, Professor
  Arrow proved mathematically that no ranked voting system meets all four of the fairness criteria discussed in this
  section. The statement of this fact is known as Arrow's Impossibility Theorem. Visit this site for more details on
  Professor Arrow (https://openstax.org/r/prizes/economic-sciences/1972/arrow/facts/)

Check Your Understanding

 8. Which fairness criterion is violated by all four of the main ranked voting methods presented in this chapter?

 9. Which of the four main ranked voting methods presented in this chapter satisfies the Condorcet criterion?
1176 11 · Voting and Apportionment

10. Which of the four main ranked voting methods presented in this section violates the majority criterion?

11. Which of the four main ranked voting methods presented in this section violates the monotonicity criterion?

12. According to Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, which of the four main ranked voting methods presented in this
      chapter violate at least one of the fairness criteria?

13. Determine whether the following statement is true or false and explain your reasoning: Any ranked election that
      violates the majority criterion also violates the Condorcet criterion.

14. Determine whether the following statement is true or false and explain your reasoning: Any ranked election that
      violates the Condorcet criterion also violates the majority criterion.

15. Does Arrow's Impossibility Theorem apply to approval voting? Why or why not?

Determine whether each statement is true or false. Explain your reasoning.
    16. Arrow's Impossibility Theorem guarantees that ranked voting systems always lead to unfair elections.
    17. Approval voting is in the class of voting systems called Cardinal Voting systems.

        SECTION 11.2 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, identify which fairness criteria, if any, are violated by characteristics of the described voter
profile. Explain your reasoning.

     1. In a plurality election, the candidates have the following vote counts: A 125, B 132, C 149, D 112. The pairwise
          matchup points for each candidate would have been: A 1, B 3, C 1, D 1.

     2. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 1245, B 1360, C 787. Candidate A
          received 55 percent of the first-place rankings.

     3. In a pairwise comparison election, the four candidates initially received the following points for winning
          matchups: A 2, B , , C 1, D . When candidate C dropped out of the election, the remaining candidates

          received: A 1, B , D .

     4. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 15, B 11, C 12, D 16. The pairwise
          matchup points for the same voter profiles would have been: A 2, B 0, C 1, D 3.

     5. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 15, B 11, C 12, D 16. When
          Candidate E was added to the ballot, the Borda scores became: A 25, B 21, C 15, D 24, E 18.

     6. In a pairwise comparison election, Candidate C was a Condorcet candidate in a straw poll. When the actual
          election took place, several voters up-ranked Candidate C on their ballots, but no other changes were made to
          the voter preferences, and Candidate B won the election.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                   Votes  49 51

                                                   Candidate A 3 1

                                                   Candidate B 1 2

                                                   Candidate C 2 3

     7. In a pairwise comparison election, Candidate A was in first place, Candidate B was in second place, and
          Candidate C was in third place. When the actual election tool place, the only changes were that several voters
          down-ranked Candidate B on their ballots, but the outcome remained the same.

     8. Determine the Borda score for each candidate and the winner of the election using the Borda count method.
     9. Is there a majority candidate? If so, which candidate?
    10. Does this Borda method election violate the majority criterion? Justify your answer.
    11. Is there a Condorcet candidate? If so, which candidate?
    12. Does this Borda method election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
    13. If Candidate C is removed from the ballot, which candidate wins by the Borda count method?
    14. Does this Borda count method election violate IIA? Justify your answer.

Use the table below for the following exercises.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        11.2 · Fairness in Voting Methods 1177

Votes        7 9 12 15 5

Candidate A 4 4 1 1 4

Candidate B 1 1 2 2 3

Candidate C 3 2 3 4 1

Candidate D 2 3 4 3 2

    15. Determine Borda score for each candidate and the winner of the election using the Borda count method.
    16. Is there a majority candidate? If so, which candidate?
    17. Does this Borda method election violate the majority criterion? Justify your answer.
    18. Is there a Condorcet candidate? If so, which candidate?
    19. Does the Borda method election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
    20. Can an election that fails the majority criterion satisfy the Condorcet criterion? Why or why not?

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                      Number of Ballots 10 7 5 5 4

Candidate A  1 3334

Candidate B  3 2141

Candidate C  2 4212

Candidate D  4 1423

    21. Determine the Borda score for each candidate and the winner of the election using the Borda count method.
    22. Is there a majority candidate?
    23. Does the election violate the majority criterion? Justify your answer.
    24. Determine the winner by pairwise comparison.
    25. Is there a Condorcet candidate?
    26. Does the Borda election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
    27. Determine the winner by the ranked-choice method.
    28. Does the ranked-choice election violate the majority criterion? Justify your answer.
    29. Does the ranked-choice election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
    30. Can an election that fails the Condorcet criterion satisfy the majority criterion? Why or why not?

Use the table below for the following exercises.

                                                            Number of Ballots 49 48 3

Candidate A  1 33

Candidate B  2 12

Candidate C  3 21

31. Determine the winner of the election using the plurality method.
32. Determine the winner by pairwise comparison.
33. Is there a Condorcet candidate?
34. Does this plurality election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
35. If Candidate C is removed from the ballot, which candidate wins by plurality?
1178 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    36. Does this plurality violate the IIA? Explain your reasoning.
Use the sample ballot summary below for the following exercises.

                                                        Number of Ballots 16 20 24 8

                                    Candidate A  1 3 21

                                    Candidate B  3 1 44

                                    Candidate C  4 2 12

                                    Candidate D  2 4 33

    37. Determine the winner of the election using the ranked-choice method.
    38. Determine the winner by pairwise comparison.
    39. Is there a Condorcet candidate?
    40. Does this ranked-choice election violate the Condorcet criterion? Justify your answer.
    41. If the four voters in the last column rank Candidate C ahead of A, which candidate wins by the ranked-choice

          method?
    42. Does this ranked-choice election violate the monotonicity criterion? Explain your reasoning.

Use the sample ballot summary below for the following exercises.

                                                        Number of Ballots 15 12 9 3

                                    Candidate A  1 3 32

                                    Candidate B  2 2 11

                                    Candidate C  3 1 23

    43. Determine the winner of the election using the ranked-choice method.
    44. How could it be demonstrated that this ranked-choice election violates IIA?
    45. Determine the winner of the election by the Borda method.
    46. Does this Borda method election violate the IIA? Why or why not?
    47. Does this Borda method election violate the monotonicity criterion? Why or why not?

Use the pairwise comparison matrix in the given figure for the following exercises.

    48. Which candidate wins the pairwise election?
    49. Determine the winner by pairwise comparison if N were removed from the ballot.
    50. Determine the winner by pairwise comparison if M were removed from the ballot.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1179

    51. Does this pairwise election satisfy the IIA?

11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment
Problem

Figure 11.15 Every person at a party gets their fair slice of the cake. (credit: "apple spice cake" by Mark Bonica/Flickr, CC
BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Analyze the apportionment problem and applications to representation.
 2. Evaluate applications of standard divisors.
 3. Evaluate applications of standard quotas.

The Apportionment Problem

In the new democracy of Imaginaria, there are four states: Fictionville, Pretendstead, Illusionham, and Mythbury. Each
state will have representatives in the Imaginarian Legislature. You might now have an agreement on which voting
method your citizens will use to elect representatives. However, before that process can even begin, you must decided on
how many representatives each state will receive. This decision will present its own challenges.

When sharing your birthday cake, it's only fair that everyone gets the same portion size, right? You were portioning the
cake by dividing it up equally and giving everyone a slice. A great thing about cake is that you can slice it any way you
want, but how do you apportion, or divide and distribute, items that can't be sliced? Suppose that you have a box of 16
Ring PopsTM, gem-shaped lollipops on a plastic ring. You are going to share the box with four other kids. Dividing the 16
Ring PopsTM among the group of five leads to a problem; after each person in the group gets three Ring PopsTM, there is
still one left! Who gets the last one? The apportionment problem is how to fairly divide, or apportion, available
resources that must be distributed to the recipients in whole, not fractional, parts.

The apportionment problem applies to many aspects of life, including the representatives in the Imaginarian legislature.
The table below provides a short list of examples of resources that must be apportioned in whole parts, and the
recipients of those resources.

Resource                           Recipients

Covid-19 Vaccines                  Nations around the world

Airport Terminals                  Airlines

Faculty Positions at a University  Departments

Public Schools                     Communities
1180 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                                      Resource               Recipients
                                    U.S. House of Representatives Seats          States

                                               Parliamentary Seats         Political Parties

Fair division of a resource is not necessarily equal division of the resource like when distributing cake slices. When
distributing airport terminals amongst airlines, there are many factors to consider such as the size of the airline, the
number and types of aircraft they have, and the demand for the service. In most cases, fairness is defined as being
proportional; two quantities are proportional if they have the same relative size. In the case of the Covid-19 vaccine, the
expectation would be that countries with larger populations get more doses of the vaccine. In the Imaginarian
legislature, the expectation may be that the states with larger populations will receive the larger number of
representatives. This concept is referred to as a part-to-part ratio.

Suppose that a supermarket has a special on pies, two for $5. The first customer purchases four pies for $10, and the

second customer purchases eight pies for $20. The dollar to pie ratio for the first customer is

                                    and the dollar to pie ratio for the second customer is            . So,

the dollar to pie ratio is constant. Although the customers do not spend the same amount of money, the amount each
spent was proportional to the number of pies purchased.

Now suppose that the supermarket changed the special to $5 for the first pie, and $2 for each additional pie. In that

case, four pies would cost                      , while 8 pies would cost                   . The dollar to pie ratios would be

                                    and                                    , respectively. This special does not result in a

constant part to part ratio. The dollars spent are not proportional to the number of pies purchased.

VIDEO

What Is a Ratio? (https://openstax.org/r/ratios_proportions)

What Are the Different Types of Ratios? (https://openstax.org/r/ratio_types)

  EXAMPLE 11.24

Ratio of Faculty to Students at a College
The following table provides a comparison of the number of faculty members in each department at a particular college
to the student head count in that department and the number of class sections in that department in the Spring
semester. Use this information to answer the questions.

                                    Department          Mathematics English History Science

       (S) Student Head Count                           4800               2376  1536         2880

                                    (C) Class Sections  120                108   48           96

                                    (T) Total Faculty   30                 27    12           24

       (F) Full-Time Faculty                            10                 9     4               8

       (P) Part-Time Faculty                            20                 18    8            16

1. Determine the ratios for each department: S to C, C to T, S to T, F to P
2. What are the units of the ratios that you found?
3. Which of these pairs, if any, has a constant part to part ratio? State the ratio.
4. Does it appear that the total number of faculty positions were allocated to each department based on student head

     count, the number of class sections, or neither? Justify your answer.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1181

    Solution
1. Divide the first quantity by the second, for each department, as shown in the table below.
2. Answers are provided in last column of the table.

   Department eMathematics English                History  Science           Units of Ratios Found

   S to C                                                                    Students per class section

   C to T                                                                    Class sections per faculty member

   S to T                                                                    Students per faculty member

   F to P                                                                    Full-time faculty member per part-
                                                                                      time faculty member

3. The ratio of class sections to faculty members is a constant ratio of four. The ratio of full-time faculty to part-time
     faculty is a constant ratio of .

4. It appears that the faculty positions were allocated based on the number of class sections because there is a
     constant ratio of four class sections per faculty member.

   YOUR TURN 11.24

The SAT is to be administered at a high school. In preparation, pencils have been distributed to each of the
classrooms based on the room capacity. Use the information in the following table to answer each question.

                                     Room Number                             BCDE

                    Room Capacity (number of student desks) 24 18 32 22

                                     Number of Pencils                       36 27 48 33

   1. Find the part to part ratio of desks to pencils for each room. Represent it as both a reduced fraction and a
       decimal rounded to the nearest hundredth as needed.

   2. Find the part to part ratio of pencils to desks for each room. Represent it as both a reduced fraction and a
       decimal rounded to the nearest hundredth as needed.

   3. Have the pencils been distributed proportionally? If so, what is the constant ratio of pencils to desks? Give the
       units.

There are some useful relationships between quantities that are proportional to each other. When there is a constant

ratio between two quantities, the one quantity can be found by multiplying the other by that ratio. Remember the

supermarket special on pies, 2 pies for $5? The ratio of dollars to pies is                    and the ratio of

pies to dollars is                   . These two values are reciprocals of each other,         and                          .

This means that multiplying by one has the same effect as dividing by the other. This also means that knowing either
constant ratio allows us to calculate the price given the number of pies. To find the cost of 20 pies, multiply by the ratio
of dollars to pies or divide by the ratio of pies to dollars.

·
·

These patterns are true in general.
1182 11 · Voting and Apportionment

FORMULA

Let be a particular item and another such that there is a constant ratio of to

·                                    and

·

·

EXAMPLE 11.25

Ratio of Faculty to Students at a College
Refer to the information given in Example 11.24.

1. If there are 32 class sections each semester in the Fine Art department, and the same ratio is used to determine the
     number of faculty members, how many faculty members would you expect to see in the Fine Art department?

2. If the Health Sciences department has 6 full-time faculty members, how many part-time faculty members are in the
     department?

    Solution
1. Multiply the number of class sections by the ratio of faculty members per class section to find the number of faculty.

     Since there are 4 faculty members per class, the number of faculty members in 32 classes should be
     faculty members.
2. Multiply the number of full-time faculty by the ratio of part-time to full-time to find the number of part-time. Since
     ratio of full-time faculty to part-time faculty at the college is or 1 full-time per 2 part time, the ratio of part-time to

   full-time is  part-time to 1 full-time; so the number of part-time faculty in a department with 6 full-time faculty

   should be     part-time faculty.

   YOUR TURN 11.25

Refer again to the table providing information on classroom capacities and pencil distribution.

                                    Room Number        BCDE

                                    Room Capacity (number of student desks) 24 18 32 22

                                    Number of Pencils  36 27 48 33

      1. Determine the number of pencils that would be allocated to a classroom F with 28 desks by multiplying the
           number of desks by the ratio of pencils to desks.

      2. Determine the number of pencils that would be allocated to a classroom F with 28 desks by dividing the
           number of desks by the ratio of desks to pencils.

      3. Assuming pencils continued to be distributed in the same manner, if there were another classroom, G, that
           received 51 pencils, how many desks would we expect to find in the room?

The apportionment application that will be important to the founders of Imaginaria occurs in representative
democracies in which elected persons represent a group. The United Kingdom, France, and India each have a
parliament, and the United States has a Congress, just as Imaginaria will have a legislature! The citizens of a country
must decide what portion of the representatives each group, such as a state or province or even a political party, will
have. A larger portion of representatives means greater influence over policy.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1183

  EXAMPLE 11.26

Ratio of U.S. Representatives to State Population
Table 11.4 contains a list of the five U.S. states with the greatest number of representatives in the U.S. House of
Representatives, along with the population of that state in 2021. Use the information in the table to answer the
questions.

                 State              Representative Seats State Population

                 (CA) California    53  39,613,000

                 (TX) Texas         36  29,730,300

                 (NY) New York      27  19,300,000

                 (FL) Florida       27  21,944,600

                 (PA) Pennsylvania  18  12,804,100

                 Table 11.4 The First through Fifth Ranked States by Number of
                 Representatives (sources: https://www.census.gov/popclock/ [state
                 population], https://www.britannica.com/topic/United-States-
                 House-of-Representatives-Seats-by-State-1787120 [representative
                 seats])

1. What is the ratio of State Population to Representative Seats for each state to the nearest hundred thousand?
2. What is the ratio of Representative Seats to State Population for each state rounded to seven decimal places?
3. What is the ratio of Representative Seats to State Population for each state rounded to six decimal places?
4. Does there appear to be a constant ratio? Justify your answer.

    Solution
1. CA 700,000; TX 800,000; NY 700,000; FL 800,000; PA 700,000
2. CA 0.0000013; TX 0.0000012; NY 0.0000014; FL 0.0000012; PA 0.0000014
3. CA 0.000001; TX 0.000001; NY 0.000001; FL 0.000001; PA 0.000001
4. The ratio of State Population to Representative Seats seems to be either 700,000 or 800,000. There does appear to

     be a constant ratio of about 0.000001 of Representative Seats to State Population if we round off to the sixth
     decimal place.

YOUR TURN 11.26

Table 11.9 contains a list of the five U.S. states ranked sixth through tenth in the number of representatives in the
U.S. House of Representatives, along with the population of that state in 2021. Use the information in the table to
answer the questions.

                 State              Representative Seats State Population

                 (IL) Illinois      18  12,804,100

                 (OH) Ohio          16  11,714,600

                 Table 11.5 The Sixth through Tenth Ranked U.S. States by Number of
                 Representatives (sources: https://www.census.gov/popclock/ [state
                 population], https://www.britannica.com/topic/United-States-House-
                 of-Representatives-Seats-by-State-1787120 [representative seats])
1184 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    State                Representative Seats State Population

                                    (MI) Michigan        14  9,992,430

                                    (GA) Georgia         14  10,830,000

                                    (NC) North Carolina  13  10,701,000

               Table 11.5 The Sixth through Tenth Ranked U.S. States by Number of
               Representatives (sources: https://www.census.gov/popclock/ [state
               population], https://www.britannica.com/topic/United-States-House-
               of-Representatives-Seats-by-State-1787120 [representative seats])

1. What is the ratio of State Population to Representative Seats for each state to the nearest hundred thousand?
2. What is the ratio of Representative Seats to State Population for each state rounded to seven decimal places?
3. What is the ratio of Representative Seats to State Population for each state rounded to six decimal places?
4. Does there appear to be a constant ratio? Are the results similar to the top five states?

       VIDEO

      Math Antics - Rounding (https://openstax.org/r/rounding)

You might be wondering why the ratio doesn't appear to be quite the same depending on the rounding of the values.
We will see that the key to this variation lies in the fractions. Just like the five children sharing 16 Ring PopsTM, there are
going to be leftovers and there are many methods for deciding what to do with those leftovers.

The Standard Divisor

There are two houses of congress in the United States: the Senate and the House of Representatives. Each state has two
senators, but the number of representatives depends on the population of the state. The number of representative seats
in the U.S. House of Representatives is currently set by law to be 435. In order to distribute the seats fairly to each state,
the ratio of the population of the U.S. to the number of representative seats must be calculated. The ratio of the total
population to the house size is called the standard divisor, and it is the number of members of the total population
represented by one seat.

Although apportionment applies to many other scenarios, such as the pencil distribution during the SAT, the terminology
of apportionment is based on the House of Representatives scenario. Thus, several government-related terms take on a
more general meaning. The states are the recipients of the apportioned resource, the seats are the units of the
resource being apportioned, the house size is the total number of seats to be apportioned, the state population is the
measurement of the state's size, and the total population is the sum of the state populations.

  FORMULA

EXAMPLE 11.27

The Standard Divisor of the U.S. House of Representatives 2021
As of this writing, the Census.gov website U.S. Population clock showed a population of 332,693,997. There are 435 seats
in the U.S. House of Representatives. Find the standard divisor rounded to the nearest tenth.

     Solution  people by 435 seats, there are 758,960.6 people per representative.
Dividing

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1185

      YOUR TURN 11.27

1. By the end of the first U.S. Congress in 1791, there were 13 states, 65 representative seats, and approximately
    3,929,214 citizens. Find the standard divisor rounded to the nearest tenth.

Whether the standard divisor is less than, equal to, or greater than 1 depends on the ratio of the population to the
number of seats.

· The standard divisor will be equal to 1 if the total population is equal to the number of seats. This would mean that
    each member of the population is allocated their own personal seat.

· The standard divisor will be a number between 0 and 1 when the total population is less than the number of seats.
    This means that each member of the population is allocated more than one seat.

· The standard divisor will be a number greater than 1when the total population is greater than the number of seats.
    This means that a certain number of members of the population will share 1 seat.

If the population is five children and the house consists of five pieces of candy, the standard divisor is
                                          meaning each child gets one candy. If the population is five children and ten pieces of

candy, the standard divisor is             meaning that each child gets more than one candy. If the

population is five children and four pieces of candy, the standard divisor is                         meaning

that each child gets less than one candy.

If the seats in the Imaginarian legislature are distributed to the states based on population, then the house size will be
less than the population and we should expect the standard divisor to be a number greater than 1.

EXAMPLE 11.28

School Resource Officers in Brevard County, Florida
The public schools in a certain county have been allotted 349 school resource officers to be distributed among 327 public
schools attended by approximately 271,500 students.

1. Identify the states, seats, house size, state population, and total population in this apportionment scenario.
2. Describe the ratio the standard divisor represents in this scenario and calculate the standard divisor to the nearest

     tenth.

Solution

1. The states are the schools in that county. The seats are the school resource officers. The house size is the number of

school resource officers, which is 349. The state population is the number of students in a particular school, which

was not given. The total population consists of the sum of the school populations, which is 271,500.

2. The standard divisor is the ratio of the total population to the house size, which is the number of students served by

each resource officer. Divide                                                  students per officer.

        YOUR TURN 11.28

  The Hernandez family and the Higgins family went trick-or-treating together for Halloween last year. They returned
  with 313 pieces of candy, which they will now apportion to the families. The Hernandez family has three children and
  the Higgins family has four children.

      1. Identify the states, seats, house size, state population, and total population in this apportionment scenario.
      2. Describe the ratio the standard divisor represents in this scenario and calculate the standard divisor to four

           decimal places.

The Standard Quota

Once the standard divisor for the Imaginarian legislature is calculated, the next task is to determine the number of seats
that each state should receive, which is referred to as the state's standard quota. Unless all the states have the same
population, each state will receive a different number of seats because the quantities will be proportionate to the state
populations. To determine those amounts, we will use an idea we learned earlier. Recall that, when the number of units
1186 11 · Voting and Apportionment

        of item is proportionate to the number of units of item , we have:
        In this case, we are trying to calculate the number of seats a state should be apportioned, the state's standard quota. So

           So would refer to seats allocated to a particular state, while would refer to the state population. This means that
        the ratio of to is the ratio of the total population to house size, which is the standard divisor. So in apportionment
        terms, we have the following formula.

          FORMULA

EXAMPLE 11.29

The Standard Quota of the U.S. House of Representatives 2021
Example 27 outlined that the Census.gov website U.S. Population clock showed a population of 330,147,881, there are
435 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, and the standard divisor was 758,960.6 people per representative. The
state of California has a population of approximately 39,613,000. Use these values to determine the standard quota for
California to two decimal places.

Solution

                                                representatives

      YOUR TURN 11.29

1. By the end of the first U.S. Congress in 1791, there were 13 states, 65 representative seats, and approximately
    3,929,214 citizens. In that year, the state of Delaware had a population of approximately 59,000. people. Use this
    information and the standard divisor you found in Your Turn 11.27 to find Delaware's standard quota rounded to
    two decimal places.

  EXAMPLE 11.30

Apportionment of Laptops in a Science Department
The science department of a high school has received a grant for 34 laptops. They plan to apportion them among their
six classrooms based on each classroom's student capacity. Use the values in the table below to find the standard quota
for each classroom.

                                 Room Students

                                 A  30

                                 B  25

                                 C  28

                                 D  32

                                 E  24

                                 F  27

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1187

     Solution
Step 1: Identify the state population, total population, and the house size. The states are the classrooms, and the state
populations are listed in the table. The total population is the sum of the state populations, which is 166. The house size
is the number of seats, or laptops, to be allocated, which is 34.
Step 2: Calculate the standard divisor by dividing the total population by the house size.

                                                                                                                   students per laptop.

Step 3: Calculate the standard quota by dividing the state population by the standard divisors , as shown in the table
below.

Room Room Capacity Room's Standard Quota

A                                             30  laptops

B                                             25  laptops

C                                             28  laptops

D                                             32  laptops

E                                             24  laptops

F                                             27  laptops

Step 4: Find the sum of the standard quotas.               . This is only slightly off

from the number of laptops--34--which can be caused by rounding off in previous steps. This is a good indication that

the calculations were correct. If you find that the value of the sum of the standard quotas is significantly different from

the house size (number of seats), it is possible that the standard divisor was calculated using too few decimal places.

Calculate the standard divisor and standard quotas again but round off to a greater number of decimal places.

        YOUR TURN 11.30

  1. This year the Hernandez family and the Higgins family were joined by the Ho family for Halloween trick-or-
      treating. The Hernandez family has three children, the Higgins family has four children, and the Ho family has
      two children. This time, they collected 527 pieces of candy, which they are going to apportion based on the
      number of children. Find the standard quota for each family. Round all values to four decimal places. If
      traditional rounding methods are applied to determine the actual number whole number values of pieces of
      candy received by each family, do the values sum to 527?

Check Your Understanding

In the following questions, assume there is a constant ratio between units of A and units of B. Two students are having
a discussion. Determine who is correct: Student 1, Student 2, both, or neither.

    18. Student 1 says that the number of units of A is the product of the number of units of B times the ratio of A to B.
          Student 2 says that the number of units of A is the quotient of the number of units of B divided by the ratio of A
          to B.

    19. Student 1 says that the number of units of A is the quotient of the number of units of B divided by the ratio of B
          to A.
          Student 2 says that the number of units of B is the quotient of the number of units of A divided by the ratio of A
          to B.

    20. Suppose there are 110 of item A and 55 of item B.
1188 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Student 1 says the ratio of A to B is Student 2 says the ratio of B to A is .

21. Suppose the constant ratio of A to B is 0.75. Student 1 says the ratio of A to B is     Student 2 says the ratio of B

to A is .

22. Student 1 says that                          . Student 2 says that

                                              .

23. Student 1 says that                                .

Student 2 says that                              .

24. Student 1 says that                                                                  .

Student 2 says that

        SECTION 11.3 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for the apportionment) in
the given scenarios.

     1. A parent has 25 pieces of candy to split among their four children. They will earn the candy based on how many
          minutes of chores they children did this week.

     2. The board of trustees of a college has recently approved the installation of 70 new emergency blue lights in five
          parking lots. The number of lights in each lot will be proportionate to the size of the parking lot, which is to be
          measured in acres.

     3. The reading coach at an elementary school has 52 prizes to distribute to students as a reward for time spent
          reading.

     4. "Top officials from Operation Warp Speed, the [U.S.] government's program to fast-track the development and
          delivery of COVID-19 vaccines, announced they've allocated 6.4 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines to states
          based on their total populations." (The Coronavirus Crisis, by Pien Huang, Shots Health News From NPR,
          npr.org, November 24, 2020)

     5. Refer to question 4, except suppose that the COVID-19 vaccine allocations were based on the most vulnerable
          population, residents aged 65 and over.

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the standard divisor to the nearest hundredth. Include the
units.

     6. The total population is 2,235 automobiles, and the number of seats is 14 warehouses.
     7. The total population is 135 hospitals, and the number of seats is 200 respirators.

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the standard quota. Include the units.
     8. The state population is eight residents in a unit, and the standard divisor is 1.75 residents per parking space.
     9. The state population is 52 ICU patients each week, and the number of seats is 6.5 patients per respirator.
    10. The total population is 145 basketball players, the number of seats is 62 trophies, and the state population is 14
          basketball players on Team Tigers.
    11. The total population is 12 giraffes, the number of seats is nine water troughs, and the state population is three
          giraffes in Enclosure C.

For the following exercises, use the table below, which shows student head count, class section, and total faculty in
each of four college departments.

Department                          (M) Math (E) English (H) History (S) Science (O) College Overall

(T) Student Head Count              4800  2376   1536     2880                              87118

(C) Class Sections                  120   108    48       96                                3712

(F) Faculty Members                 30    27     12       24                                928

12. Determine the F to T ratios for each department rounded to four decimal places as needed. What are the units?
13. Determine the C to F ratios for each department rounded to four decimal places as needed. What are the units?
14. What is the F to T ratio for the college overall? Include units. How does it compare to the F to T ratios for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             11.3 · Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem 1189

          individual departments?
    15. What is the overall C to F ratio? Include units. How does it compare to the C to F ratios for individual

          departments?
    16. Does there appear to be a constant F to T ratio? If so, what is the ratio? If not, what implications does this have

          about the different departments?
    17. Does there appear to be a constant C to F ratio? If so, what is the ratio? If not, what implications does this have

          about the different departments?
    18. If the departments are the states, the students are the population, and the faculty members are the seats, use

          the College Overall column to determine the standard divisor for the apportionment of the faculty rounded to
          two decimal places as needed. Include the units.
    19. If the departments are the states, the classes are the population, and the faculty members are the seats, use
          the Overall College column to determine the standard divisor rounded to two decimal places as needed.
          Include the units.
    20. Use the standard divisor from question 18 to find the standard quota for each department rounded to two
          decimal places as needed. What are the units?
    21. Use the standard divisor from question 19 to find the standard quota for each department rounded to two
          decimal places as needed.

For the following exercises, use this information: Wakanda, the domain of the Black Panther, King T'Challa has six
fortress cities. In Wakandan, the word "birnin" means "fortress city." King T'Challa has found 111 Vibranium artifacts
that must be distributed among the fortress cities of Wakanda. He has decided to apportion the artifacts based on the
number of residents of each birnin. The table below displays the populations of major Wakandan cities.

Fortress    Birnin       Birnin     Birnin    Birnin          Birnin      Birnin        Total
  Cities   Djata (D)  T'Chaka (T)  Zana (Z)  S'Yan (S)   Bashenga (B)  Azzaria (A)  Population

Residents   26,000       57,000     27,000    18,000          64,000   45,000       237,000

22. Identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for the apportionment) in this scenario.
23. Find the standard divisor for the apportionment of the Vibranium artifacts. Round to the nearest tenth as

      needed. Include the units.
24. Find each birnin's standard quota for the apportionment of the Vibranium artifacts. Round to the nearest

      hundredth as needed. What are the units?
25. Find the sum of the standard quotas. Is it reasonably close to the number of artifacts available for distribution?

For the following exercises, suppose that 6.4 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine are to be distributed among U.S. states.
The vaccines will either be distributed based on the total state population or based on the number of people over 65
years old, as shown in the table below.

           State      State Population State Population Age 65+ Percentage of State Population 65+

(CA) California       39,613,000             5,669,000                 14.3%

(TX) Texas            29,730,300             3,602,000                 12.6%

(NY) New York         19,300,000             3,214,000                 16.4%

(FL) Florida          21,944,600             4,358,000                 20.5%

(PA) Pennsylvania     12,804,100             2,336,000                 18.2%

(US) United States    330,151,000            52,345,000                15.8%

26. Find the standard divisor for the apportionment of the vaccine doses by population using the estimate for the
      total U.S. population. Round to the nearest tenth as needed. Include the units.

27. Find each state's standard quota for the apportionment of the vaccine doses. Round to the nearest tenth as
1190 11 · Voting and Apportionment

      needed. What are the units?
28. Find the standard divisor for the apportionment of the vaccine doses by population age 65 and older using the

      estimate for the total U.S. population of people aged 65 and older. Round to the nearest tenth as needed.
      Include the units.
29. Find each state's standard quota for the apportionment of the vaccine doses by total state population. Round to
      the nearest tenth as needed. What are the units?
30. Compare the standard quota for each state based on the entire state population to the standard quota for each
      state based on the portion of the population age 65 and older. Which states would receive more doses of
      vaccine if the apportionment were based on the population of people age 65 and older?
31. Approximately 15.8 percent of U.S. residents are age 65 and older.
       a. Which of the five states listed have a percentage of residents age 65 and older greater than 15.8 percent?
       b. Which of the five states listed have a percentage of residents age 65 and older less than 15.8 percent?
       c. Explain the correlation.

For the following exercises, use this information: Children from five families--the Chorro family, the Eswaran family, the
Javernick family, the Lahde family, and the Stolly family--joined a town-wide Easter egg hunt. When they returned with
their baskets, they had 827 eggs! They decided to share their eggs among the families based on the number of children
in each family, as shown in the table below.

                                    Family         Number of Children

                                    (C) Chorro     3

                                    (E) Eswaran    2

                                    (J) Javernick  4

                                    (L) Lahde      1

                                    (S) Stolly     5

32. Identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for the apportionment) in this scenario.
33. Find the standard divisor for the apportionment of the Easter eggs. Round to five decimal places as needed.

      Include the units.
34. Find each family's standard quota for the apportionment of the Easter eggs. Round to the nearest hundredth as

      needed. What are the units?
35. Find the sum of the standard quotas from exercise 34. Is the sum reasonably close to the number of Easter

      eggs available for distribution?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1191

11.4 Apportionment Methods

Figure 11.16 Schoolchildren depend on apportionment of resources like laptops among schools and classroom. (credit:
"Richmond Public Schools" by Virginia Department of Education/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe and interpret the apportionment problem.
 2. Apply Hamilton's Method.
 3. Describe and interpret the quota rule.
 4. Apply Jefferson's Method.
 5. Apply Adams's Method.
 6. Apply Webster's Method.
 7. Compare and contrast apportionment methods.
 8. Identify and contrast flaws in various apportionment methods.

A Closer Look at the Apportionment Problem

In Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem we calculated the standard divisor and the
standard quotas in various apportionment scenarios. The results of those calculations routinely led to fractions and
decimals of units. However, the seats in the House of Representatives, laptops in a classroom, or a variety of other
resources, are indivisible, meaning they cannot be divided up into fractional parts. This leaves a decision to be made. For
example, if the standard quota for the number of laptops to be distributed to a classroom is 12.44 units, how do we deal
with the fractional part of 0.44? It is unclear if the classroom should receive 12 units, 13 units, or some other value. Let's
try traditional rounding to the nearest whole number value.

EXAMPLE 11.31

Installing Emergency Lights

The board of trustees of a college has recently approved the installation of 70 new emergency blue lights in three

parking lots. The number of lights in each lot will be proportionate to the size of the parking lot, which isto be measured

in acres. The total number of acres is 34; so the standard divisor is  . The standard quota for each lot is listed

in the table below. Use this information to answer each question.
1192 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                    Lot Acres      Lot's Standard Quota
                                                                  emergency blue lights
                                    A     15                     emergency blue lights
                                                                  emergency blue lights
                                    B     9

                                    C     10

1. Use traditional rounding to determine the number of lights assigned to each lot.
2. Find the sum of the values from part 1.
3. Does the sum found in part 2 equal the number of lights available?

    Solution
1. If traditional rounding is used, there will be 31, 19, and 21 lights distributed to each lot, respectively.
2. The total of these values is 71.
3. No, the total from part 2 is one more than the number of lights available. In other words, one of the parking lots

     must get 1 fewer light than apportioned.

YOUR TURN 11.31

The science department of a high school has received a grant for 34 laptops. They plan to apportion them among
their six classrooms based on each classroom's student capacity. Use the standard quotas in the table below to
answer each question.

                                             Room Room Capacity Room's Standard Quota

                                       A       30  laptops

                                       B       25  laptops

                                       C       28  laptops

                                       D       32  laptops

                                       E       24  laptops

                                       F       27  laptops

      1. Use traditional rounding to determine the number of laptops assigned to each classroom.
      2. Find the sum of the values from part 1.
      3. Does the sum found in part 2 equal the number of laptops available?

Example 11.31 demonstrates that we cannot successfully apportion indivisible resources by rounding off each standard
quota using traditional rounding. This leaves us with a problem. What is a fair way to distribute the fractional parts of the
standard quotas? We will refer to this as the apportionment problem. Several methods for making this decision will be
discussed.

  EXAMPLE 11.32

A-10C Thunderbolt II Aircraft
In 2015, the U.S. Air Force had a fleet of approximately 281 A-10C Thunderbolt II aircraft. Suppose that the Air Force

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1193

administration wanted to distribute 27 aircrafts across six bases based on the number of qualified pilots stationed at
those bases. Use the information in the table below to answer each question.

                                     Base         Pilots

                                     (A) Alpha    13

                                     (B) Bravo    12

                                     (C) Charlie  5

                                     (D) Delta    16

                                     (E) Echo     7

                                     (F) Foxtrot  9

1. Identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for the apportionment) in this scenario.
2. Find the standard divisor for the apportionment of the aircraft. Round to four decimal places as needed. Include the

     units.
3. Find each Air Force base's standard quota for the apportionment of the aircraft. Round to the nearest hundredth as

     needed. What are the units?
4. How does this example demonstrate the apportionment problem? Will traditional rounding solve the problem?

    Solution
1. The states are the bases, the seats are the aircraft, and the state populations are the pilots at a given base.

2.                                                             pilots per aircraft.

3. A             , B  , C            , D                  , E  , F                   . The units are

    aircraft.

4. This example demonstrates the apportionment problem because it is not possible to send a fractional number of

    aircraft to an Air Force base. On the other hand, if we use traditional rounding methods to get whole numbers, the

    results are                      aircraft will be apportioned, which is one less than the number of aircraft that

    were supposed to beapportioned.

        YOUR TURN 11.32

  1. The reading coach at an elementary school has 13 gift cards to distribute to their three students as a reward for
      time spent reading. When they calculated the standard quota for each student based on the number of minutes
      they student had read, the results were: 4.49 gift cards, 4.03 gift cards, and 4.48 gift cards. How does this
      demonstrate the apportionment problem?

Hamilton's Method of Apportionment

One of the problems encountered when standard quotas are transformed into whole numbers using traditional
rounding is that it is possible for the sum of the values to be greater than the number of seats available. A reasonable
way to avoid this is to always round down, even when the first decimal place is five or greater. For example, a standard
quota of 12.33 and a standard quota of 12.99 would both round down to 12. This is called the lower quota.

  EXAMPLE 11.33

Lower Quota for Apportionment of Aircraft
The Air Force administration wants to distribute 27 aircrafts across six bases based on the number of qualified pilots
stationed at those bases. The standard quotas for each base are listed in the table below. Use this information to answer
1194 11 · Voting and Apportionment

the questions.

                                                  Base      Standard Quota
                                               (A) Alpha                     aircraft
                                               (B) Bravo                     aircraft
                                               (C) Charlie                   aircraft
                                                (D) Delta                    aircraft
                                                (E) Echo                     aircraft
                                               (F) Foxtrot                   aircraft

1. Give the lower quota for each Air Force base.
2. Find the sum of the lower quotas. By how much does this sum fall short of the actual number of aircraft?

    Solution
1. Round down. The lower quota for each Air Force base is 5, 5, 2, 6, 3, 3, respectively.
2. The sum is 24. This is 3 fewer than the actual number of aircraft.

YOUR TURN 11.33

The apportionment of 70 new emergency blue lights in three parking lots is based on acreage. The standard quota
for each lot is listed in the table below. Use this information to answer each question.

                                    Lot Acres               Lot's Standard Quota

                                    A  15                   emergency blue lights

                                    B  9                    emergency blue lights

                                    C  10                   emergency blue lights

      1. Give the lower quota for each parking lot.
      2. Find the sum of the lower quotas.
      3. By how much does this sum fall short of the actual number of emergency lights?

If the standard quotas are all rounded down, their sum will always be less than or equal to the house size. Then, it would
only remain to find a fair way to distribute any remaining seats. Alexander Hamilton, who was a general in the American
Revolution, author of the Federalist Papers, and the first secretary of the treasury, took this approach to apportionment.

Steps for Hamilton's Method of Apportionment

There are five steps we follow when applying Hamilton's Method of apportionment:

 1. Find the standard divisor.
 2. Find each state's standard quota.
 3. Give each state the state's lower quota (with each state receiving at least 1 seat).
 4. Give each remaining seat one at a time to the states with the largest fractional parts of their standard quotas until

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1195

     no seats remain.
5. Check the solution by confirming that the sum of the modified quotas equals the house size.

      VIDEO

     Hamilton Method of Apportionment (https://openstax.org/r/Hamiltons_method)

  EXAMPLE 11.34

Hawaiian School Districts
Suppose that the Hawaii State Department of Education has a budget for 616 schools and is doing a research study to
determine the equitable number of schools to have in each of the five counties based on the residents under 19 years
old, This data is provided in the table below. Using the Hamilton method, calculate how many schools would be funded
in each state.

                                Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui                              Total

          Residents under age 19 46,310 224,230               20    16,560 38,450 325,570

     Solution
Step 1: Calculate the standard divisor. Divide the total population, 325,570, by the house size, 616 seats. The standard
divisor is 528.52.

Step 2: Find each state's standard quota:

          Hawaii                Honolulu                   Kalawao      Kauai                   Maui   Total

Standard                                                                                               616

Quota

Step 3: Find each state's lower quota and their sum:

                                Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui Total

          Lower Quota           87                    424  1        31  72 615

Step 4: Compare the sum of the states' lower quotas, 615, to the house size, 616. One seat remains to be apportioned
and must be given to the state with the largest fractional part: Maui with 0.75. So, the final Hamilton quotas are as
follows: Hawaii 87, Honolulu 424, Kalawao 1, Kauai 31, and Maui 73.

Step 5: Find the total to confirm the sum of the quotas equals the house size, 616. Then                                  .

The apportionment is complete.
1196 11 · Voting and Apportionment

YOUR TURN 11.34

1. In the country of Imaginaria, there will be four states: Fictionville, Pretendstead, Illusionham, and Mythbury.
    Suppose there will be 35 seats in the legislature of Imaginaria. Use Hamilton's method of apportionment to
    determine the number of seats in each state based on the populations in the following table.

                                    Fictionville Pretendstead Illusionham Mythbury  Total

Population                          71,000      117,000     211,000  1,194,000 1,593,000

        TECH CHECK

Apportionment Calculators
Check out websites such as Ms. Hearn Math (https://openstax.org/r/hamilton-calculator) for a free Hamilton
apportionment calculator.
This can be a useful tool to confirm your results!

The Quota Rule

A characteristic of an apportionment that is considered favorable is when the final quota values all either result from
rounding down or rounding up from the standard quotas. The value that results from rounding down is called the lower
quota, and the value that results from rounding up is called the upper quota.

As we explore more methods of apportionment, we will consider whether they satisfy the quota rule. If a scenario exists
in which a particular apportionment allocates a value greater than the upper quota or less than the lower quota, then
that apportionment violates the quota rule and the apportionment method that was used violates the quota rule.

  EXAMPLE 11.35

Which Apportionment Method Satisfies the Quota Rule?
Several apportionment methods have been used to allocate 125 seats to ten states and the results are shown in the
table below. Determine which apportionments do not satisfy the quota rule and justify your answer.

                                    State A State B State C State D State E State F State G

Standard Quota 41.26 16.00                      5.77        2.64     7.82  10.47    0.21

Lower Quota                         41      16           5  2        7     10       0

Upper Quota                         42      17           6  3        8     11       1

Method X                            43      16           5  2        7     10       1

Method Y                            41      16           6  2        8     10       1

Method Z                            42      16           7  3        7     9        1

     Solution
Look for states such that the number of seats allocated differs from the lower or upper quota. Method X violates the
quota rule because State A receives 43 seats instead of 41 or 42. Method Z violates the quota rule because State C

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1197

receives 7 seats instead of 5 or 6 and State F receives 9 instead of 10 or 11.

YOUR TURN 11.35

1. Apportionment Method V has been used to allocate 125 seats to ten states as shown in the table below.
    Determine whether the apportionment satisfies the quota rule and justify your answer.

                                  State A State B State C State D State E State F State G

          Standard Quota41.26 10.70 16.00 13.11 17.00 5.77                             2.64

          Lower Quota 41             10               16     13                 17  5  2

          Upper Quota 42             11               17     14                 18  6  3

          Method V  42               11               17     13                 18  4  2

It is possible for an apportionment method to satisfy the quota rule in some scenarios but violate it in others. However,
because the Hamilton method always begins with the lower quota and either adds one to it or keeps it the same, the
final Hamilton quota will always consist of values that are either lower quota values or upper quota values. When an
apportionment method has this characteristic, it is said to satisfy the quota rule. So, we can say:

The Hamilton method of apportionment satisfies the quota rule.

Although the Hamilton method of apportionment satisfies the quota rule, it can result in some unexpected outcomes,
which has caused it to pass in and out of favor of the U.S. government over the years. There are several apportionment
methods that have been popular alternatives, such as Jefferson's method of apportionment that the founders of
Imaginaria should consider.

Jefferson's Method of Apportionment

Another approach to dealing with the fractional parts of the standard quotas is to modify the standard divisor so that the
total of the resulting modified lower quotas is the necessary number of seats. This is the approach used by Jefferson.

In Jefferson's method, the change to the standard divisor is made so that the total of the modified lower quotas equals
the house size. The change in the standard divisor to get the modified divisor is relatively small. There is not a formula
for this. The modified divisor is found by "guess and check." It is important to remember that increasing the divisor
decreases the quotas, but decreasing the divisor increases the quotas. So, if you need a larger quota, try reducing the
divisor, and if you need a smaller quota, try increasing the divisor.

EXAMPLE 11.36

Modifying a Standard Divisor
Suppose the population of a state is 50 and the standard divisor is 12.5.

1. Find the state's standard quota.
2. Increase the standard divisor by 2 units and use the modified divisor to determine the modified quota for the state.
3. Decrease the modified divisor from part 2 by 1.5 units and use the new modified divisor to determine the modified

     quota for the state.
4. Choose any value of divisor between the value of the modified divisor from part 2 and the value of the modified

     divisor from part 3 and use it to determine the modified quota for the state.
5. Which modified quota was the largest, the modified quota from part 2, from part 3, or from part 4? Explain why.

Solution

1. The state's standard quota is  .

2. The modified divisor is 14.5. The modified quota is           .

3. The modified divisor is 13. The modified quota is      .

4. One value between 13 and 14.5 is 13.5. With a modified divisor of 13.5, the modified quota is          .

5. The modified quota from part 3 was the largest because the divisor was the smallest of the three. Dividing the same
1198 11 · Voting and Apportionment

number by a smaller value gives a larger result.

      YOUR TURN 11.36

Suppose the population of a state is 12 and the standard divisor is 0.225.
    1. Find the state's standard quota.
    2. Decrease the standard divisor by 0.200 units and use the modified divisor to determine the modified quota
         for the state.
    3. Increase the modified divisor from part 2 by 0.100 units and use the new modified divisor to determine the
         modified quota for the state.
    4. Choose any value of divisor between the value of the modified divisor from part 2 and the value of the
         modified divisor from part 3 and use it to determine the modified quota for the state.
    5. Which modified quota was the smallest, the modified quota from part 2, from part 3, or from part 4? Explain
         why.

When you use Jefferson's method, you might have to adjust the divisor several times find modified lower quotas that
sum to the house size. First, guess what the divisor should be based on the sum of the lower quotas and then increase
or decrease it from there based on whether the sum needs to be smaller or larger respectively. If the result still does not
produce lower quotas that sum to the house size, adjust again. Keep a record of the values that didn't work to help you
narrow your search.

Steps for Jefferson's Method of Apportionment

We take four steps to apply Jefferson's Method of apportionment:

Step 1: Find the standard divisor.

Step 2: Find each state's quota. This will be the standard quota the first time Step 2 is completed and the standard
divisor is used, but Step 2 may be repeated as needed using a modified divisor and resulting in modified quotas.

Step 3: Find the states' lower quotas (with each state receiving at least one seat), and their sum.

Step 4: If the sum from Step 3 equals the number of seats, the apportionment is complete. If the sum of the lower
quotas is less than the number of seats, reduce the standard divisor. If the sum of the lower quotas is greater than the
number of seats, increase the standard divisor. Return to Step 2 using the modified divisor.

  EXAMPLE 11.37

Hawaiian State Representative Districts
Suppose that the Hawaii State Department of Education has a budget for 616 schools and is doing a research study to
determine the equitable number of schools to have in each of five counties based on the residents under the age of 19.
With the data in the table below, apply Jefferson's method to apportion the schools to the counties.

                                    Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui  Total

Residents under Age 19 46,310 224,230             20  16,560 38,450 325,570

     Solution
Step 1: The process for finding the standard divisor, standard quotas, and lower quotas is the same in the Hamilton and
Jefferson methods of apportionment. We walked through the Hamilton Method in Example 11.34, and following these
steps resulted in lower quotas as shown in the table below.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1199

             Hawaii  Honolulu  Kalawao  Kauai  Maui  Total
                87                               72   616
  Standard           424       1        31
     Quota                                            615

Lower Quota

Step 2: Compare the sum of the states' lower quotas, 615, to the house size, 616. Since 615 is less than 616, use a
modified divisor that is less than the standard divisor of 528.52. Try 526.00.

Step 3: Find each state's modified quota, lower quota, and the sum of the lower quotas based on the modified divisor of
526:

             Hawaii  Honolulu  Kalawao  Kauai  Maui  Total

Modified                                             616

Quota

Lower Quota  88      426       1        31     72    618

Step 4: The new sum of the lower quotas is 2 units greater than 616. We have overshot the goal. So, increase the divisor
to a value between 526.00 and 528.52. Try 527.00.

Step 5: Repeat the process of finding the quotas. Find each state's modified quota, lower quota, and the sum of the
lower quotas based on the modified divisor of 526.00:

             Hawaii  Honolulu  Kalawao  Kauai  Maui  Total

Modified                                             616

Quota

Lower Quota  87      425       1        31     72    616

Step 6: The new sum of the lower quotas equals the house size. The apportionment is complete.

The apportionment is: Hawaii County 87, Honolulu County 425, Kalawao County 1, Kauai 31, and Maui 72 schools.

When using Jefferson's method, the modified divisors you use may be different from what another person chooses, but
final apportionment values will be the same.
1200 11 · Voting and Apportionment

YOUR TURN 11.37

1. Let's return to the Imaginarian states of Fictionville, Pretendstead, Illusionham, and Mythbury. Suppose that
    there are going to be 35 seats in the legislature. This time use Jefferson's method of apportionment to determine
    the number of seats in each state based on the populations in the table below. How many seats would each state
    receive?

                                    Fictionville Pretendstead Illusionham Mythbury  Total

Population                          71,000  117,000  211,000  1,194,000 1,593,000

Notice that, in this apportionment, Mythbury received more than the upper quota. Since this apportionment of
representatives to Imaginarian states by Jefferson's method does not satisfy the quota rule, we say that:
Jefferson's method violates the quota rule.
We have discussed two apportionment methods: one that satisfies the quota rule and one that does not. Before you
decide which method to use in Imaginaria, there are a couple more options to consider.

       VIDEO
      Jefferson Apportionment Method (https://openstax.org/r/Jeffersons_method)

          TECH CHECK

  Apportionment Calculators

  It is possible to create Excel spreadsheets that complete the calculations necessary to complete a Jefferson
  Apportionment. In some cases, this work has already been done and posted online. Check out websites such Ms.
  Hearn Math (https://openstax.org/r/jefferson-calculator) for a free Jefferson apportionment calculator.
  This can be a useful tool to confirm your results!

Adams's Method of Apportionment

Adams's method of apportionment is another method of apportionment that is based on a modified divisor. However,
instead of basing the changes on the sum of the lower quotas, as Jefferson did, Adams used the upper quotas.
To apply Adams's Method of apportionment, there are four steps we follow:
 1. Find the standard divisor.
 2. Find each state's quota. This will be the standard quota the first time Step 2 is completed, and the standard divisor is

      used, but Step 2 may be repeated as needed using a modified divisor and resultingin modified quotas.
 3. Find the states' upper quotas and their sum.
 4. If the sum from Step 3 equals the number of seats, the apportionment is complete. If the sum of the upper quotas

      is less than the number of seats, reduce the standard divisor. If the sum of the upper quotas is greater than the
      number of seats, increase the standard divisor. Return to Step 2 using the modified divisor.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1201

  EXAMPLE 11.38

Hawaiian School Districts
As in earlier examples, suppose that the Hawaii State Department of Education has a budget for 616 schools and is
doing a research study to determine the equitable number of schools to have in each of the five counties based on the
residents under the age of 19. Use the data in the following table and the Adams method to apportion the schools to the
counties.

                     Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui          Total

          Residents under Age 19 46,310 224,230     20    16,560 38,450 325,570

     Solution
Step 1: The steps of finding the standard divisor and each state's quota are the same in the Jefferson and Adams
methods. As in Example 11.37, the standard divisor is 528.52.

Step 2: Find each state's upper quota and their sum:

             Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                             Total

Standard                                                                                                          616

Quota

Upper Quota  88      425                         1        32     73                                               619

Step 3: Compare the sum of the states' upper quotas, 619, to the house size, 616. Since 619 is greater than 616, we need
to reduce the size of the quotas. Use a modified divisor that is greater than the standard divisor of 528.52. Try 534.00.

Step 4: Find each state's modified quota, upper quota, and the sum of the upper quotas based on the modified divisor of
534:

             Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                             Total

Modified                                                                                                          616

Quota

Upper Quota  88      420                         1        32     72                                               613

Step 5: The new sum of the upper quotas is 3 units less than 616. Larger quotas are needed. So, decrease the divisor to a
value between 534.00 and 528.52. Try 532.00.

Step 6: Find each state's modified quota, upper quota, and the sum of the upper quotas based on the modified divisor of
532.00:

County       Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                             Total

Modified                                                                                                          616

Quota

Upper Quota  88      422                         1        32     73                                               616

Step 7: The new sum of the upper quotas equals the house size. The apportionment is complete.
The apportionment is Hawaii County 88, Honolulu County 422, Kalawao County 1, Kauai 32, and Maui 73 schools.
1202 11 · Voting and Apportionment

When using Adams's method, just as with Jefferson's method, the modified divisors you use may be different from what
another person chooses, but final apportionment values will be the same.

YOUR TURN 11.38

1. There are four states in Imaginaria: Fictionville, Pretendstead, Illusionham, and Mythbury. Assume there will be
    35 seats in the legislature of Imaginaria. Use Adams's method of apportionment to determine the number of
    seats in each state based on the populations in the table below. How many seats would each state receive?

                                    Fictionville Pretendstead Illusionham Mythbury  Total

Population                          71,000  117,000  211,000  1,194,000 1,593,000

In this apportionment, Mythbury received less than the state's lower quota. So, this apportionment is an example of a
scenario in which the Adams's method violates the quota rule.
Adams's method of apportionment violates the quota rule.
So far, only Hamilton's method satisfies the quota rule, but there is one more apportionment method you should
consider for Imaginaria.

       VIDEO

      Adams Method Apportionment Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/Adams_method)

          TECH CHECK

  Apportionment Calculators

  Check out websites such as Ms. Hearn Math (https://openstax.org/r/adams-calculator) for a free Adams Method
  apportionment calculator.

  This can be a useful tool to confirm your results!

Webster's Method of Apportionment

Webster's method of apportionment is another method of apportionment that is based on a modified divisor. However,
instead of basing the changes on the sum of the lower quotas, as Jefferson did or the sum of the upper quotas as Adams
did, Webster used traditional rounding.
To apply Webster's method of apportionment, there are four steps we take:
 1. Find the standard divisor.
 2. Find each state's quota. This will be the standard quota the first time Step 2 is completed, and the standard divisor is

      used, but Step 2 may be repeated as needed using a modified divisor and resulting in modified quotas.
 3. Round each state's quota to the nearest whole number and find the sum of these values.
 4. If the sum of the rounded quotas equals the number of seats, the apportionment is complete. If the sum of the

      rounded quotas is less than the number of seats, reduce the divisor. If the sum of the rounded quotas is greater
      than the number of seats, increase the divisor. Return to Step 2 using the modified divisor.
When using Webster's method, just as with Jefferson's method, the modified divisors you use may be different from what
another person chooses, but final apportionment values will be the same.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1203

  EXAMPLE 11.39

Hawaiian School Districts
Use the data in the table below to apportion 616 schools to Hawaiian counties. This time, use Webster's method.

                     Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui          Total

          Residents under Age 19 46,310 224,230     20    16,560 38,450 325,570

     Solution
To apply Webster's method of apportionment, there are four steps we take:

Step 1: The processes of finding the standard divisor and standard quota are the same in the Jefferson, Adams, and
Webster's methods. As in the previous examples, the standard divisor is 528.52.

Step 2: Find each state's rounded quota and their sum:

             Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                            Total

Standard                                                                                                         616

Quota

Rounded      88      424                         1        31     73                                              617

Quota

Step 3: Compare the sum of the states' rounded quotas, 617, to the house size, 616. Since 617 is greater than 616, we
need to reduce the size of the quotas. Use a modified divisor that is greater than the standard divisor of 528.52. Try
534.00.

Step 4: Find each state's modified quota, rounded quota, and the sum of the rounded quotas based on the modified
divisor of 534:

             Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                            Total

Modified                                                                                                         616

Quota

Upper Quota  87      420                         1        31     72                                              612

Step 5: The new sum of the rounded quotas is 4 units less than 616. Larger quotas are needed. So, decrease the divisor
to a value between 534.00 and 528.52. Try 530.00.

Step 6: Find each state's modified quota, rounded quota, and the sum of the rounded quotas based on the modified
divisor of 530.00:

             Hawaii  Honolulu                    Kalawao  Kauai  Maui                                            Total

Modified                                                                                                         616

Quota

Upper Quota  87      423                         1        31     73                                              615

Step 7: The new sum of the rounded quotas is 1 unit less than 616. Larger quotas are needed. So, decrease the divisor to
a value between 528.52 and 530.00. Try 529.50.
1204 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Step 8: Find each state's modified quota, rounded quota, and the sum of the rounded quotas based on the modified
divisor of 529.50:

                 Hawaii                         Honolulu      Kalawao  Kauai            Maui                       Total

Modified                                                                                                           616

Quota

Upper Quota                         87          423           1        31                      73                  615

Step 9: The new sum is still only 1 unit less than 616. Larger quotas are needed, but not much larger. So, decrease the
divisor to a value between 528.52 and 529.50. Try 529.30.

Step 10: Find each state's modified quota, rounded quota, and the sum of the rounded quotas based on the modified
divisor of 529.30:

                 Hawaii                         Honolulu      Kalawao  Kauai            Maui                       Total

Modified                                                                                                           616

Quota

Upper Quota                         87          424           1        31                      73                  616

Step 11: The new sum of the rounded quotas equals the house size. The apportionment is complete.
The apportionment is Hawaii County 87, Honolulu County 424, Kalawao County 1, Kauai 31, and Maui 73 schools.

YOUR TURN 11.39

1. If you use Webster's method to apportion 35 legislative seats to the 4 states of Imaginaria, Fictionville,
    Pretendstead, Illusionham, and Mythbury, with the populations given in the table below, what is the resulting
    apportionment?

                                        Fictionville Pretendstead Illusionham Mythbury  Total

             Population                 71,000       117,000  211,000  1,194,000 1,593,000

So far, we know that the Hamilton method satisfies the quota rule, while the Jefferson and Adams methods do not. The
apportionments in the Example and Your Turn above are both scenarios in which the Webster method satisfies the quota
rule. Does it always? We have a little more work to do to find out. However, one thing is clear. Not all apportionment
methods have the same results. Before you make such an important decision for Imaginaria, it's important to think
about the differences in the apportionments that result from these four methods. How will the differences affect the
citizens of Imaginaria?

          TECH CHECK

  Apportionment Calculators

  Check out websites such as Ms. Hearn Math (https://openstax.org/r/webster-calculator) for a free Webster Method
  apportionment calculator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1205

This can be a useful tool to confirm your results!

Comparing Apportionment Methods

Recall that the four apportionment methods discussed in this chapter differ in two main ways:

  · Whether or not a modified divisor is used
  · The type of rounding of the quotas that is used

How might these differences affect Imaginarians? In the next two examples, we will compare the results when different
apportionment methods are applied to the same scenario.

  EXAMPLE 11.40

Hawaiian School Districts with Different Apportionment Methods
Let's use the results from Example 11.34, Example 11.37, Example 11.38, and Example 11.39 to compare the four
apportionment methods we have discussed. The following table summarizes the results of the results of the Hamilton,
Jefferson, Adams and Webster methods when applied to the apportionment of 616 schools to Hawaiian counties.

           Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui

Under 19 years old 46,310 224,230                        20  16,560 38,450

Hamilton   87                                       424  1   31  73

Jefferson  87                                       425  1   31  72

Adams      88                                       422  1   32  73

Webster    87                                       424  1   31  73

1. Do any of the apportionment methods result in the same apportionment? If so, which ones?
2. Which apportionment method would the citizens of the largest county likely favor most and least? Justify your

     answer.
3. As a group, which apportionment method would the citizens of the other four counties likely favor most and least?

     Justify your answer.

    Solution
1. Yes, the Hamilton and Webster methods result in the same apportionment.
2. The largest county is Honolulu. The citizens would likely favor the Jefferson method of apportionment most since

     they received the most seats by that method. They would likely favor the Adams method of apportionment least
     because they received the least number of seats by that method.
3. As a group, the other four counties received 192 seats by either the Hamilton or Webster method, 194 seats by the
     Adams method, and 191 seats by the Jefferson method. They would likely favor the Adams method the most and
     favor the Jefferson methods the least.

      YOUR TURN 11.40

In Your Turn 11.34, 11.37, 11.38, and 11.39, you apportioned 35 legislative seats among the four states of Imaginaria
using the Hamilton, Jefferson, Adams, and Webster methods of apportionment. To understand how the differences
in the apportionments might affect Imaginarians, answer these questions.

    1. Which apportionment method would the citizens of the largest state likely favor most and least? Justify your
         answer.

    2. As a group, which apportionment method would the citizens of the other three states likely favor most and
1206 11 · Voting and Apportionment

least? Justify your answer.

The Adams method favored the smaller states and the Jefferson method favored the larger states in the previous
example, but is this the case in general?

Since the Jefferson method begins with the lower quotas, any adjustment to the quotas will be an increase. As you have
seen, this is accomplished by using a modified divisor that is smaller than the standard divisor. The next example
compares the impact of a decreasing divisor on the modified quotas of large states to the impact of the same size
decrease on small states.

  EXAMPLE 11.41

Effect of Decreasing Divisors on Modified Quotas
The following table displays the effect of reducing the size of the divisor. Observe the effect this has on the modified
quotas of smaller states versus larger states and use the table answer each question.

                                                      Modified Quotas

State Population Divisor: 10,500 Divisor: 10,000 Divisor: 9,500

A                                   10,000     0.95   1                1.05

B                                   100,000    9.52   10               10.53

C                                   1,000,000  95.24  100              105.26

1. When the divisor decreases from 10,500 to 10,000, how many representatives are gained by each state based on the
     lower quota?

2. When the divisor decreases from 10,000 to 9,500, how many representatives are gained by each state based on the
     lower quota?

3. Which state gains the most representatives each time the divisor is decreased?

    Solution
1. Since a state must have at least one seat, State A begins with 1 seat and still has one seat. State B begins with 9

     seats and increases to 10 seats. State C begins with 95 seats and increases to 100 seats. So, State A gains 0, B gains
     1, and C gains 5 seats.
2. State A begins with 1 and still has 1. State B begins with 10 and still has 10. State C begins with 100 and increases to
     105. So, State A gains 0, State B gains 0, and State C gains 5.
3. State C, the largest state, gains the most representatives each time the divisor is decreased.

This example demonstrates that the Jefferson method is biased toward states with larger populations because the
modified divisor is smaller than the standard divisor. On the other hand, the Adams's method, which begins with the
upper quotas, must increase the standard divisor in order to reduce the quotas. Once again, the effect on the number of
seats is greater for the larger states, but this time they are decreased. This means that the Adams's method favors states
with smaller populations.

        YOUR TURN 11.41

  The following table displays the effect of increasing the size of the divisor. Observe the effect this has on the
  modified quotas of smaller states versus larger states and use the table to answer each question.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1207

                               Modified Quotas

State Population Divisor: 11,500 Divisor: 12,000 Divisor: 12,500

A  10,000        0.87          0.83                0.8

B  100,000       8.7           8.33                8

C  1,000,000     86.96         83.33               80

1. When the divisor increases from 11,500 to 12,000, how many representatives are lost by each state based on
    the upper quota?

2. When the divisor increases from 12,000 to 12,500, how many representatives are lost by each state based on
    the upper quota?

3. Which state loses the most representatives each time the divisor is increased?

Flaws in Apportionment Methods

As we have seen, different apportionment methods can have the same results in some scenarios but different results in
others. Citizens of states which receive fewer seats with a particular apportionment method will view the apportionment
method as flawed and argue in favor of a different method. This inevitably creates debates regarding the use of one
method over another. Methods that favor larger states are likely to be challenged by smaller states, methods that favor
smaller states are likely to be challenged by larger states, and methods that violate the quota rule are likely to be
challenged by states of any size depending on the circumstances.

Suppose that the State of Hawaii House of Representatives had 51 representatives, each with their own district. Imagine
that redistricting were underway, and the representative districts were to be apportioned to each of five counties based
on population. The following table shows the apportionment that would result from the use of the Jefferson, Adams, and
Webster methods of apportionment.

              Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui

   Population 201,500 974,600  100    72,300 167,400

Lower Quota   7         35     0                2       6

Upper Quota   8         36     1                3       7

   Jefferson  7         35     1                2       6

   Adams      7         34     1                3       6

   Webster    7         34     1                3       6

From the table, you can see that Hawaii, Kalawao, and Maui receive the same number of seats regardless of the method
used. However, citizens of Honolulu would likely reject the Adams and Webster methods arguing that they violate the
quota rule. Similarly, citizens of Kauai would probably reject the Jefferson method based on the argument that it unfairly
favors the larger states. This scenario demonstrates that the Adams and Webster methods violate the quota rule, but the
Jefferson method also violates the quota rule at times. The Hamilton method is the only method that satisfies the
quota rule in all scenarios. It also consistently favors neither larger nor smaller states. Unfortunately, it can have some
strange and results in certain circumstances, which you will see in the next section.
1208 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                 WHO KNEW?
          Gerrymandering: A Subtle Way to Impact Apportionment
          In addition to your choice of voting method and your choice of apportionment method, there is another important
          decision to make which could potentially have a huge impact on the fairness of elections in Imaginaria--the creation
          of electoral districts. In example above, we imagined that there were 51 state legislators in Hawaii, each representing
          their own district. But how did the legislators decide on the boundaries for these districts? Typically, boundaries are
          drawn so that each district has approximately the same number of residents, but the percentage of residents in each
          district with a particular political affiliation can swing the power from one group to another. When the districts are
          drawn to impact the power of a political party, ethnic or racial group, or other group, this is called gerrymandering.
          For example, districts can be drawn so that a particular group is spread thinly across districts, increasing the
          likelihood that they will not have strong representation.

          Figure 11.17 This cartoon map conveys the idea that the drawing of the map may impact election outcomes. (credit:
          "The Gerry Mander"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
          "The Gerry-mander" first appeared in this cartoon-map in the Boston Gazette, March 26, 1812, and was soon
          reproduced in several other Massachusetts newspapers in response to election district changes initiated by governor
          Eldridge Gerry. Note that while the practice is named after him, Gerry was not the first to employ it.

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Jonathan Mattingly
          Jonathan Mattingly is a mathematician who was featured in a Nature article titled "The Mathematicians Who Want to
          Save Democracy" (https://openstax.org/r/mattingly). Mattingly is a mathematician at Duke University in North
          Carolina and he runs election simulations based on alternate versions of electoral districts in order to analyze the
          effects of gerrymandering. He has even been asked to testify as an expert witness in court. Mattingly and other
          mathematicians who are working on the problem will potentially have an impact on the redistricting that will occur as
          a result of the 2020 census. (Carrie Arnold, "The Mathematicians Who Want to Save Democracy," Nature 546, 200-202,
          2017.)

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1209

Check Your Understanding

25. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section does not use a modified divisor?

26. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section satisfies the quota rule?

27. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section is biased toward states with larger
      populations?

28. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section is biased toward states with smaller
      populations?

29. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section begin the apportionment with a state's upper
      quota and adjust down?

30. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section begin the apportionment with a state's lower
      quota and adjust up?

31. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section use traditional rounding?

32. Does the change from a standard divisor to a modified divisor tend to change the number of seats for larger or
      smaller states more?

        SECTION 11.4 EXERCISES                                                    State F  Total Seats

For the following exercises, use the standard quotas given in the table below.
                                         State A State B State C State D State E

Scenario X 17.63 26.62 10.81 16.01 13.69 15.24                                             100

Scenario Y 12.37  7.59   71.71  6.75  5.76                                        20.81    125

Scenario Z 3.53   31.56  2.95   5.12  9.84                                        NA       53

     1. Round the standard quota for each state in Scenario X using traditional rounding. Find the sum of the modified
          quotas. What is the difference between the sum and the house size?

     2. Round the standard quota for each state in Scenario Y using traditional rounding. Find the sum of the modified
          quotas. What is the difference between the sum and the house size?

     3. Round the standard quota for each state in Scenario Z using traditional rounding. Find the sum of the modified
          quotas. What is the difference between the sum and the house size?

     4. Find the lower quota for each state in Scenario Y. If each state is allocated its lower quota, how many seats
          remain to be allocated?

     5. Find the lower quota for each state in Scenario X. If each state is allocated its lower quota, how many seats
          remain to be allocated?

     6. Find the lower quota for each state in Scenario Z. If each state is allocated its lower quota, how many seats
          remain to be allocated?

     7. Find the upper quota for each state in Scenario X and determine how much the sum of the upper quotas
          exceeds the house size.

     8. Find the upper quota for each state in Scenario Y and determine how much the sum of the upper quotas
          exceeds the house size.

     9. Find the upper quota for each state in Scenario Z and determine how much the sum of the upper quotas
          exceeds the house size.

    10. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for Scenario Y.
    11. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for Scenario X.
    12. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for Scenario Z.

For the following exercises, use the information in the table below, which gives standard and final quotas for Methods
X, Y, and Z.
1210 11 · Voting and Apportionment

                                                 State A State B State C State D State E

                  Standard Quota 1.67                      3.33  5.00       6.67    8.33

                                    Method X     2         2           5    7             9

                                    Method Y     1         3           5    7             9

                                    Method Z     1         3           5    6       10

13. Does the apportionment resulting from method X satisfy the quota rule? Why or why not?
14. Does the apportionment resulting from method Z satisfy the quota rule? Why or why not?
15. Does the apportionment resulting from method Y satisfy the quota rule? Why or why not?

In the movie Black Panther, the hero lives in the fictional country of Wakanda. Imagine that 111 Vibranium artifacts
must be distributed among the fortress cities, or birnin, of Wakanda based on the population of each birnin. Use the
population and standard quota information in the table below for the following exercises.

            Birnin                     Birnin     Birnin          Birnin         Birnin         Birnin    Total
           Djata (D)                T'Chaka (T)  Zana (Z)        S'Yan (S)  Bashenga (B)     Azzaria (A)

Residents  26,000                   57,000       27,000          18,000     64,000           45,000       237,000

Standard   12.18                    26.70           12.65        8.43       29.98            21.08        111
  Quota

    16. Modify the standard quota for each state using traditional rounding. Find the sum of the modified quotas. What
          is the difference between the sum and the house size?

    17. Find the standard lower quota for each state. If each state is allocated its lower quota, how many seats remain
          to be allocated?

    18. Find the standard upper quota for each state and determine how much the sum of the upper quotas exceeds
          the house size.

    19. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the artifacts.
    20. Find the modified lower quota for each state using a modified divisor of 2,000. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    21. Find the modified lower quota for each state using a modified divisor of 2,100. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    22. Use the Jefferson method to apportion the artifacts. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If

          so, indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    23. Does the Jefferson method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    24. Find the modified upper quota for each state using a modified divisor of 2,250. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    25. Find the modified upper quota for each state using a modified divisor of 2,150. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    26. Use the Adams method to apportion the artifacts. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If so,

          indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    27. Does the Adams method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    28. Which method of apportionment, Jefferson or Adams, is a resident of Birnin T'Chaka likely to prefer? Justify your

          answer.
    29. Use the Webster method to apportion the artifacts. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If

          so,indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    30. Does the Webster method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    31. Which of the four methods of apportionment from this section (Hamilton, Jefferson, Adams, or Webster) are the

          residents of Birnin S'Yan likely to prefer? Justify your answer.

Children from five families--the Chorro family, the Eswaran family, the Javernick family, the Lahde family, and the Stolly

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.4 · Apportionment Methods 1211

family--joined a town Easter egg hunt. When they returned with their baskets, they had 827 eggs! They decided to
share their eggs amongst the families based on the number of children in each family. Use the population and
standard quota information in the table below for the following exercises.

          (C) Chorro (E) Eswaran (J) Javernick (L) Lahde (S) Stolly Total

Children  3            2        4       1        5  15

Standard Quota 155.04  103.36   206.72  103.36   258.40 827

    32. Modify the standard quota for each state using traditional rounding. Find the sum of the modified quotas. What
          is the difference between the sum and the house size?

    33. Find the standard lower quota for each state. If each state is allocated its lower quota, how many seats remain
          to be allocated?

    34. Find the standard upper quota for each state, and determine how much the sum of the upper quotas exceeds
          the house size.

    35. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the Easter eggs.
    36. Find the modified lower quota for each state using a modified divisor of 0.01800. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    37. Find the modified lower quota for each state using a modified divisor of 0.01810. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    38. Use the Jefferson method to apportion the Easter eggs. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor.

          If so, indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    39. Does the Jefferson method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    40. Find the modified upper quota for each state using a modified divisor of 0.0182. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    41. Find the modified upper quota for each state using a modified divisor of 0.01816. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    42. Use the Adams method to apportion the Easter eggs. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If

          so, indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    43. Does the Adams method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    44. Use the Webster method to apportion the Easter eggs. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor.

          If so, indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    45. Does the Webster method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?

For the following exercises, use this information: Suppose that the State of Delaware received 2,000 packs of COVID-19
vaccines, with ten doses per pack. These (unopened) packs must be distributed to the three counties based on total
population. Use the population information in the table below to determine how many packs of vaccine will be
distributed to each county based on the given apportionment method.

                                                                 (N) New Castle (K) Kent (S) Sussex

          Residents    558,753  180,786 234,225

46. Hamilton's Method
47. Jefferson's Method
48. Adams's Method
49. Webster's Method
50. Notice that the apportionments found in questions 46, 47, 48, and 49 all satisfy the quota rule. Does this

      contradict the statement, "The Jefferson, Adams, and Webster methods of apportionment all violate the quota
      rule"? Why or why not?
1212 11 · Voting and Apportionment

    11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods

        Figure 11.18 In this seating chart for the House of Representatives, each color indicates representatives from a
        particular state.

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Describe and illustrate the Alabama paradox.
         2. Describe and illustrate the population paradox.
         3. Describe and illustrate the new-states paradox.
         4. Identify ways to promote fairness in apportionment methods.

     Apportionment Paradoxes

        The citizens of Imaginaria will want the apportionment method to be as fair as possible. There are certain characteristics
        that they would reasonably expect from a fair apportionment.

          · If the house size is increased, the state quotas should all increase or remain the same but never decrease.
          · If one state's population is growing more rapidly than another state's population, the faster growing state should

              not lose a seat while a slower growing state maintains or gains a seat.
          · If there is a fixed number of seats, adding a new state should not cause an existing state to gain seats while others

              lose them.
        However, apportionment methods are known to contradict these expectations. Before you decide on the right
        apportionment for Imaginarians, let's explore the apportionment paradox, a situation that occurs when an
        apportionment method produces results that seem to contradict reasonable expectations of fairness.
        There is a lot that the founders of Imaginaria can learn from U.S. history. The constitution of the United States requires
        that the seats in the House of Representatives be apportioned according to the results of the census that occurs every
        decade, but the number of seats and the apportionment method is not stipulated. Over the years, several different
        apportionment methods and house sizes have been used and scrutinized for fairness. This scrutiny has led to the
        discovery of several of these apportionment paradoxes.

     The Alabama Paradox

        At the time of the 1880 U.S. Census, the Hamilton method of apportionment had replaced the Jefferson method. The
        number of seats in the House of Representatives was not fixed. To achieve the fairest apportionment possible, the house
        sizes were chosen so that the Hamilton and Webster methods would result in the same apportionment. The chief clerk of
        the Census Bureau calculated the apportionments for house sizes between 275 and 350. There was a surprising result
        that became known as the Alabama paradox, which is said to occur when an increase in house size reduces a state's
        quota. Alabama would receive eight seats with a house size of 299, but only receive seven seats if the house size
        increased to 300. (Michael J. Caulfield (Gannon University), "Apportioning Representatives in the United States Congress -
       Paradoxes of Apportionment," Convergence (November 2010), DOI:10.4169/loci003163)

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1213

EXAMPLE 11.42

The 1880 Alabama Quota
The 1880 census recorded the population of Alabama as 1,513,401 and that of the U.S. as 62,979,766.

1. Calculate the standard divisor and standard quota for the State of Alabama based on a house size of 299.
2. Calculate the standard divisor and standard quota for the State of Alabama based on a house size of 300.
3. Did the standard quota increase or decrease when the house size increased?
4. Consider the Hamilton method of apportionment. Explain how Alabama's final quota could be smaller with a larger

     standard quota.

Solution

1. The standard divisor is                                                citizens per seat. The standard quota for

Alabama is                        seats.

2. The standard divisor is                                                citizens per seat. The standard quota for

Alabama is                        seats.

3. The standard quota increased.

4. In each case, the state would receive the lower quota of 7 and then be awarded one more seat if the fractional part

of the standard quota were high enough relative to the fractional parts of the other states' standard quotas. When

the house size was 299, Alabama received one of the remaining seats after the lower quotas were distributed. When

the house size was 300, Alabama did not receive one of the remaining seats after the lower quotas were distributed.

It must have been the case that either the fractional part 0.2090 ranked lower amongst the other fractional parts of

the state quotas than the fractional part 0.1850 did, or there were fewer remaining seats, or both.

After the 1900 census, the Census Bureau again calculated the apportionment based on various house sizes. It was
determined that Colorado would receive three seats with a house size of 356, but only two seats with a house size of 357.

        YOUR TURN 11.42

  The 1900 census recorded the population of Colorado as 539,700 and that of the U.S. as 76,212,168.
      1. Calculate the standard divisor and standard quota for the State of Colorado based on a house size of 356.
      2. Calculate the standard divisor and standard quota for the State of Colorado based on a house size of 357.
      3. Did the standard quota increase or decrease when the house size increased?
      4. Consider the Hamilton method of apportionment. Explain how Colorado's final quota could be smaller with a
           larger standard quota.

EXAMPLE 11.43

Hamilton's Method and the Alabama Paradox
Suppose that States A and B each have a population of 6, while State C has a population of 2.

1. Use the Hamilton method to apportion 10 seats.
2. Use the Hamilton method to apportion 11 seats.
3. Does this example demonstrate the Alabama paradox? If so, how?

    Solution                                                              individuals per seat.
1. Step 1: The total population is 14. The standard divisor is

Step 2: The states' standard quotas are as follows: A                , B             , and C

Step 3: The states' lower quotas are as follows: A 4, B 4, and C 1.

Step 4: The sum of the lower quotas is 9, which means there is one seat remaining to be apportioned. State C has
the highest fractional part and receives the additional seat.

Step 5: The final apportionment is as follows: A 4, B 4, and C 2, which sums to 10.

2. Step 1: The total population is 14. The standard divisor is            individuals per seat.
1214 11 · Voting and Apportionment

Step 2: The states' standard quotas are: A                , B  , and C  .

Step 3: The states' lower quotas are: A 4, B 4, and C 1.

Step 4: The sum of the lower quotas is 9, which means there are two seats remaining to be apportioned. A and B
have the highest fractional parts and receive the additional seats.

Step 5: The final apportionment is: A 5, B 5, and C 1.

3. Yes, this demonstrates the Alabama paradox because State C receives two seats if the house size is 10, but only one
     seat if the house size is 11.

        YOUR TURN 11.43

  Suppose that the founders of Imaginaria decide to have a parliament that apportions seats to four political parties
  based on the portion of the vote each party has earned. Also, suppose that Party A has 56.7 thousand votes, Party B
  has 38.5 thousand votes, Party C has 4.2 thousand votes, and Party D has 0.6 thousand votes.

      1. Use the Hamilton method to apportion 323 seats.
      2. Use the Hamilton method to apportion 324 seats.
      3. Does this example demonstrate the Alabama paradox? If so, how?

The Population Paradox

It is important for the founders of Imaginaria to keep in mind that the populations of states change as time passes.
Some populations grow and some shrink. Some populations increase by a large amount while others increase by a small
amount. These changes may necessitate a reapportionment of seats, or the recalculation of state quotas due to a
change in population. It would be reasonable for Imaginarians to expect that the state with a population that has grown
more than others will gain a seat before the other states. Once again, this is not always the case with the Hamilton
method of apportionment. The population growth rate of a state is the ratio of the change in the population to the
original size of the population, often expressed as a percentage. This value is positive if the population is increasing and
negative if the population is decreasing. The population paradox occurs when a state with an increasing population
loses a seat while a state with a decreasing population either retains or gains seats. More generally, the population
paradox occurs when a state with a higher population growth rate loses seats while a state with a lower population
growth rate retains or gains seats.

Notice that the population paradox definitions has two parts. If either part applies, then the population paradox has
occurred. The first part of the definition only applies when one state has a decreasing population. The second part of the
definition applies in all situations, whether there is a state with a decreasing population or not. It will be easier to identify
situations that involve a decreasing population. The other situations requires the calculation of a growth rate. The reason
that we don't have to calculate a growth rate when one state has a decreasing population and the other has an
increasing population is that increasing population has a positive growth rate which is always greater than the negative
growth rate of a decreasing population.

      A state must lose a seat in order for the population paradox to apply. It is not enough for a state with a lower
      growth rate to gain a seat while a state with a higher growth rate retains the same number of seats.

  EXAMPLE 11.44

Apportionment of Respirators to Hospitals
Suppose that 18 respirators are to be apportioned to three hospitals based on their capacities. The Hamilton method is
used to allocate the respirators in 2020, then to reallocate based on new capacities in 2021. The results are shown in the
table below. How does this demonstrate the population paradox?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1215

          Capacity in  Respirators  Change in  Growth Rate =  Capacity in  Respirators
              2020        in 2020    Capacity                     2021        in 2021
Hospital
                                         57
A         825          9                                      882              9
                                         13
B         613          7                                      626              6
                                          3
C         239          2                                      242              3

     Solution
Hospital B lost a respirator while hospital C gained one, even though hospital B had a higher growth rate than hospital C.

YOUR TURN 11.44

1. Suppose that 18 respirators are to be apportioned to three hospitals based on their capacities. The respirators
    are allocated based on the Hamilton method in 2020, then reallocated based on new capacities in 2021. The
    results are shown in the table below. How does this demonstrate the population paradox?

          Capacity     Respirators  Change in  Growth Rate    Capacity     Respirators
           in 2020        in 2020    Capacity                  in 2021        in 2021
Hospital

   A      237          5            6                         243          6

   B      889          21           69                        958          21

   C      674          16           18                        692          15

FORMULA

The growth rate of a population can be calculated by subtracting the previous population size from the current
population size, and then dividing the difference by the previous population size.

      Make sure to calculate the subtraction before the division. If you are entering the values in a calculator, it is helpful
      to put parentheses around the subtracted terms.

  EXAMPLE 11.45

The Congress of Costaguana
The country of Costaguana has three states: Azuera with a population of 894,000; Punta Mala with a population of
696,000; and Esmeralda with a population of 215,000. There are 38 seats in the Congress of Costaguana. The
apportionment of the seats is determined by Hamilton's method to be: 19 for Azuera, 15 for Punta Mala, and 4 for
Esmerelda. A census reveals that the population has grown and the seats must be reapportioned. If Azuera now has
953,000 residents, Punta Mala now has 706,000 residents, and Esmerelda now has 218,000 residents, how many seats
1216 11 · Voting and Apportionment

will each state receive upon reapportionment? How is this an example of the population paradox?

     Solution
The Hamilton reapportionment is: 19 for Azuera, 14 for Punta Mala, and 5 for Esmerelda. This is an example of the
population paradox because Punta Mala lost a seat to Esmerelda, even though Punta Mala's population grew by 1.44
percent while Esmerelda's only grew by 1.40 percent.

      YOUR TURN 11.45

1. The country of Elbonia has three states: Mudston with a population of 866,000; WallaWalla with a population of
    626,000; and Dilberta with a population of 256,000. There are 38 seats in the Congress of Elbonia. The
    apportionment of the seats is determined by Hamilton's method to be: 19 for Mudston, 14 for WallaWalla, and 5
    for Dilberta. A census reveals that the population has grown and the seats must be reapportioned. If Mudston
    now has 921,000 residents, WallaWalla now has 640,000 residents, and Dilberta now has 260,000 residents, how
    many seats will each state receive upon reapportionment? How is this an example of the population paradox?

The New-States Paradox

As a founder of Imaginaria, you might also consider the possibility that Imaginaria could annex nearby lands and
increase the number of states. This occurred several times in the United States such as when Oklahoma became a state
in 1907. The House size was increased from 386 to 391 to accommodate Oklahoma's quota of five seats. When the seats
were reapportioned using Hamilton's method, New York lost a seat to Maine despite the fact that their populations had
not changed. This is an example of the new-state paradox, which occurs when the addition of a new state is
accompanied by an increase in seats to maintain the standard ratio of population to seats, but one of the existing states
loses a seat in the resulting reapportionment.

  EXAMPLE 11.46

New State of Oscuridad
The country of San Lorenzo has grown from two states to three. The house size of the congress has been increased by
eight and the seats have been reapportioned to accommodate the new state of Oscuridad. The constitution mandates
the use of the Hamilton method of apportionment. Use this information and the following table to answer the questions.

State                               Population (in hundreds) Original Apportionment Reapportionment

Clara                               7,100  39              40

Velasco                             9,080  51              50

Oscuridad                           1,500  Not Applicable  8

1. What was the original house size?
2. What is the new house size?
3. How is this reapportionment an example of the new-states paradox?

    Solution
1.
2.
3. The original state of Velasco lost a seat to the original state of Clara when the new state of Oscuridad was added.

      YOUR TURN 11.46
The country of Narnia has grown from two states to three. The house size of the congress has been increased by five

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1217

and the seats have been reapportioned to accommodate the new state of Chippingford. The constitution mandates
the use of the Hamilton method of apportionment. Use this information and the following table to answer the
questions.

State         Population (in hundreds) Original Apportionment Reapportionment

Beruna        7600  39              40

Beaversdam    9720  51              50

Chippingford  1000  Not Applicable  5

      1. What was the original house size?
      2. What is the new house size?
      3. How is this reapportionment an example of the new-states paradox?

  EXAMPLE 11.47

The Growing Country of Gulliversia
The country of Gulliversia has two states: Lilliput with a population of 700,000 and Brobdingnag with a population of
937,000. The constitution of Gulliversia requires that the 90 congressional seats be apportioned by Hamilton's method.
Lilliput has received 38 seats while Brobdingnag has received 52 seats. Recently, the island of Houyhnhnmsland with a
population of 170,000 has joined the union, becoming a state of Gulliversia. When Houyhnhnmsland is included, nine
additional seats must be apportioned to maintain the same ratio of seats to citizens. Use Hamilton's method to
reapportion the 99 seats to the three states. How is the resulting apportionment an example of the new-states paradox?

     Solution
The reapportionment gives 39 seats to Lilliput, 51 seats to Brobdingnag, and 9 seats to Houyhnhnmsland. This is an
example of the new-states paradox because the original state of Brobdingnag lost a seat to the original state of Lilliput
when the new state was added to the union.

        YOUR TURN 11.47

  1. The country of Neverland has two states: Neverwood with a population of 760,000 and Mermaids Lagoon with a
      population of 943,000. The constitution of Neverland requires that the 84 congressional seats be apportioned by
      Hamilton's method. Neverwood has received 37 seats while Mermaids Lagoon has received 47 seats. Recently,
      the island of Marooners Rock with a population of 190,000 has joined the union, becoming a state of Neverland.
      When Marooners Rock is included, nine additional seats must be apportioned to maintain the same ratio of seats
      to citizens. Use Hamilton's method to reapportion the 93 seats to the three states. How is the resulting
      apportionment an example of the new-states paradox?

When a new state is added, it is necessary to determine the amount that the house size must be increased to retain the
original ratio of population to seats, in other words to keep the original standard divisor. To calculate the new house size,
divide the new population by the original standard divisor, and round to the nearest whole number.

  FORMULA
1218 11 · Voting and Apportionment

EXAMPLE 11.48

Oklahoma Joins the Union
Oklahoma was admitted as the 46th state on November 16, 1907. Before Oklahoma joined the union, the U.S. population
was approximately 75,030,000 and the House of Representatives had 386 seats. The new state had a population of
approximately 970,000. Use this information to estimate the original standard divisor to the nearest hundred, the new
population, the new house size, and the number of seats Oklahoma should receive.

     Solution
Step 1:

Step 2: New Population

Step 3:

Step 4: There are                   new seats to be apportioned to Oklahoma.

        YOUR TURN 11.48

  1. New Mexico was admitted as the 47th state on January 6, 1912. Before New Mexico joined the union, the U.S.
      population was approximately 76,000,000 and the House of Representatives had 391 seats. The new state had a
      population of approximately 300,000. Use this information to estimate the original standard divisor to the
      nearest hundred, the new population, the new house size, and the number of seats New Mexico should receive.

The Search for the Perfect Apportionment Method

The ideal apportionment method would simultaneously satisfy the following four fairness criteria.

  · Satisfy the quota rule
  · Avoid the Alabama paradox
  · Avoid the population paradox
  · Avoid the new-states paradox

We have seen that the Hamilton method allows the Alabama paradox, the population paradox, and the new-states
paradox in some apportionment scenarios. Let's explore the results of the other methods of apportionment we have
discussed in some of the same scenarios.

  EXAMPLE 11.49

Orange Grove and the New-States Paradox
The incorporated town of Orange Grove consists of two subdivisions: The Oaks with 1,254 residents and The Villages
with 10,746 residents. A council with 100 members supervises the municipality's operations. The council votes to annex
an unincorporated subdivision called The Lakes with a population of 630. They plan to increase the size of the council to
maintain the ratio of seats to residents such that the new council will have 100 seats plus the number of seats given to
The Lakes. Use each of the following apportionment methods and indicated number of additional seats to find the
original and new apportionment and determine whether the new-state paradox occurs.

 1. Jefferson's method with five additional seats.
 2. Adams's method with six additional seats.
 3. Webster's method with five additional seats

     Solution
 1. Using a modified divisor of 119, the original apportionment would have been: The Oaks 10 and The Villages 90.

      Using a modified divisor of 119, the new apportionment would be: The Oaks 10, The Villages 90, and The Lakes 5.
      The new-state paradox does not occur.
 2. Using a modified divisor of 121, the original apportionment would have been: The Oaks 11 and The Villages 89.
      Using a modified divisor of 121, the new apportionment would be: The Oaks 11, The Villages 89, and The Lakes 6.
      The new-state paradox does not occur.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                  11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1219

 3. Using the standard divisor of 120, the original apportionment would have been: The Oaks 10 and The Villages 90.
      Using a modified divisor of 119.5, the new apportionment would be: The Oaks 10, The Villages 90, and The Lakes 5.
      The new-state paradox does not occur.

        YOUR TURN 11.49

  1. Suppose that in 2016, States A, B, and C had populations of 13 million, 12 million, and 112 million, respectively. In
      2020, State A has grown by 1 million residents, State B has lost 1 million residents, and State C has gained 2
      million residents. Compare the apportionments in 2016 to 2020 using each method given below. Which of the
      four methods violate(s) the population paradox in this scenario?

We have seen in our examples that neither the population paradox nor the new-states paradox occurred when using the
Jefferson, Adams, and Webster methods. It turns out that, although all three of these divisor methods violate the quota
rule, none of them ever causes the population paradox, new-states paradox, or even the Alabama paradox. On the other
hand, the Hamilton method satisfies the quota rule, but will cause the population paradox, the new-states paradox, and
the Alabama paradox in some scenarios.

In 1983, mathematicians Michel Balinski and Peyton Young proved that no method of apportionment can simultaneously
satisfy all four fairness criteria.

There are other apportionment methods that satisfy different subsets of these fairness criteria. For example, the
mathematicians, Balinski and Young who proved the Balinski-Young Impossibility Theorem created a method that both
satisfies the quota rule and is free of the Alabama paradox. (Balinski, Michel L.; Young, H. Peyton (November 1974). "A
New Method for Congressional Apportionment." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 71 (11): 4602-4606.)
However, no method may always follow the quota rule and simultaneously be free of the population paradox. (Balinski,
Michel L.; Young, H. Peyton (September 1980). "The Theory of Apportionment" (PDF). Working Papers. International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. WP-80-131.)

So, as you and your fellow founders of Imaginaria make the important decision about the right apportionment method
for Imaginaria, do not look for a perfect apportionment method. Instead, look for an apportionment method that best
meets the needs and concerns of Imaginarians.

Check Your Understanding

In the following questions, a scenario is given. Determine whether the scenario is an example of a quota rule violation,
the Alabama paradox, the population paradox, the new-states paradox, or none of these.

    33. A city purchased five new firetrucks and apportioned them among the existing fire stations. Although your
          neighborhood fire station has the same proportion of the city's firetrucks as before the new ones were
          purchased, it now has one fewer.

    34. The school resources officers in a county were reapportioned based on the most recent census. The number of
          students at Chapel Run Elementary went up while the number of students at Panther Trail Elementary went
          down. However, Chapel Run now has one fewer resources officer while Panther Trail has one more than it did
          previously.

    35. The standard quota for States A, B, and C are 1.19, 2.73, and 5.71 respectively. State A received 1 seat, State B
          received 3 seats, and State C received 4 seats.

    36. A corporation that owns several hospitals purchased an additional hospital, causing the doctor to patient ratio
          to decrease.

    37. When the city of Cocoa annexed an adjacent unincorporated community, the number of seats on the city
          council was increased to maintain the standard ratio of citizens to seats, but one existing community of Cocoa
          still lost a seat on the city council to another existing community of Cocoa when the new community was
          added.

In the following questions, a type of scenario is described. Indicate which paradox could arise in a scenario of this kind.
    38. A reapportionment occurs because the populations of the states change, and the house size remains the same.
    39. A reapportionment occurs because the house size increases, and the populations of the states remain the
          same.
    40. A reapportionment occurs because an additional state is added to the union, the populations of the original
          states remain the same, and the house size is increased to correspond to the population of the new state.
1220 11 · Voting and Apportionment

             SECTION 11.5 EXERCISES

        In the following exercises, determine whether the scenario violates the Alabama paradox. Justify your answer.
              1. A company with an office in each of four cities must distribute 145 new Chromebooks to the four offices. It is
                   determined that Office A will receive 42, Office B will receive 17, Office C will receive 35, and Office D will receive
                   51. At the last minute, it is discovered that there are 146 Chromebooks. When they are reapportioned, Office A
                   receives 42, Office B receives 16, Office C receives 36, and Office D receives 52.
              2. A county with three towns has 30 garbage trucks to apportion. Attenborough receives 6 trucks, Breckenridge
                   receives 8 trucks, and Cabbotsville receives 16 trucks, in proportion to their populations. When one additional
                   truck is purchased, the reallocation results in 5 trucks for Attenborough, 9 for Breckenridge, and 8 for
                   Cabbotsville though there has been no change in populations.
              3. A group of 60 dentists work for a company that runs five offices. The dentists have been apportioned to the
                   offices by the number of patients. Office A receives 14 dentists, Office B receives 11, Office C receives 11, Office
                   D receives 12, and Office E receives 12. When a new dentist joins the group, the new apportionment gives the
                   following: A 14, B 11, C 11, D 12, and E 13.

        In the following exercises, determine whether the scenario violates the population paradox. Justify your answer.
              4. A company with locations in three cities plans to give 200 achievement awards that shall be apportioned to the
                   three cities by population. City A with 9,150 employees is allotted 61 awards, City B with 6,040 employees is
                   allotted 40 awards, and City C with 14,810 employees is allotted 99 awards to distribute. Then it is discovered
                   that the number of employees is out of date. The awards are reallocated based on the new populations: City A
                   with 9,180; City B with 6,040; and City C with 14,930. It turns out that the apportionment remains the same.
              5. A soccer club must apportion soccer balls to the teams among four age brackets based on the number of teams
                   in each bracket. Bracket U8 receives 32 balls, U12 receives 46 balls, U15 receives 29 balls, and U18 receives 25
                   balls. Mid-season, the balls are reapportioned. U8 has decreased by 10 percent, U12 has increased by 20
                   percent, U15 remains the same, and U18 has increased by 10 percent. The reapportionment gives 33 balls to
                   U8, 46 balls to U12, 29 balls to U15, and 14 balls to U18.
              6. READ (Reading Education Assistance Dogs) trains and certifies therapy animals to serve in classrooms and help
                   children develop a love of reading in a low-stress environment. Suppose that 20 therapy teams are apportioned
                   to three schools based on their populations. When the population of School A decreases by 10 percent, the
                   population of School B increases by 10 percent, and the population of School C remains constant, the
                   apportionment remains the same.

        In the following exercises, determine whether the scenario violates the new-states paradox. Justify your answer.
              7. A charity organization has 851 volunteers in Country A and 3449 volunteers in Country B. There are 43 lead
                   organizers that must be apportioned to the two locations. Country A receives 9 while Country B receives 34.
                   When the operations are expanded to Country C with 725 volunteers, 7 new lead organizers are added to the
                   team. When the lead organizers are reapportioned, Country A receives 9, Country B receives 34, and Country C
                   receives 7 lead organizers.
              8. A country has two states. There are 22 seats in the legislature. State A has 4 seats, and State B has 18 seats.
                   When State C joins the union, the number of representatives is increased by five. Under the new
                   apportionment, State A receives 3 seats, State B receives 19 seats, and State C receives 5 seats.
              9. In the Garunga Solar System, there are four inhabited planets. Three of the planets are members of the United
                   Association of Garungan Planets (UAGP). The UAGP has 67 seats. Planet Angluertka has 40 seats, planet
                   Bangluertka has 27 seats, and planet Clangluertka has 13 seats. When planet Danggluertka decides to join the
                   UAGP, 14 seats are added to accommodate them proportionately. The new allocation of seats gives 40 seats to
                   Angluertka, 26 seats to Bangluertka, 14 seats to Clangluertka, and 14 seats to Danggluertka.

        In the following exercises, use the Hamilton method of apportionment to answer the questions.
            10. When the number of seats changed from 147 to 148, the standard quotas changed from A 44.24, B 17.35, C
                   37.12, and D 48.29 to A 45.54, B 17.47, C 37.37, and D 48.62.
                    a. How did the increase in seats impact the apportionment?
                    b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

            11. When the number of seats changed from 126 to 127, the standard quotas changed from A 9.57, B 29.49, C
                   33.89, D 28.43, and E 24.61 to A 9.65, B 29.72, C 34.16, D 38.66, and E 24.81.
                    a. How did the increase in seats impact the apportionment?
                    b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

            12. When the number of seats changed from 25 to 26, the standard quotas changed from A 2.21, B 5.25, C 11.27,

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1221

      and D 6.27 to A 2.30, B 5.46, C 11.72, and D 6.52.
       a. How did the increase in seats impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

13. When the number of seats changed from 25 to 26, the standard quotas changed from A 2.43, B 5.42, and C 8.15
      to A 2.46, B 5.47, and C 8.07.
       a. How did the increase in seats impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

14. The house size is 18. When the population of State A increases by 11.76 percent, State B increases by 16.22
      percent, and State C increases by 12.18 percent, the standard quotas change from A 2.46, B 6.00, and C 9.53 to
      A 2.41, B 6.25, and C 9.34.
       a. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

15. The house size is 100. When the population of State A increases by 20 percent, State B increases by 10 percent,
      State C increases by 30 percent, and the populations of States D, E, and F remain the same. The standard
      quotas change from A 12.50, B 25.00, C 9.38, D 18.75, E 12.50 and F 21.88 to A 13.91, B 25.51, C 11.30, D 17.39, E
      11.59, and F 20.29.
       a. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

16. The house size is 17. When the population of State A increases by 12.73 percent, State B increases by 15.63
      percent, and State C increases by 12.90 percent, the standard quotas change from A 2.53, B 5.90, and C 8.57 to
      A 2.51, B 5.99, and C 8.50.
       a. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

17. The house size is 38 seats. When the population of State A increases by 6.60 percent, State B increases by 1.44
      percent, and State C increases by 1.40 percent, the standard quotas change from A 18.82, B 14.65, and C 4.53 to
      A 19.59, B 14.29, and C 4.41.
       a. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

18. The house size is 24 seats. When the population of State A increases by 28 percent, State B increases by 26
      percent, and State C increases by 15 percent, the standard quotas change from A 3.38, B 6.32, and C 14.30 to A
      3.63, B 6.67, and C 13.71.
       a. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

19. The house size was 60. There were three states with standard quotas of A 4.18, B 15.38, and C 40.44. A fourth
      state was annexed, and the house size was increased to 65. The new standard quotas are A 4.17, B 15.33, C
      40.32, and D 5.18.
       a. How did the additional state impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

20. The house size was 50. There were three states with standard quotas of A 9.41, B 24.42, and C 16.17. A fourth
      state was annexed, and the house size was increased to 66. The new standard quotas are A 9.36, B 24.30, C
      16.09, and D 16.25.
       a. How did the additional state impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

21. The house size was 27. There were three states with standard quotas of A 6.39, B 11.40, and C 9.21. A fourth
      state was annexed, and the house size was increased to 35. The new standard quotas are A 6.38, B 11.37, C
      9.19, and D 8.06.
       a. How did the additional state impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

22. The house size was 100. There were three states with standard quotas of A 26.09, B 30.43, and C 43.48. A fourth
      state was annexed, and the house size was increased to 122. The new standard quotas are A 26.14, B 30.50, C
      43.57, and D 21.78.
       a. How did the additional state impact the apportionment?
       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.
1222 11 · Voting and Apportionment

In the following exercises, use the information in the table below.

State          A                    B       C  D  E       F          G  H  I      J          K       L   P          Q   R

Population 624 1,219 979 3,462 7,470 4,264 5,300 263 809 931 781 676 150 250 350

Original          38                                 204                          126                               50

House Size

Updated           39                                 205                          127                               51

House Size

23. Consider States A, B, and C.
       a. Determine the apportionment for States A, B, and C with the original house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       b. Determine the apportionment for States A, B, and C with the updated house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       c. Does the change in the house size and use of the Hamilton method cause the Alabama paradox? Explain
             your reasoning.

24. Consider States D, E, F, and G.
       a. Determine the apportionment for States D, E, F, and G with the original house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       b. Determine the apportionment for States D, E, F, and G with the updated house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       c. Does the change in the house size and use of the Hamilton method cause the Alabama paradox? Explain
             your reasoning.

25. Consider States H, I, J, K, and L.
       a. Determine the apportionment for States H, I, J, K, and L with the original house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       b. Determine the apportionment for States H, I, J, K, and L with the updated house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       c. Does the change in the house size and use of the Hamilton method cause the Alabama paradox? Explain
             your reasoning.

26. Consider States P, Q, and R.
       a. Determine the apportionment for States P, Q, and R with the original house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       b. Determine the apportionment for States P, Q, and R with the updated house size using the Hamilton
             method.
       c. Does the change in the house size and use of the Hamilton method cause the Alabama paradox? Explain
             your reasoning.

In the following exercises, use the information in the table below.  Population Growth Rate  House Size
                State Original Population Updated Population

            A                          889           958                   7.76%

            B                          674           692                   2.67%                42

            C                          237           243                   2.53%

            D                       12,032        14,124

            E                       10,789        9,726                                         135

Access for free at openstax.org
                          11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1223

State Original Population Updated Population Population Growth Rate House Size

F  995     2,304

G  901     1,156   28.3%

H  1,683   2,125   26.3%  24

I  3,808   4,369   14.7%

X  56      63

Y  125     141            16

Z  182     213

P  6,534   6,534

Q  7,832   7,810          40

R  13,959  13,992

S  20,515  21,164

27. Calculate the population growth rates , , and for States D, E, and F. Give answer as a percentage rounded to
      one decimal place.

28. Calculate the population growth rates , , , and for States P, Q, R, and S. Give answer as a percentage
      rounded to one decimal place.

29. Calculate the population growth rates , , and for States X, Y, and Z. Give answer as a percentage rounded to
      one decimal place.

30. Consider States A, B, and C.
       a. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States A, B, and C with the original population.
       b. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States A, B, and C with the updated population.
       c. Does the increase in population of States A, B, and C from the original population to the updated
             population and the use of the Hamilton method cause the population paradox? Explain your reasoning.

31. Consider States D, E, and F.
       a. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States D, E, and F with the original population.
       b. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States D, E, and F with the updated population.
       c. Does the increase in population and the use of the Hamilton method cause the population paradox?
             Explain your reasoning.

32. Consider States G, H, and I.
       a. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States G, H, and I with the original population.
       b. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States G, H, and I with the updated population.
       c. Does the increase in population and the use of the Hamilton method cause the population paradox?
             Explain your reasoning.

33. Consider States X, Y, and Z.
       a. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States X, Y, and Z with the original population.
       b. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States X, Y, and Z with the updated population.
       c. Does the increase in population and the use of the Hamilton method cause the population paradox?
             Explain your reasoning.

34. Consider States P, Q, R, and S.
       a. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States P, Q, R, and S with the original population.
       b. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for States P, Q, R, and S with the updated population.
1224 11 · Voting and Apportionment

c. Does the increase in population and the use of the Hamilton method cause the population paradox?
     Explain your reasoning.

In the following exercises, use the information in the table below.          New House Size
                                       State Population Original House Size

                                    A  627

                                    B  1,287  25

                                    C  973                                   32

                                    D  815

                                    E  520

                                    F  1,510  50

                                    G  1,060

                                    H  950

                                    P  1,222  100

                                    Q  473

                                    R  225

                                    K  1,688

                                    L  7,912  48

                                    M  1,448

                                    T  150

                                    U  250

                                    V  350    50

                                    W  450

35. Consider States A, B, and C.
       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the original house size.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the seats.

36. Consider States E, F, and G.
       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the original house size.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the seats.

37. Consider States P and Q.
       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the original house size.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the seats.

38. Consider States K and L.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             11.5 · Fairness in Apportionment Methods 1225

       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the original house size.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the seats.

39. Suppose that States A, B, and C annex State D and increase the house size proportionately.
       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the new house size.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
       c. Does the new-states paradox occur?

40. Suppose that States E, F, and G annex State H and increase the house size proportionately.
       a. Determine the new house size, , that is necessary.
       b. Calculate the standard divisor based on the new house size.
       c. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
       d. Does the new-states paradox occur?

41. Suppose that States P and Q annex State R and increase the house size proportionately.
       a. Determine the new house size, , that is necessary.
       b. Calculate the standard divisor based on the new house size.
       c. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
       d. Does the new-states paradox occur?

42. Suppose that States K and L annex State M and increase the house size proportionately.
       a. Determine the new house size, , that is necessary.
       b. Calculate the standard divisor based on the new house size.
       c. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
       d. Does the new-states paradox occur?

43. Suppose that States T, U, and V annex State W and increase the house size proportionately.
       a. Calculate the standard divisor based on the original house size and only States T, U, and V.
       b. Use the Hamilton method to apportion the seats to T, U, and V.
       c. Determine the new house size when State W is annexed.
       d. Calculate the standard divisor based on the new house size.
       e. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
        f. Does the new-states paradox occur? (Refer to part b.)

44. Suppose 24 seats are apportioned to States A, B, and C with populations of 16, 15, and 125 respectively. Then
      the populations of States A, B, and C change to 17, 15, and 126 respectively.

       a. Demonstrate that the population paradox occurs when the Hamilton method is used.
       b. Determine whether the population paradox occurs when the Webster method is used. Justify your answer.

45. Suppose that 10 seats are apportioned to States A, B, and C with populations 6, 6, and 2 respectively. Then the
      number of seats is increased to 11. Demonstrate that the Alabama paradox occurs when the Hamilton method
      is used.
1226 11 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

11.1 Voting Methods

  · majority
  · plurality
  · runoff election
  · runoff voting system
  · two-round system
  · Hare Method
  · preference ranking
  · ranked ballot
  · ranked-choice voting (RCV)
  · instant runoff voting (IRV)
  · Borda count method
  · Borda score
  · Compromise candidate
  · divisive candidate
  · pairwise comparison method
  · Condorcet voting methods
  · Condorcet candidate
  · approval voting system
  · approval voting ballot
  · spoiler

11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods

  · majority criterion
  · tyranny of the majority
  · Condorcet criterion
  · Condorcet method
  · monotonicity criterion
  · up-rank
  · down-rank
  · independence of irrelevant alternatives criterion (IIA)
  · Arrow's Impossibility Theorem
  · cardinal voting system

11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem

  · apportion
  · apportionment problem
  · proportional
  · part-to-part ratio
  · representative democracies
  · standard divisor
  · states
  · seats
  · house size
  · state population
  · total population
  · standard quota

11.4 Apportionment Methods

  · apportionment problem
  · lower quota
  · upper quota

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    11 · Chapter Summary 1227

11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods

  · apportionment paradox
  · Alabama paradox
  · reapportionment
  · population growth rate
  · population paradox
  · new-state paradox

Key Concepts

11.1 Voting Methods

  · In plurality voting, the candidate with the most votes wins.
  · When a voting method does not result in a winner, runoff voting can be used to do so.
  · Ranked-choice voting, also known as instant runoff voting, is one type of ranked voting system.
  · The Borda count method is a type of ranked voting system in which each candidate is given a Borda score based on

      the number of candidates ranked lower than them on each ballot.
  · When pairwise comparison is used, the winner will be the Condorcet candidate if one exists.
  · Approval voting allows voters to give equally weighted votes to multiple candidates.
  · When a voter finds a characteristic of a particular voting method unappealing, they may consider that characteristic

      a flaw in the voting method and look for an alternative method that does not have that characteristic.

11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods

  · There are several common measures of voting fairness, including the majority criterion, the head-to head criterion,
      the monotonicity criterion, and the irrelevant alternatives criterion.

  · According to Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, each voting method in which the only information is the order of
      preference of the voters will violate one of the fairness criteria.

11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem

  · The apportionment problem is how to fairly divide and distribute available resources to recipients in whole, not
      fractional, parts.

  · To distribute the seats in the U.S. House of Representatives fairly to each state, calculations are based on state
      population, total population, and house size, or the total number of seats to be apportioned.

  · The standard divisor is the ratio of the total population to the house size, and the standard quota is the number of
      seats that each state should receive.

11.4 Apportionment Methods

  · Hamilton's method of apportionment uses the standard divisor and standard lower quotas, and it distributes any
      remaining seats based on the size of the fractional parts of the standard lower quota. Hamilton's method satisfies
      the quota rule and favors neither larger nor smaller states.

  · Jefferson's method of apportionment uses a modified divisor that is adjusted so that the modified lower quotas sum
      to the house size. Jefferson's method violates the quota rule and favors larger states.

  · Adams's method of apportionment uses a modified divisor that is adjusted so that the modified upper quotas, sum
      to the house size. Adams's method violates the quota rule and favors smaller states.

  · Webster's method of apportionment uses a modified divisor that is adjusted so that the modified state quotas,
      rounded using traditional rounding, sum to the house size. Webster's method violates the quota rule but favors
      neither larger nor smaller states.

11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods

  · Several surprising outcomes can occur when apportioning seats that voters may find unfair: Alabama paradox,
      population paradox, and new-state paradox.

  · Apportionment methods are susceptible to apportionment paradoxes and may violate the quota rule.
  · The Balinsky-Young Impossibility Theorem indicates that no apportionment can satisfy all fairness criteria.

Videos

11.1 Voting Methods

  · How Does Ranked-Choice Voting Work? (https://openstax.org/r/ranked-choice_voting1)
  · Determine Winner of Election by Ranked-Choice Method (aka Instant Runoff) (https://openstax.org/r/ranked-
1228 11 · Chapter Summary

    choice_voting2)
· Determine Winner of Election by Borda Count Method (https://openstax.org/r/Borda_count_method)
· Determine Winner of Election by Pairwise Comparison Method (https://openstax.org/r/w1NNK7Dn3E8)

11.2 Fairness in Voting Methods

· Separation of Powers and Checks and Balances (https://openstax.org/r/separation_of_powers)

11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem

· What Is a Ratio? (https://openstax.org/r/ratios_proportions)
· What Are the Different Types of Ratios? (https://openstax.org/r/ratio_types)
· Math Antics - Rounding (https://openstax.org/r/rounding)

11.4 Apportionment Methods

· Hamilton Method of Apportionment (https://openstax.org/r/Hamiltons_method)
· Jefferson Apportionment Method (https://openstax.org/r/Jeffersons_method)
· Adams Method Apportionment Calculator (https://openstax.org/r/Adams_method)

Formula Review

11.3 Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem

Let be a particular item and another such that there is a constant ratio of to .

·                                and

·

·

11.5 Fairness in Apportionment Methods

Projects

The First Census: Challenges of Collecting Population Data

As you and your fellow founders write the Imaginarian constitution, you must also design systems to collect accurate
information about the population of Imaginaria. Why is this important and what are the challenges you will face? Let's
find out! Research and answer each question. (Questions adapted from "Authorizing the First Census-The Significance of
Population Data," Census.gov, United States Census Bureau)

 1. The First Congress laid out a plan for collecting this data in Chapter II, An Act Providing for the Enumeration of the
      Inhabitants of the United States, which was approved March 1, 1790. What group did Congress select to carry out
      the first enumeration? Why did they choose this group? What might be the advantages and disadvantages to this
      approach?

 2. Choose at least two challenges faced by the U.S. government during the first enumeration and explain how the
      information gathered might have helped address them.

 3. President James Madison was a U.S. Representative who participated in the census debate in the first congress.
      What were the main points of his remarks and how were they relevant to the overall debate about the first
      enumeration?

 4. What issues do you think the U.S. Census Bureau encounters today as it continues to collect and process data about
      the U.S. population that might be significant to you and the other founders of Imaginaria?

The Party System: How Many Political Parties Are Enough?

The electoral system of Imaginaria will likely involve multiple political parties. The way these parties interact with the
system may be determined by the founders of the new democracy. Let's explore the ways in which political parties
interact with the governments of various democracies by researching and answering each of the following questions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    11 · Chapter Summary 1229

 1. What concerns did the founders of the United States have about political parties? Have any of their concerns
      become a reality? Were political parties addressed in the U.S. Constitution? How did they become such a large part
      of politics in the U.S.? As a founder of Imaginaria, would you address political parties in your constitution?

 2. What is frontloading? Does our current system of frontloading impact fair representation? Why do two small, racially
      homogeneous states hold their primaries first? Do you think this impacts the final results?

 3. How does the interaction political parties and the electoral system in the United States differ from that of other
      countries? Give at least three specific examples. Of these three, which would you be most likely to use as a model
      for Imaginaria?

Technology and Voting: How Has the Digital Age Impacted Elections?

Unlike most other countries, Imaginaria will be founded in the digital age. Let's explore the impact this might have on
how you choose to set up your electoral system. Research and answer each question.

 1. Participation in an electoral system if very important. In what ways does the Internet positively affect participation?
      In what ways does it negatively affect participation. What roll, if any, should government of Imaginaria play in
      tempering or promoting the Impact of the Internet?

 2. Find at least three examples of governments that utilize Internet voting around the world. What concerns have
      slowed the spread of this technology? What are the advantages and disadvantages of Internet voting? Would you be
      in favor of Internet voting for Imaginaria? Why or why not?
1230 11 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Voting Methods
 1. In a plurality election, the candidates have the following vote counts: A 125, B 132, C 149, and D 112. Which
      candidate has the plurality and wins the election?

For the following exercises, use the table below.
                                                              Options A B C D E

                                                            Candidate 1 1 3 3 1 3

                                                            Candidate 2 2 1 1 2 4

                                                            Candidate 3 3 4 2 4 1

                                                            Candidate 4 4 2 4 3 2

     2. Which candidate has a plurality?
     3. Does the plurality candidate have a majority?
     4. Determine the winner of the election by the Hare method based on the sample preference summary in the

          table.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                        Number of Ballots 10 20 15 5

                                 Option A     1 4 34

                                 Option B     2 3 42

                                 Option C     4 2 13

                                 Option D     3 1 21

     5. Use ranked-choice voting to determine the two options in the final round and the number of votes they each
          receive in that round.

     6. Is there a winning option? If so, which option? Justify your answer.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                 Number of Ballots 100 80 110 105 55

                                 Candidate A  114  42

                                 Candidate B  222  31

                                 Candidate C  441  14

                                 Candidate D  333  23

     7. What are the Borda scores for each candidate?
     8. Which candidate is the winner by the Borda count method?

Use Pairwise Comparison Matrix for Candidates U, V, W, X, and Y to answer Questions 9 and 10.
     9. Calculate the points received by each candidate in pairwise comparison matrix.
    10. Determine the winner of the pairwise comparison election represented by matrix. If there is a winner,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            11 · Chapter Summary 1231

          determine whether the winner is a Condorcet candidate and explain your reasoning. If there is no winner,
          indicate this.

11. The ladies of The Big Bang Theory decide to hold their own approval voting election to determine the best option
      in Rock, Paper, Scissors, Lizard, Spock. Use the summary of their approval ballots in the table below to determine
      the number of votes for each candidate. Determine the winner, or state that there is none.

                                                           VOTERS Penny Bernadette Amy

Rock      Yes                                                                  No      No

Paper     Yes                                                                  Yes     No

Scissors Yes                                                                   Yes     Yes

Lizard       No                                                                No      No

Spock     Yes                                                                  No      Yes

For the following exercises, use the table below.                         40%  35%     25%
                                                      Percentage of Vote

Candidate A                                                               1         3  2

Candidate B                                                               2         1  3

Candidate C                                                               3         2  1

    12. Which candidate is the winner by the ranked-choice method?
    13. Suppose that you used the approval method and each voter approved their top two choices. Which candidate is

          the winner by the approval method?
    14. Which candidate is the winner by the Borda count method?

Fairness in Voting Methods
15. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 1245, B 1360, and C 787. Candidate A

      received 55% of the first place rankings. Identify which fairness criteria, if any, are violated by characteristics of the
      described voter profile in this Borda count election. Explain your reasoning.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                        Number of Ballots 8 10 12 4

Option A                                                                  13 21

Option B                                                                  31 44

Option C                                                                  42 12

Option D                                                                  24 33

16. Determine Borda score for each candidate, and the winner of the election using the Borda count method.
17. Is there a majority candidate? If so, which candidate?
18. Does the Borda method election violate the majority criterion? Justify your answer.
19. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 15, B 11, C 12, and D 16. The

      pairwise match up points for the same voter profiles would have been A 2, B 0, C 1, and D 3. Identify which
1232 11 · Chapter Summary

          fairness criteria, if any, are violated by characteristics of the described voter profile in this Borda election.
          Explain your reasoning.
    20. Determine the winner of the election using the ranked-choice method.
    21. If the four voters in the last column rank C ahead of A, which candidate wins by the ranked-choice method?
    22. Does this ranked-choice election violate the monotonicity criterion? Explain your reasoning.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                        Number of Ballots 15 12 9 3

                                                 Option A        1 3 32

                                                 Option B        2 2 11

                                                 Option C        3 1 23

    23. Determine the winner of the election by the Borda method.
    24. Does this Borda method election violate the IIA? Why or why not?
    25. Which of the ranked voting methods in this chapter, if any, meets the majority criterion, the head-to-head

          criterion, the monotonicity criterion, and the irrelevant alternatives criterion?

Standard Divisors, Standard Quotas, and the Apportionment Problem
26. Identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for the apportionment) in the given scenario: The

      reading coach at an elementary school has 52 prizes to distribute to their students as a reward for time spent
      reading.

27. Use the given information to find the standard divisor to the nearest hundredth. Include the units. The total
      population is 2,235 automobiles, and the number of seats is 14 warehouses.

28. Use the given information to find the standard quota. Include the units. The state population is eight residents in a
      unit, and the standard divisor is 1.75 residents per parking space.

Apportionment Methods
29. Which of the four apportionment methods discussed in this section does not use a modified divisor?

30. Determine the Hamilton apportionment for Scenario X in the table below.

                                             State A State B State C State D State E State F Total Seats

Scenario X 17.63 26.62 10.81 16.01 13.69 15.24                                     100

31. Does the apportionment resulting from Method X in the table below satisfy the quota rule? Why or why not?
                                                                          State A State B State C State D State E

                                 Standard Quota            1.67  3.33  5.00  6.67  8.33

Apportionment Method X                                     2     2     5     7     9

For the following exercises, use the table below and the following information: In Wakanda, the domain of the Black
Panther, King T'Challa, has six fortress cities. In Wakandan, the word "birnin" means "fortress city." King T'Challa has
found 111 Vibranium artifacts that must be distributed among the fortress cities of Wakanda. He has decided to
apportion the artifacts based on the number of residents of each birnin.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11 · Chapter Summary 1233

 Fortress   Birnin       Birnin     Birnin    Birnin         Birnin      Birnin    Total
   Cities  Djata (D)  T'Chaka (T)  Zana (Z)  S'Yan (S)  Bashenga (B)  Azzaria (A)

Residents   26,000       57,000     27,000    18,000         64,000   45,000       237,000

Standard     12.18        26.70      12.65      8.43          29.98   21.08        111
  Quota

    32. Does the Jefferson method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    33. Find the modified upper quota for each state using a modified divisor of 2,250. Is the sum of the modified

          quotas too high, too low, or equal to the house size?
    34. Use the Adams method to apportion the artifacts. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If so,

          indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    35. Does the Adams method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    36. Use the Webster method to apportion the artifacts. Determine whether it is necessary to modify the divisor. If

          so, indicate the value of the modified divisor.
    37. Does the Webster method result in an apportionment that satisfies or violates the quota rule in this scenario?
    38. Which of the four methods of apportionment from this section are the residents of Birnin S'Yan likely to prefer?

          Justify your answer.
    39. Does the change from a standard divisor to a modified divisor tend to change the number of seats for larger or

          smaller states more?
    40. Which of the four apportionment methods--Jefferson, Adams, Hamilton, or Webster--satisfies the quota rule?

Fairness in Apportionment Methods
41. A city purchased five new firetrucks and apportioned them among the existing fire stations. Although your

      neighborhood fire station has the same proportion of the city's firetrucks as before the new ones were purchased,
      it now has one fewer. Is this scenario an example of a quota rule violation, the Alabama paradox, the population
      paradox, the new-states paradox, or none of these?

42. When the number of seats changed from 25 to 26, the standard quotas changed from A 2.21, B 5.25, C 11.27, and
      D 6.27 to A 2.30, B 5.46, C 11.72, and D 6.52.
       a. How did the increase in seats impact the apportionment?

       b. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

43. The school resources officers in a county were reapportioned based on the most recent census. The number of
      students at Chapel Run Elementary went up while the number of students at Panther Trail Elementary went down,
      but Chapel Run now has 1 fewer resources officers while Panther Trail has one more than it did previously. Is this
      scenario an example of a quota rule violation, the Alabama paradox, the population paradox, the new-states
      paradox, or none of these?

For the following exercises, the house size is 24 seats. When the population of A increases by 28 percent, B increases by
26 percent, and C increases by 15 percent, the standard quotas change from A 3.38, B 6.32, and C 14.30 to A 3.63, B
6.67, and C 13.71.

    44. How did the change in populations impact the apportionment?
    45. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

46. When the city of Cocoa annexed an adjacent unincorporated community, the number of seats on the city council
      was increased to maintain the standard ratio of citizens to seats, but one existing community of Cocoa still lost a
      seat on the city council to another existing community of Cocoa when the new community was added. Is this
      scenario an example of a quota rule violation, the Alabama paradox, the population paradox, the new-states
      paradox, or none of these?

For the following exercises, the house size was 27. There were three states with standard quotas of A 6.39, B 11.40, and
C 9.21. A fourth state was annexed, and the house size was increased to 35. The new standard quotas are A 6.38, B
11.37, C 9.19, and D 8.06.

    47. How did the additional state impact the apportionment?
    48. Is this apportionment an example of a paradox? Justify your answer.

For the following exercises, suppose 11 seats are apportioned to States A, B, and C with populations of 50, 129, and 181
1234 11 · Chapter Summary

people, respectively. Then the populations of States A, B, and C change to 57, 151, and 208, respectively.
    49. Demonstrate that the population paradox occurs when the Hamilton method is used.
    50. Demonstrate that the population paradox does not occur when the Jefferson method is used. Justify your
          answer.
    51. Demonstrate that the population paradox does not occur when the Adams method is used. Justify your answer.
    52. Demonstrate that the population paradox does not occur when the Webster method is used. Justify your
          answer.

Chapter Test

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                       Number of Ballots 12 17 15 13

                                 Option A  1243

                                 Option B  3132

                                 Option C  4314

                                 Option D  2421

    1. Determine the winner of the election by plurality.
    2. Determine the Borda scores for each candidate to determine the winner by Borda count method.
    3. Create and analyze a pairwise comparison matrix based on the preference summary to determine the winner of

         the election by pairwise comparison.

4. From the table below use ranked-choice voting to determine the winner of the election.

                                                  Number of Ballots 28 5 30 5 16 16

                                 Option L  32112 3

                                 Option R  11323 2

                                 Option E  23231 1

For the following exercises, identify which fairness criteria, if any, are violated by characteristics of the described voter
profile. Explain your reasoning

     5. In a Borda count election, the candidates have the following Borda scores: A 1345, B 1260, C 685. Candidate B
          received 51% of the first-place rankings.

     6. In a plurality election, the candidates have the following percentages of first place votes: A 25, B 21, C 30, D 24.
          The pairwise matchup points for the same voter profiles would have been A 3, B 0, C 2, D 2.

For the following exercises, use the table below.

                                                       Number of Ballots 13 14 11 12

                                 Option A  2133

                                 Option B  3241

                                 Option C  4412

                                 Option D  1334

7. Determine the winner by ranked-choice voting if two of the voters in the second column up-rank the original

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           11 · Chapter Summary 1235

          winner. Refer to Question 4. Which fairness criterion, if any, is violated?
     8. Determine the winner by ranked-choice voting if candidate R is removed from the election. Refer to Question 4.

          Which fairness criterion, if any, is violated?

For the following exercises, use this information: The incorporated town of Orange Grove consists of two subdivisions:
The Oaks with 1,254 residents, and The Villages with 10,746 residents. A council with 100 members supervises the
municipality's operations with representation proportionate to the number of residents.

     9. Identify the states, the seats, and the state population (the basis for apportionment) in the given scenario.
    10. Determine the standard divisor for the apportionment
    11. Determine each state's standard quota rounded to two decimal places.

For the following exercises, use this information: Air Force administration wanted to distribute 27 aircraft across 6
bases based on the number of qualified pilots stationed at those bases. The standard quota is 2.2963. The standard
quotas for each base are listed in the table below.

                   Air Force Base (A) Alpha (B) Bravo (C) Charlie (D) Delta (E) Echo (F) Foxtrot

Pilots          13           12    5        16      7            9

Standard Quota  5.66         5.23  2.18  6.97   3.05             3.92

12. Determine the states' lower quotas and the states' upper quotas.
13. Use Adams's method to apportion the aircraft.
14. Use Jefferson's method to apportion the aircraft.
15. The apportionment of 616 schools to 5 Hawaiian counties by various methods is displayed in the table below.

                County       Hawaii Honolulu Kalawao Kauai Maui

                Lower Quota  87    424   0      31     72

                Upper Quota  88    425   1      32     73

                Jefferson    87    425   1      31     72

                Adams        88    422   1      32     73

                Webster      87    424   1      31     73

          Apportionment by which methods, if any, fail to satisfy the quota rule? Explain your reasoning.

For the following exercises, use this information: The incorporated town of Orange Grove consists of two subdivisions:
The Oaks with 1,254 residents, and The Villages with 10,746 residents. A council with 100 members supervises the
municipality's operations. The Hamilton method was used to apportion the council seats. The Oaks has 10 seats on the
council, while The Villages has 90 seats. The council votes to annex an unincorporated subdivision called The Lakes with
a population of 630. They plan to increase the size of the council to maintain the ratio of seats to residents such that
the new council will have 100 seats plus the number of seats given to The Lakes.

    16. What is the standard divisor from the original apportionment?
    17. What is the new house size?
    18. Use the Hamilton method to reapportion the seats.
    19. Is the reapportionment an example of the new-states paradox? If so, how?

For the following exercises, use this information: determine whether the reapportionment violates the Alabama
paradox, the population paradox, or neither. Justify your answer.

    20. States A, B, C, and D received 21, 25, 26, and 28 seats respectively. When the population remains the same, but
          house size is increased, the reapportionment is A 20, B 26, C 27, and D 29.

    21. States A, B, C, and D received 21, 25, 26, and 28 seats respectively. When the house size remains the same, the
          population of state A increased, the population of state B decreased, and the populations of states C and D
1236 11 · Chapter Summary

          remained the same, the reapportionment is A 20, B 26, C 26, and D 28.

Access for free at openstax.org
                  12 · Introduction 1237

12  GRAPH THEORY

Figure 12.1 Networks connect cities around the globe. (credit: "Globalization" by faith.e.murphy/Flickr, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  12.1 Graph Basics
  12.2 Graph Structures
  12.3 Comparing Graphs
  12.4 Navigating Graphs
  12.5 Euler Circuits
  12.6 Euler Trails
  12.7 Hamilton Cycles
  12.8 Hamilton Paths
  12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem
  12.10 Trees

      Introduction

In this chapter, you will learn the fundamental skills needed to work with graphs used in an area of mathematics known
as graph theory. You can think of these graphs as a kind of map. Maps have served many purposes over the course of
history. You probably use GPS maps to navigate to various destinations. A scientist from ancient Greece named Ptolemy
wanted an accurate map of the world to make more accurate astrological predications. In recent years, neurobiologists
have mapped the cerebral cortex to better understand the human brain. Social network analysts map online interactions
to assist advertisers in reaching target audiences. Like other maps, the graphs you will study in this chapter can serve
many purposes, but they do not have a lot of the details you might expect in a map such as size, shape, and distance
between objects. All of that is stripped away so that we can focus on one element of maps, the connections between
objects.
1238 12 · Graph Theory

    12.1 Graph Basics

        Figure 12.2 Cell phone networks connect individuals. (credit: "Business people using their phones" by Rawpixel
        Ltd./Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Identify parts of a graph.
         2. Model applications of graph basics.
        When you hear the word, graph, what comes to mind? You might think of the -coordinate system you learned about
        earlier in this course, or you might think of the line graphs and bar charts that are used to display data in news reports.
        The graphs we discuss in this chapter are probably very different from what you think of as a graph. They look like a
        bunch of dots connected by short line segments. The dots represent a group of objects and the line segments represent
        the connections, or relationships, between them. The objects might be bus stops, computers, Snapchat accounts, family
        members, or any other objects that have direct connections to each other. The connections can be physical or virtual,
        formal or casual, scientific or social. Regardless of the kind of connections, the purpose of the graph is to help us
        visualize the structure of the entire network to better understand the interactions of the objects within it.

     Parts of a Graph

        In a graph, the objects are represented with dots and their connections are represented with lines like those in Figure
        12.3. Figure 12.3 displays a simple graph labeled G and a multigraph labeled H. The dots are called vertices; an
        individual dot is a vertex, which is one object of a set of objects, some of which may be connected. We often label
        vertices with letters. For example, Graph G has vertices a, b, c, and d, and Multigraph H has vertices, e, f, g, and h. Each
        line segment or connection joining two vertices is referred to as an edge. H is considered a multigraph because it has a
        double edge between f and h, and a double edge between h and g. Another reason H is called a multigraph is that it has
        a loop connecting vertex e to itself; a loop is an edge that joins a vertex to itself. Loops and double edges are not allowed
        in a simple graph.
        To sum up, a simple graph is a collection of vertices and any edges that may connect them, such that every edge
        connects two vertices with no loops and no two vertices are joined by more than one edge. A multigraph is a graph in
        which there may be loops or pairs of vertices that are joined by more than one edge. In this chapter, most of our work
        will be with simple graphs, which we will call graphs for convenience.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   12.1 · Graph Basics 1239

                                                          Figure 12.3 A Graph and a Multigraph
It is not necessary for the edges in a graph to be straight. In fact, you can draw an edge any way you want. In graph
theory, the focus is on which vertices are connected, not how the connections are drawn (see Figure 12.4). In a graph,
each edge can be named by the two letters of the associated vertices. The four edges in Graph X in Figure 12.4 are ab,
ac, ad, and ae. The order of the letters is not important when you name the edge of a graph. For example, ab refers to
the same edge as ba.

      A graph may have vertices that are not joined to other vertices by edges, such as vertex f in Graph X in Figure 12.4,
      but any edge must have a vertex at each end.

                                             Figure 12.4 Different Representations of the Same Graph
  EXAMPLE 12.1
Identifying Edges and Vertices
Name all the vertices and edges of graph F in Figure 12.5.

                                                                      Figure 12.5 Graph F
     Solution
The vertices are v, w, x, y, and z. The edges are vw, vx, wx, wz, xy, and xz.
      When listing the vertices and edges in a graph, work in alphabetical order to avoid accidentally listing the same item
1240 12 · Graph Theory

              twice. When you are finished, count the number of vertices or edges you listed and compare that to the number of
              vertices or edges on the graph to ensure you didn't miss any.

                 YOUR TURN 12.1
          1. Name all the vertices and edges of Graph A.

                                                                                        Graph A

        Since the purpose of a graph is to represent the connections between objects, it is very important to know if two vertices
        share a common edge. The two vertices at either end of a given edge are referred to as neighboring, or adjacent. For
        example, in Figure 12.5, vertices x and w are adjacent, but vertices y and w are not.

          EXAMPLE 12.2
        Identifying Vertices That Are Not Adjacent
        Name all the pairs of vertices of graph F in Figure 12.5 that are not adjacent.

             Solution
        The pairs of vertices that are not adjacent in graph F are v and y, v and z, w and y, and y and z.

                 YOUR TURN 12.2
          1. Name all the pairs of vertices of graph A in Figure 12.6 that are not adjacent.

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Sergey Brin and Laurence Page
          The "Google boys," Sergey Brin and Laurence Page, transformed the World Wide Web in 1998 when they used the
          mathematics of graph theory to create an algorithm called Page Rank, which is known as the Google Search Engine
          today. The two computer scientists identified webpages as vertices and hyperlinks on those pages as edges because
          hyperlinks connect one website to the next. The number of edges influences the ranking of a website on the Google
          Search Engine because the websites with more links to "credible sources" are ranked higher. ("Page Rank: The Graph
          Theory-based Backbone of Google," (https://openstax.org/r/The_Graph_Theory) September 20, 2011, Cornell
          University, Networks Blog.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                         12.1 · Graph Basics 1241

Analyzing Geographical Maps with Graphs

                                  Figure 12.6 Commercial airlines' route systems create a global network.
When graphs are used to model and analyze real-world applications, the number of edges that meet at a particular
vertex is important. For example, a graph may represent the direct flight connections for a particular airport as in Figure
12.7. Representing the connections with a graph rather than a map shifts the focus away from the relative positions and
toward which airports are connected. In Figure 12.7, the vertices are the airports, and the edges are the direct flight
paths. The number of flight connections between a particular airport and other South Florida airports is the number of
edges meeting at a particular vertex. For example, Key West has direct flights to three of the five airports on the graph.
In graph theory terms, we would say that vertex FYW has degree 3. The degree of a vertex is the number of edges that
connect to that vertex.

                                             Figure 12.7 Direct Flights between South Florida Airports
  EXAMPLE 12.3
Determining the Degree of a Vertex
Determine the degree of each vertex of Graph J in Figure 12.7. If graph J represents direct flights between a set of
airports, do any of the airports have direct flights to two or more of the other cities on the graph?
1242 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                              Figure 12.8 Graph J
             Solution
        For each vertex, count the number of edges that meet at that vertex. This value is the degree of the vertex. In Figure
        12.9, the dashed edges indicate the edges that meet at the marked vertex.

                                                               Figure 12.9 Degrees of Vertices of Graph J
        Vertex a has degree 3, vertex b has degree 1, vertices c and d each have degree 2, and vertex e has degree 0. Airports a,
        c, and d have direct flights to two or more of the other airports.

                 YOUR TURN 12.3
          1. Name a vertex of Graph A in Figure 12.6 with degree 4.
        Graphs are also used to analyze regional boundaries. The states of Utah, Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico all meet at
        a single point known as the "Four Corners," which is shown in the map in Figure 12.10.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   12.1 · Graph Basics 1243

                                                           Figure 12.10 Map of the Four Corners
In Figure 12.11, each vertex represents one of these states, and each edge represents a shared border. States like Utah
and New Mexico that meet at only a single point are not considered to have a shared border. By representing this map as
a graph, where the connections are shared borders, we shift our perspective from physical attributes such as shape, size
and distance, toward the existence of the relationship of having a shared boundary.

                                     Figure 12.11 Graph of the Shared Boundaries of Four Corners States
  EXAMPLE 12.4
Graphing the Midwestern States
A map of the Midwest is given in Figure 12.12. Create a graph of the region in which each vertex represents a state and
each edge represents a shared border.
1244 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                  Figure 12.12 Map of Midwestern States
             Solution
        Step 1: For each state, draw and label a vertex as in Figure 12.13.

                                                       Figure 12.13 Vertex Assigned to Each Midwestern State
        Step 2: Draw edges between any two states that share a common land border as in Figure 12.14.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   12.1 · Graph Basics 1245

                          Figure 12.14 Edge Assigned to Each Pair of Midwestern States with Common Border
The graph is given in Figure 12.15.

                      Figure 12.15 Final Graph Representing Common Boundaries between Midwestern States
        YOUR TURN 12.4
  1. The figure shows a map of the Island of Oahu in the State of Hawaii divided into regions. Draw a graph in which
      each vertex represents one of the regions and each edge represents a shared land border.
1246 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                                      Map of Oahu
               VIDEO
               Graph Theory: Create a Graph to Represent Common Boundaries on a Map (https://openstax.org/r/Graph_Theory)

     Graphs of Social Interactions

        Geographical maps are just one of many real-world scenarios which graphs can depict. Any scenario in which objects are
        connected to each other can be represented with a graph, and the connections don't have to be physical. Just think
        about all the connections you have to people around the world through social media! Who is in your network of Twitter
        followers? Whose Snapchat network are you connected to?

          EXAMPLE 12.5
        Graphing Chloe's Roblox Friends
        Roblox is an online gaming platform. Chloe is interested to know how many people in her network of Roblox friends are
        also friends with each other so she polls them. Explain how a graph or multigraph might be drawn to model this
        scenario by identifying the objects that could be represented by vertices and the connections that could be represented
        by edges. Indicate whether a graph or a multigraph would be a better model.

             Solution
        The objects that are represented with vertices are Roblox friends. A Roblox friendship between two friends will be
        represented as an edge between a pair of vertices. There will be no double edges because it is not possible for two
        friends to be linked twice in Roblox; they are either friends or they are not. Also, a player cannot be a friend to themself,
        so there is no need for a loop. Since there are no double edges or loops, this is best represented as a graph.

                 YOUR TURN 12.5
          1. In a particular poker tournament, five groups of five players will play at a table until one player wins, then the

               five winning players will play each other at a table in a final round. Explain how a graph or multigraph might be

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   12.1 · Graph Basics 1247

      drawn to model this scenario by identifying the objects that could be represented by vertices and the
      connections that could be represented by edges. Indicate whether a graph or a multigraph would be a better
      model.

        WHO KNEW?

  Using Graph Theory to Reduce Internet Fraud
  Could graphs be used to reduce Internet fraud? At least one researcher thinks so. Graph theory is used every day to
  analyze our behavior, particularly on social network sites. Alex Buetel, a computer scientist from Carnegie Mellon
  University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, published a research paper in 2016 that discussed the possibilities of
  distinguishing the normal interactions from those that might be fraudulent using graph theory. Buetel wrote, "To
  more effectively model and detect abnormal behavior, we model how fraudsters work, catching previously undetected
  fraud on Facebook, Twitter, and Tencent Weibo and improving classification accuracy by up to 68%." In the same
  paper, the researcher discusses how similar techniques can be used to model many other applications and even,
  "predict why you like a particular movie." (Alex Beutel, "User Behavior Modeling with Large-Scale Graph Analysis,"
  http://reports-archive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/2016/CMU-CS-16-105.pdf, May 2016, CMU-CS-16-105, Computer Science
  Department, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA)

Check Your Understanding

 1. A simple graph has no loops.
       a. True
       b. False

 2. It is not possible to have a vertex of degree 0.
       a. True
       b. False

 3. A graph with three vertices has at most three edges.
       a. True
       b. False

 4. A multigraph with three vertices has at most three edges.
       a. True
       b. False

 5. If vertex a is adjacent to vertex b, and vertex b is adjacent to vertex c, then vertex a must be adjacent to vertex c.
       a. True
       b. False

        SECTION 12.1 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the figure showing Diagrams A, B, C, and D.

     1. Identify any multigraphs.
     2. Identify any graphs.
     3. Identify any multigraph that has a loop.
     4. Identify any multigraph that has a double edge.
1248 12 · Graph Theory

        For the following exercises, use the figure showing Graphs S, T, U, V, and W.

              5. Determine the number of vertices in Graph T.
              6. Determine the number of vertices in Graph U.
              7. Identify the graph with the most vertices.
              8. Identify the graphs with four vertices.
              9. Identify the graph with the most edges.
            10. Identify the graph with the fewest edges.
            11. Name the vertices in Graph S.
            12. Name the vertices in Graph V.
            13. Determine the number of edges in Graph U.
            14. Determine the number of edges in Graph T.
            15. Name the edges in Graph V.
            16. Name the edges in Graph W.
            17. Identify any pairs of vertices in Graph T that are not adjacent.
            18. Identify any vertices in Graph V that are not adjacent.
            19. Find the degree of vertex a in graph U.
            20. Find the degree of vertex a in graph S.
            21. Which two graphs have a vertex of degree 4?
        For the following exercises, use the figure showing Graphs A, B, C, and D.

            22. Identify the graph with 1 vertex of degree 6 and 6 vertices of degree 1.
            23. Identify the graph with 1 vertex of degree 6 and 6 vertices of degree 2.
            24. Identify the graph with exactly 1 vertex of degree 0.
            25. Identify the graph with exactly 2 vertices of degree 1.
            26. Name all the pairs of adjacent vertices in Graph B.
            27. Name all the pairs of adjacent vertices in Graph A.
            28. Identify the graph in which the sum of the degrees of the vertices is 14.
        For each of the following exercises, a scenario is given. Explain how a graph or multigraph might be drawn to model
        the scenario by identifying the objects that could be represented by vertices and the connections that could be
        represented by edges. Indicate whether a graph or a multigraph would be a better model.
            29. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is tracking the spread of a virus. The CDC is attempting to

                   determine where the virus began by identifying where each known carrier contracted the virus.
            30. The faculty members in a college mathematics department have a "telephone tree" that assigns each faculty

                   member two other faculty members to call with information in the event of an emergency. The chairperson of
                   the department contacts two faculty members. Each of these faculty members contacts two faculty members,
                   and so on, until all faculty members have been notified.
            31. There is a theory that any two people on earth are no more than six social connections apart, which is known as
                   "six degrees of separation" or the "six handshake rule." It means that there is a chain of a "friend of a friend"
                   that connects any two people through at most six steps.
            32. The U.S. Postal Service has a network of post offices that move mail around the United States. Mail trucks from
                   one post office follow routes deliver mail to other locations. These mail trucks also pick up mail to bring back to
                   their home post office.
        In the following exercises , draw a graph to represent the given scenario.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             12.2 · Graph Structures 1249

    33. Draw a graph to model the scenario described in Your Turn 12.5.
    34. In the game of chess, a king can move one space in any direction, vertically, horizontally, or diagonally, as

          indicated in the figure. Draw a graph to represent the possible movements of a king on a three-by-three section
          of a chess board such that each edge represents one move, and each vertex represents a position where the
          king might be at the beginning or end of a turn. Assume that the king can have unlimited turns.

    35. Chloe is interested to know how many in her network of Roblox friends are also friends with each other, so she
          polls them. The following is a list of each of Chloe's friends and their common friends. Create a graph of the
          Roblox friends in Chloe's network, including Chloe.

      · Aria is friends with no one else in Chloe's network.
      · Benicio is friends with Dakshayani, Eun-ah, and Fukashi.
      · Dakshayani is friends with Benicio.
      · Eun-ah is friends with Benicio and Fukashi.
      · Fukashi is friends with Benicio and Eun-ah.

12.2 Graph Structures

      Figure 12.16 Neuroimaging shows brain activity. (credit: "MRI Scan" by NIH Image Gallery/Flickr, Public Domain)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe and interpret relationships in graphs.
 2. Model relationships with graphs.
Graph theory is used in neuroscience to study how different parts of the brain connect. Neurobiologists use functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure levels of blood in different parts of the brain, called nodes. When nodes
are active at the same time, it suggests there is a functional connection between them so they form a network. This
network can be represented as a graph where the vertices are the nodes and the functional connections are the edges
between them. (Mikey Taylor, "Graph Theory & Machine Learning in Neuroscience," Medium.com, June 24, 2020.
1250 12 · Graph Theory

     Importance of the Degrees of Vertices

        One reason scientists study these networks is to determine how successful the communication within a network
        continues to be when it experiences failures in nodes and connections. Graphs can be used to study the resilience of
        these networks. (Mikey Taylor, "Graph Theory & Machine Learning in Neuroscience," Medium.com, June 24, 2020)

          EXAMPLE 12.6
        Using Graphs to Understand Relationships
        The graphs in Figure 12.17 represent neural networks, where the vertices are the nodes, and the edges represent
        functional connections between them. Which graph do you think would represent a network with the highest resistance
        to failure? Which graph would probably be the most vulnerable to failure? How might this relate to the degrees of the
        vertices?

                                                                 Figure 12.17 Models of Neural Networks
             Solution
        Graph B represents a network that would have the highest resistance to failure because there are more edges
        connecting the nodes indicating there are more connections between nodes than on either of the other graphs. This
        would make the network more resistant to failure because there are more options to work around a faulty edge or node.
        Graph A would probably be the most susceptible to failure because the network depends on a few particular edges and
        vertices for connections. There are more vertices of higher degree in Graph B than in Graph A because there are more
        edges connecting the nodes.

                YOUR TURN 12.6
          Sociologists use graphs to study connections between people and to identify characteristics that make communities
          more resilient, more likely to stay connected over time. In the graphs shown, the edges represent social connections
          and the vertices are individuals.

                                                                            Models of Communities
              1. Which graph do you think represents the most resilient community? What is the sum of the degrees of all the

                   vertices in this graph?
              2. Which graph do you think represents the community that is least likely to stay connected over time? What is

                   the sum of the degrees of all the vertices in this graph?
              3. Is the sum of the degrees higher or lower in a more resilient community?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             12.2 · Graph Structures 1251

Relating the Number of Edges to the Degrees of Vertices

In the applications of graph theory to neuroscience and sociology in Example 12.6 and YOUR TURN 12.6, there was a
correlation between the degrees of vertices and the resilience of a network. Researchers in many fields have also
observed a direct relationship between the number of edges in a graph and the degrees of the vertices. To begin to
understand this relationship, consider a graph with five vertices and zero edges as in Figure 12.18.

                                                Figure 12.18 Graph with Five Vertices and zero Edges
Instead of being marked with a name, each vertex in Figure 12.18 is marked with its degree. In this case, all of the
degrees are 0 so the sum of the degrees is also zero. Suppose that we add an edge between any two existing vertices
and indicate the degrees of the vertices. This gives us a graph with five vertices and one edge like the graph in Figure
12.19.

                                                Figure 12.19 Graph with Five Vertices and One Edge
Note that the degrees of two vertices increased, each by 1. So, the sum of the degrees is now 2. Suppose that we
continue in this way, adding one edge at a time and making note of the number of edges and the sum of the degrees of
the vertices as in Figure 12.20.

                                          Figure 12.20 Comparing Number of Edges to Sum of Degrees
Figure 12.20 demonstrates a characteristic that is true of all graphs of any shape or size. When the number of edges is
increased by one, the sum of the degrees increases by two. This happens because each edge has two ends and each end
increases the degree of one vertex by one unit. As a result, the sum of the degrees of the vertices on any graph is always
twice the number of edges. This relationship is known as the Sum of Degrees Theorem.

  FORMULA
  For the Sum of Degrees Theorem,

  or

  EXAMPLE 12.7
Finding the Sum of Degrees
Suppose that a graph has five edges.
 1. Find the sum of the degrees of the vertices.
 2. Draw two different graphs that demonstrate this conclusion.
1252 12 · Graph Theory

             Solution
         1. The sum of the degrees is twice the number of edges: 2 × 5=10. The sum of the degrees is 10.
         2. See Figure 12.21.

                                                                            Figure 12.21

        YOUR TURN 12.7

  Suppose that the sum of the degrees of a graph is six.
      1. Find the number of edges.
      2. Draw two graphs that demonstrate your conclusion.

Completeness

Suppose that there were five strangers in a room, A, B, C, D, and E, and each one would be introduced to each of the
others. How many introductions are necessary? One way to begin to answer this question is to draw a graph with each
vertex representing an individual in the room and each edge representing an introduction as in Figure 12.22.

                                 Figure 12.22 Model of Introductions between Five Strangers

Let's approach the problem by thinking about how many new people Person A would meet, then Person B, and so on,

making sure not to repeat any introductions. The first graph in Figure 12.22 shows Person A meeting Persons B, C, D,

and E, for a total of 4 introductions. The next graph shows that Person B still has to meet Persons C, D, and E, for a total

of 3 more introductions. The next graph shows that Person C still has to meet Persons D and E, which is 2 more

introductions. The next graph shows that Person D only remains to meet Person E, which is 1 more introduction. The

final graph has                  edges representing 10 introductions. The last graph is an example of a complete

graph because each pair of vertices is joined by an edge. Another way of saying this is that the graph is complete

because each vertex is adjacent to every other vertex.Figure 12.23 shows complete graphs with three, four, five, and six

vertices.

                                 Figure 12.23 Complete Graphs with Up to Six Vertices

Suppose we want to know the number of introductions necessary in a room with six people. This would be represented

by a complete graph with six vertices, and the total number of introductions would be                     , the

number of edges in the graph. In fact, you can always find the number of introductions in a room with people by

adding all the whole numbers from 1 to  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 12.2 · Graph Structures 1253

FORMULA

The number of edges in a complete graph with vertices is the sum of the whole numbers from 1 to  ,

                   .

Suppose that we want to determine how many introductions are necessary in a room with 500 strangers. In other words,
suppose that we want to determine the number of edges in a complete graph with 500 vertices. Adding up all the
numbers from 1 to 499 could take a long time! In the next example, we use the Sum of Degrees Theorem to make the
problem more manageable.

EXAMPLE 12.8

Using the Sum of Degrees Theorem
Use the Sum of Degrees Theorem to determine the number of introductions required in a room with

1. 6 strangers.
2. 10 strangers.
3. strangers.

Solution

1. Since there are 6 strangers, there are 6 vertices. Since each individual must meet 5 other individuals, there are 5

edges meeting at each vertex which means each vertex has degree 5. Since there are 6 vertices of degree 5, the sum

of degrees is         . By the Sum of Degrees Theorem, the number of edges is half the sum of the degrees, which

is        . So, the total number of introductions is 15.

2. Since there are 10 strangers, there are 10 vertices. Since each individual must meet 9 other individuals, there are 9

edges meeting at each vertex which means each vertex has degree 9. Since there are 10 vertices of degree 9, the

sum of degrees is            . By the Sum of Degrees Theorem, the number of edges is half the sum of the degrees,

which is           . So, the total number of introductions is 45.

3. Since there are strangers, there are vertices. Since each individual must meet  other individuals, there are

    edges meeting at each vertex which means each vertex has degree   . Since there are vertices of degree

    , the sum of degrees is  . By the Sum of Degrees Theorem, the number of edges is half the sum of the

degrees, which is     . So, the total number of introductions is   .

      YOUR TURN 12.8

1. Determine the number of introductions necessary in a room with 500 strangers using the Sum of Degrees
    Theorem.

Now we have a shorter way to calculate the number of introductions in a room with strangers, and the number of
edges on a complete graph with vertices. Let's update our formula.

  FORMULA

The number of edges in a complete graph with vertices is                           .

Subgraphs

Sometimes a graph is a part of a larger graph. For example, the graph of South Florida Airports from Figure 12.7 is part
of a larger graph that includes Orlando International Airport in Central Florida, which is shown in Figure 12.24
1254 12 · Graph Theory

                                                           Figure 12.24 Orlando and South Florida Airports
        The graph in Figure 12.24 includes an additional vertex, MCO, and additional edges shown with dashed lines. The graph
        of direct flights between South Florida airports from Figure 12.7 is called a subgraph of the graph that also includes
        direct flights between Orlando and the same South Florida airports in Figure 12.24. In general terms, if Graph B consists
        entirely of a set of edges and vertices from a larger Graph A, then B is called a subgraph of A.

          EXAMPLE 12.9
        Identifying a Subgraph
        In Figure 12.25, Graph G is given, along with four diagrams. Determine whether each diagram is or is not a subgraph of
        Graph G and explain why.

                                                           Figure 12.25 Graph G and Potential Subgraphs
             Solution
          · Diagram J is not a subgraph of Graph G because edge ec is not in Graph G.
          · Diagram K is a subgraph of Graph G because all of its vertices and edges were part of Graph G.
          · Diagram L is not a graph at all, because there is a line extending from vertex a that does not connect a to another
              vertex. So, Diagram L cannot be a subgraph.
          · Diagram M is not a subgraph of Graph G because it contains a vertex f, which is not part of G.

                YOUR TURN 12.9
          1. Draw a subgraph of Graph F from Figure 12.3 that has exactly four vertices and five edges.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                        12.2 · Graph Structures 1255

Identifying and Naming Cycles

 Figure 12.26 The water cycle begins and ends with water. (credit: "Diagram of the water cycle" by NASA, Public Domain)

When you think of a cycle in everyday life, you probably think of something that begins and ends the same way. For
example, the water cycle (Figure 12.26) begins with water in a lake or ocean, which evaporates into water vapor,
condenses into clouds, and then returns to earth as rain or some other form of precipitation that settles into lakes or
oceans. A cycle in graph theory is similar in that it begins and ends in the same way: It is a series of connected edges
that begin and end at the same vertex but otherwise never repeat any vertices.

In a cycle, there are always the same number of vertices as edges, and all vertices must be of degree 2. Cycles are often
referred to by the number of vertices. For example, a cycle with 5 vertices can be called a 5-cycle. Cycles can also be
named after polygons based on the number of edges. For example a 5-cycle is also called a pentagon. Table 12.1 lists
these names for cycles of size 3 through size 10.

Cycle Category Number of Edges Example

triangle                       3

quadrilateral                  4

pentagon                       5

hexagon                        6

heptagon                       7

octagon                        8

Table 12.1 Categories of Cycles
1256 12 · Graph Theory

                                 Cycle Category Number of Edges Example

                                 nonagon  9

                                 decagon  10

                                               Table 12.1 Categories of Cycles

There are many more polygon names, including a megagon that has a million edges and a googolgon that has
edges, but usually we just say -gon when the number is past 10. For example, a cycle with 11 edges could be called an
11-gon.

Notice that the 10-cycle, or decagon, appears to cross over itself in Table 12.1. Remember, graphs can be drawn
differently but represent the same connections. In Figure 12.27, the same decagon is transformed into a graph that does
not appear to overlap itself. We have done this without changing any of the connections so both diagrams represent the
same relationships, and both diagrams are considered decagons.

                                 Figure 12.27 Transformation of a Decagon

WHO KNEW?

Googol to Google

Did the name "googolgon" ring a bell for you? If so, there is a good reason for it. The creators of Google.com

renamed their search engine Google, a misspelled reference to the number "googol" alluding to the enormous

number of calculations their algorithm can tackle. A googol is a 1 followed by 100 zeroes, or  . (William L. Hosch,

"Google, American Company," https://www.britannica.com/topic/Google-Inc, Encyclopedia Britannica online)

Cyclic Subgraphs and Cliques

When cycles appear as subgraphs within a larger graph, they are called cyclic subgraphs. Cyclic subgraphs are named
by listing their vertices sequentially. The vertex where you begin is not important. Graph K in Figure 12.28 has two
triangle cycles (g, h, j) and (h, i, j), and one quadrilateral cycle (g, h, i, j).

                                                        Figure 12.28 Cycles in Graph K

The same cycle can be named in many ways, but we must keep in mind that listing two vertices consecutively
indicates an edge exists between them. For example, (g, h, i, j) can also be named (h, i, j, g) or (j, i, h, g). However,
you cannot name it (g, i, h, j,) which doesn't reflect the correct order of the vertices. We can see that the order (g, i,
h, j) is incorrect because the cycle has no edges gi or hj.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  12.2 · Graph Structures 1257

  EXAMPLE 12.10

Identifying Cyclic Subgraphs
Identify the types of cyclic subgraphs in Graph H in Figure 12.29 and name them.

                                                                     Figure 12.29 Graph H
     Solution
In order to avoid missing a cycle, begin by analyzing the vertex a, then proceed in alphabetical order. Vertex a is part of
two cycles, the quadrilateral cycle (a, b, f, g,) and the hexagonal cycle (a, b, c, d, e, f). Next look at vertex b. It is part of the
hexagonal cycle (b, c, d, e, f, g). After checking each of the remaining vertices, we see there are no other cycles.

      In order to avoid naming the same cycle twice, consider naming cycles beginning with the letter closest to the
      beginning of the alphabet and then progressing clockwise.

        YOUR TURN 12.10

  1. Which types of cycles are in Graph G in Figure 12.32? Use the vertices of the graph to give a name for one of each
      type that you find.

We have seen that sociologists use graphs to study the structures of social networks. In sociology, there is a principle
known as Triadic Closure. It says that if two individuals in a social network have a friend in common, then it is more likely
those two individuals will become friends too. Sociologists refer to this as an open triad becoming a closed triad. This
concept can be visualized as graphs in Figure 12.30. (Chakraborty, Dutta, Mondal, and Nath, "Application of Graph Theory
in Social Media, International Journal of Computer Sciences and Engineering, 6(10):722-729) In the open triad in Figure
12.30, person a and person b each has a friendship with person c. In the closed triad, person a and person a have also
developed a friendship. Notice that the graph representing the closed triad is a three-cycle, or a triangle, in graph theory
terms.

                                                Figure 12.30 Graphs of Open Triad and Closed Triad
Another topic of interest to sociologists, as well as computer scientists and scientists in many fields, is the concept of a
clique. In a social group, a clique is a subgroup who are all friends. A triad is an example of a clique with three people,
but there can be cliques of any size. In graph theory, a clique is a complete subgraph.

  EXAMPLE 12.11

Identifying Triads and Cliques
The graphs in YOUR TURN 12.6 represent social communities. The vertices are individuals and the edges are social
connections. Use the graphs to answer the questions.
 1. Which graph has the most triads? Name the triangles.
 2. Which graph has the fewest triads? Name the triangles.
 3. How might an increase in the number of triads in a graph affect the resilience of a community? Explain your

      reasoning.
1258 12 · Graph Theory

         4. Identify a clique with more than three vertices in Graph E by naming its vertices.
             Solution

         1. Graph E has the most triads. The triangles are (a, b, c), (a, e, g), (c, f, i), (e, g, h), (e, h, i), and (f, h, i).
         2. Graph D has the fewest triads. There are no triangles in the graph.
         3. More triads means vertices of greater degree, which indicates greater resilience. Specifically, if an edge is removed

              from a closed triad, there the two individuals who are no longer adjacent are still connected by way of the third
              member of the triad.
         4. The vertices a, e, c, and g form a clique with four vertices.

                YOUR TURN 12.11

          1. From Exercise 35 in Section 12.1 Exercises, Chloe is interested to know how many in her network of Roblox
               friends are also friends with each other, so she polls them. The following is a list of each of Chloe's friends and
               their common friends. Find a pentagon cycle in the graph of the Roblox friends in Chloe's network that includes
               Chloe.

           · Aria is friends with no one else in Chloe's network.
           · Benicio is friends with Dakshayani, Eun-ah, and Fukashi.
           · Dakshayani is friends with Benicio.
           · Eun-ah is friends with Benicio and Fukashi.
           · Fukashi is friends with Benicio and Eun-ah.

     Three-Cycles in Complete Graphs

        Just as complete graphs have a predictable number of edges, complete graphs have a predictable number of cyclic
        subgraphs. Let's look at the three-cycles within complete graphs with up to six vertices, which are shown in Figure 12.31.

                                               Figure 12.31 Complete Graphs with Up to Six Vertices

Let's list the names of all the triangles in each graph. Since every pair of vertices is adjacent, any three vertices on a
complete graph form a triangle. There is only one triangle in the complete graph with three vertices, (a, b, c). For the
rest of the graphs, it is important that we take an organized approach. Start with the vertex that is first alphabetically,
listing any triangles that include that vertex also in alphabetical order. Then, proceed to the next vertex in the alphabet,
and list any triangles that include that vertex, except those that are already listed. Keep going in this way as shown in
Table 12.2.

 Complete             3          4 Vertices      5 Vertices                       6 Vertices
Graph With:      Vertices

All a triangles  (a, b, c)       (a, b, c), (a,  (a, b, c), (a, b, d), (a, b, e)  (a, b, c), (a, b, d), (a, b, e), (a, b, f)
                                    b, d),             (a, c, d), (a, c, e)             (a, c, d), (a, c, e), (a, c, f)
                                   (a, c, d)                (a, d, e)                        (a, d, e), (a, d, f)
                                                                                                   (a, e, f)

Other b          None            (b, c, d)       (b, c, d), (b, c, e),            (b, c, d), (b, c, e), (b, c, f)
triangles                                             (b, d, e)                        (b, d, e), (b, d, f)
                                                                                             (b, e, f)

Table 12.2 Listing Triangles in Complete Graphs

Access for free at openstax.org
 Complete         3    4 Vertices  5 Vertices                      12.2 · Graph Structures 1259
Graph With:  Vertices                (c, d, e)
                                      None         6 Vertices
   Other c   None      None                     (c, d, e), (c, d, f)
  triangles
             None      None                          (c, e, f)
   Other d                                           (d, e, f)
  triangles
             1
     Total

Table 12.2 Listing Triangles in Complete Graphs

Look at the last row in Table 12.2. Do you see a pattern emerge for counting triangles in a complete graph? Without
drawing a complete graph with 7 vertices, we can predict that it will have

                                                                                                    triangles inside it. This pattern also appears in a
famous diagram known to Western mathematicians as "Pascal's Triangle." Figure 12.32 displays the first 11 rows of
Pascal's Triangle. Row 0 of Pascal's Triangle only has the number 1 in it. The first and last entries in each of the other
rows are also 1s. Otherwise, all the entries are formed by adding two entries from the previous row. For example, in row
6, entry 1 is 6, which was found by adding 1 and the 5 from the previous row, and entry 2 is 15, which was found by
adding the 5 and the 10 from the previous row, as shown in Table 12.2.

                                                                Figure 12.32 Pascal's Triangle
      IMPORTANT! When you count the rows and entries of Pascal's Triangle begin with row 0 and entry 0, not row 1 and
      entry 1.

       VIDEO
      The Mathematical Secrets of Pascal's Triangle by Wajdi Mohamed Ratemi (https://openstax.org/r/
      Wajdi_Mohamed_Ratemi)

If we begin to list the third entries in each row of Pascal's triangle from the top down, we see 1, 4, 10, 20, 35, and so on.
1260 12 · Graph Theory

        Notice that these values are exactly the number of triangles in a complete graph of sizes 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
        Specifically, entry 3 in row 7 is 35, the number of triangles in a complete graph of size 7. Let's practice using Pascal's
        triangle to find the number of triangles in a complete graph of a particular size.
        STEPS TO FIND THE NUMBER OF TRIANGLES IN A COMPLETE GRAPH OF SIZE n
        Step 1 Calculate the entries in row n of Pascal's Triangle using sums of pairs of entries in previous rows as needed.
        Step 2 The number of triangles is entry 3 in row n. Remember to count the entries 0, 1, 2, and 3, from left to right.

          EXAMPLE 12.12
        Using Pascal's Triangle to Find the Number of Triangles in a Complete Graph
        Use Pascal's Triangle in Figure 12.32 to find the number of triangles in a complete graph with 11 vertices.

             Solution
        Step 1: Identify the row number and calculate its entries. Since the complete graph has 11 vertices, we will need to look
        in row 11 of Pascal's Triangle. Use row 10 in Figure 12.32 to find the entries in row 11 as shown in Figure 12.33.

                                                            Figure 12.33 Rows 10 and 11 of Pascal's Triangle
        Step 2: Find entry number 3. The number of triangles is in entry 3. Remember to count the entries beginning with entry
        0 as shown in Figure 12.34.

                                                         Figure 12.34 Identifying an Entry in Pascal's Triangle
        Entry 3 in row 11 is 165. So, there are 165 triangles in a complete graph with 11 vertices.

                 YOUR TURN 12.12
          1. A sociologist is studying a community of 13 individuals in which every person has a social connection to every

               other person. How many closed triads are there in the community?

                   TECH CHECK
          Since the entries in Pascal's Triangle are useful in many applications, many resources such as online and traditional
          calculator functions have been developed to assist in calculating the values. The website dCode.xyz has a tool
          (https://openstax.org/r/has_a_tool) that automatically calculates entries in Pascal's Triangle using these steps:
          Step 1: Make sure to select Index 0.
          Step 2: Select your preference, display the triangle until a particular row (line), display only one row (line), or calculate
          the value at coordinates (which means give the value of a single entry).
          Step 3: Enter row number (line number) you are interested, or enter the row number and entry number in
          parentheses: (row number, entry number).
          Step 4: Select Calculate.
          Step 5: Retrieve the answer from the results box.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             12.2 · Graph Structures 1261

                                                   Figure 12.35 Pascal's Triangle Tool on dCode.xyz

Check Your Understanding

 6. A complete graph with four vertices must have exactly four edges.
       a. True
       b. False

 7. In a cycle, every vertex has degree two.
       a. True
       b. False

 8. The number of vertices in a graph is twice the number of edges.
       a. True
       b. False

 9. The cycle (a, b, c, d) can also be called (c, b, a, d).
       a. True
       b. False

10. The cycle (a, b, c, d) can also be called (a, b, d, c).
       a. True
       b. False

11. The only cliques that are cycles are cliques of three vertices.
       a. True
       b. False

12. A student found that the sum of the degrees of the vertices in a graph was 13. Why is that impossible?
13. A student finds the number of edges in a complete graph by taking half the number of vertices, then subtracting
1262 12 · Graph Theory

              one from the number of vertices, then multiplying these two values together. Will the student get the correct
              result?

             SECTION 12.2 EXERCISES

        Use the figure to answer the following exercises.

              1. List any graphs that are subgraphs of Graph U.
              2. List any graphs that are subgraphs of Graph V.
              3. Explain why Graph T is not a subgraph of Graph S.
              4. List any graphs that have a quadrilateral cyclic subgraph and name the quadrilaterals.
        Use the Sum of Degrees Theorem as needed to answer the following exercises.
              5. How many edges are in a graph if the sum of the degrees of its vertices is 18.
              6. Draw two possible graphs to demonstrate that the sum of the degrees of the vertices in a graph with 7 edges is

                   14. Label the degrees of the vertices.
              7. What is the sum of the degrees of the vertices of a graph that has 122 edges?
              8. A graph has 3 vertices of degree 2, 4 vertices of degree 1, and 2 vertices of degree 3. How many edges are in

                   the graph?
              9. There are 6 vertices and 11 edges in a graph, 2 of degree 5, 1 of degree 4, and 2 of degree 3. What is the degree

                   of the remaining vertex?
            10. A complete graph has 5 vertices. What is the sum of the degrees of the vertices?
            11. A complete graph has 120 edges. How many vertices does it have?
        Use the figure to answer the following exercises. Identify the graph or graphs with the given characteristic.

            12. The sum of the degrees of the vertices is 16.
            13. The graph is complete.
            14. The graph has no cyclic subgraphs
            15. The graph contains at least one octagon.
            16. The graph contains exactly two 3-cycles.
        Use the figure to answer the following exercises. Identify the graph or graphs with the given characteristic.

            17. The graph is a subgraph of Graph 6.
            18. The sum of the degrees of the vertices is 16.
            19. The graph is complete.
            20. The graph has no pentagons.
            21. The graph contains at least one octagon.
            22. The graph contains exactly two cyclic subgraphs.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             12.2 · Graph Structures 1263

    23. Use Table 12.1 to name a heptagon in Graph 8.
Use the figure to answer the following exercises. Identify the graph or graphs with the given characteristic.

    24. The sum of the degrees of the vertices is 16.
    25. The graph is complete.
    26. The graph contains exactly one quadrilateral.
    27. The graph contains at least one octagon.
    28. The graph contains exactly one cyclic subgraph.
Use Table 12.1 to answer the following exercises about the below figure.

    29. List every quadrilateral in Graph 12.
    30. List every quadrilateral in Graph 10.
    31. Determine the number of quadrilaterals in Graph 9.
Use the figure to answer the following exercises.

    32. Name five triangles in the graph.
    33. Identify a clique with more than three vertices in the graph by listing its vertices.
For the following exercises, draw a graph with the given characteristics.
    34. 4 vertices, 6 edges, a subgraph that is a 4-cycle.
    35. 11 vertices, the only cyclic subgraphs are triangles.
    36. Complete graph, no quadrilateral subgraph
    37. 4 vertices, 4 edges, no cyclic subgraphs
    38. Complete graph, sum of the degrees of the vertices is 20.
    39. 7 vertices, largest clique has 5 vertices.
40. In chess, a knight can move in any direction, but it must move two spaces then turn and move one more space.

      The eight possible moves a knight can make from a space in the center of a five-by-five grid are shown in the first
      figure. Draw a graph that represents all the legal moves of a knight on a three-by-three grid starting from the
      lower left corner as shown in the second figure where the vertices will represent the spaces occupied by the knight
      and the edges will indicate a move from one space to the next.
1264 12 · Graph Theory

41. What kind of cycle is the resulting graph you drew for Exercise 40?

42. Use Pascal's triangle to find number of triangles in a complete graph with 14 vertices.

43. Do you think that a graph representing network of friends on Facebook is likely to be complete or not? Explain
      your reasoning.

44. Would the graph of a family tree, in which edges represent parent-child lineage, contain any cycles? Why or why
      not?

45. We have seen that the number of triangles in a complete graph with 7 vertices can be calculated using the pattern
                                                                                                         . This pattern gets very long for complete

      graphs with more vertices, but we have seen sums from 1 to a number before, and we had a shortcut! Recall from

Example 12.8 that                               . This makes finding the sum from 1 up to            shorter. We

can write each of the sums we need in the form  .

To find the sum from 1 to 5, since  , use

To find the sum from 1 to 4, since  , use

To find the sum from 1 to 3, since  , use

To find the sum from 1 to 2, since  , use

To find the sum from 1 to 1, (Sounds silly, but it helps to see the pattern!) since           , use

Use these to rewrite the calculation for the number of triangles in a graph with 7 vertices.

      Similarly, for the number of triangles in a complete graph with 8 vertices, instead of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1265

use the shorter formula                      .

Use this pattern to find the number of triangles in a complete graph with 10 vertices. In which row and entry of
Pascal's triangle can you also find this result?

46. Use the fact that the sum from 1 to  is  to write a formula for the number of triangles in a complete

graph with n vertices.

12.3 Comparing Graphs

Figure 12.36 A flat map represents the surface of Earth in two dimensions. (credit: modification of work "World Map" by
Scratchinghead/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Figure 12.37 A globe represents the surface of Earth in three dimensions. (credit: "Globe" by Wendy Cope/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Identify the characteristics used to compare graphs.
 2. Determine when two graphs represent the same relationships
 3. Explore real-world examples of graph isomorphisms
 4. Find the complement of a graph
Maps of the same region may not always look the same. For example, a map of Earth on a flat surface looks distorted at
the poles. When the same regions are mapped on a spherical globe, the countries that are closer to the polls appear
1266 12 · Graph Theory

        smaller without the distortion. Despite these differences, the two maps still communicate the same relationships
        between nations such as shared boundaries, and relative position on the earth. In essence, they are the same map. This
        means that for every point on one map, there is a corresponding point on the other map in the same relative location. In
        this section, we will determine exactly what characteristics need to be the shared by two graphs in order for us to
        consider them "the same."

     When Are Two Graphs Really the Same Graph?

        In arithmetic, when two numbers have the same value, we say they are equal, like ½ = 0.5. Although ½ and 0.5 look
        different, they have the same value, because they are assigned the same position on the real number line. When do we
        say that two graphs are equal?
        Figure 12.38 shows Graphs A and F, which are identical except for the labels. Graphs are visual representations of
        connections. As long as two graphs indicate the same pattern of connections, like Graph A and Graph F, they are
        considered to be equal, or in graph theory terms, isomorphic.

                                                          Figure 12.38 Identical Graphs with Different Labels
        Two graphs are isomorphic if either one of these conditions holds:
         1. One graph can be transformed into the other without breaking existing connections or adding new ones.
         2. There is a correspondence between their vertices in such a way that any adjacent pair in one graph corresponds to

               an adjacent pair in the other graph.
        It is important to note that if either one of the isomorphic conditions holds, then both of them do. When we need to
        decide if two graphs are isomorphic, we will need to make sure that one of them holds. For example, Figure 12.39 shows
        how Graph T can be bent and flipped to look like Graph Z, which means that Graphs T and Z satisfy condition 1 and are
        isomorphic.

                                                           Figure 12.39 Graph T Transformed Into Graph Z
        Also, notice that the vertices that were adjacent in the first graph are still adjacent in the transformed graph as shown in
        Figure 12.40. For example, vertex 3 is still adjacent to vertex 4, which means they are still neighboring vertices joined by
        a single edge.

                                                            Figure 12.40 Adjacent Vertices Are Still Adjacent

     When Are Two Graphs Really Different?

        Verifying that two graphs are isomorphic can be a challenging process, especially for larger graphs. It makes sense to
        check for any obvious ways in which the graphs might differ so that we don't spend time trying to verify that graphs are

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1267

isomorphic when they are not. If two graphs have any of the differences shown in Table 12.3, then they cannot be
isomorphic.

                                          Unequal number of vertices

                                           Unequal number of edges

                          Unequal number of vertices of a particular degree

                                            Different cyclic subgraphs

                        Table 12.3 Characteristics of Graphs That Are Not Isomorphic

Recognizing Isomorphic Graphs

Isomorphic graphs that represent the same pattern of connections can look very different despite having the same
underlying structure. The edges can be stretched and twisted. The graph can be rotated or flipped. For example, in
Figure 12.41, each of the diagrams represents the same pattern of connections.

                                               Figure 12.41 Four Representations of the Same Graph
Looking at Figure 12.41, how can we know that these graphs are isomorphic? We will start by checking for any obvious
differences. Each of the graphs in Figure 12.41 has four vertices and five edges; so, there are no differences there. Next,
we will focus on the degrees of the vertices, which have been labeled in Figure 12.42.

                                              Figure 12.42 Graphs with Vertices of the Same Degrees
As shown in Figure 12.42, each graph has two vertices of degree 2 and two vertices of degree 3; so, there are no
differences there. Now, let's check for cyclic subgraphs. These are highlighted in Figure 12.43.
1268 12 · Graph Theory

                                                        Figure 12.43 Graphs with the Same Cyclic Subgraphs
        As shown in Figure 12.43, each graph has two triangles and one quadrilateral; so, no differences there either. It is
        beginning to look likely that these graphs are isomorphic, but we will have to look further to be sure.
        To know with certainty that these graphs are isomorphic, we need to confirm one of the two conditions from the
        definition of isomorphic graphs. With smaller graphs, you may be able to visualize how to stretch and twist one graph to
        get the other to see if condition 1 holds. Imagine the edges are stretchy and picture how to pull and twist one graph to
        form the other. If you can do this without breaking or adding any connections, then the graphs are really the same.
        Figure 12.44 demonstrates how to change graph A4 to get A3, graph A3 to get A2, and graph A2 to get A1.

                                                                     Figure 12.44 Transforming Graphs
        Now that we have used visual analysis to see that condition 1 holds for graphs A1, A2, A3, and A4 in Figure 12.43, we
        know that they are isomorphic. In Figure 12.44, one of the edges of graph A4 crossed another edge of the graph. By
        transforming it into graph A3, we have "untangled" it. Graphs that can be untangled are called planar graphs. The
        complete graph with five vertices is an example of a nonplanar graph-that means that, no matter how hard you try, you
        can't untangle it. But, when you try to figure out if two graphs are the same, it can be helpful to untangle them as much
        as possible to make the similarities and differences more obvious.

          EXAMPLE 12.13
        Identifying Isomorphic Graphs
        Which of the three graphs in Figure 12.45 are isomorphic, if any? Justify your answer.

                                                                     Figure 12.45 Three Similar Graphs
             Solution
        Step 1: Check for differences in number of vertices, number of edges, degrees of vertices, and types of cycles to see if an
        isomorphism is possible.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1269

  · Vertices: They all have the same number of vertices, 4.
  · Edges: They all have the same number of edges, 4.
  · Degrees: Graph B1 and Graph B2 each have a vertex of degree 3, while Graph B3 does not. So, Graph B3 is not

      isomorphic to either of the other two graphs, but Graph B1 and Graph B2 could possibly be isomorphic.
  · Cycles: Focus on any cycles in Graph B1 and Graph B2. Each graph has a triangle as shown in Figure 12.46.

                                                    Figure 12.46 Cycles of Graph B1 and Graph B2
Step 2: If no differences were found and an isomorphism is possible, verify one of the conditions in the definition of
isomorphic.
Since we were able to determine that Graph B1 and Graph B2 have no obvious differences, and they are relatively small
graphs, we will attempt to transform one graph into the other, which would verify condition 1. Graph B1 can be
transformed into Graph B2 without breaking or adding connections as shown in Figure 12.47. Begin by untangling graph
B1. Then rotate or flip as needed to see that the graphs match.

                                                       Figure 12.47 Transformation of Graph B1
So, Graph B1 and Graph B2 have the same structure and are isomorphic.

        YOUR TURN 12.13
  1. Name four differences between Graph C1 and Graph C2 that show they cannot be isomorphic.

                                                                         Two Distinct Graphs

Have you ever noticed that many popular board games may look different but are really the same game? A good
example is the many variations of the board game Monopoly®, which was submitted to the U.S. Patent Office in 1935.
Although the rules have been revised a bit, a very similar game board is still in use today. There have been many
versions of Monopoly over the years. Many have been stylized to reflect a popular theme, such as a show or sports team,
while retaining the same game board structure. If we were to represent these different versions of the game using a
graph, we would find that the graphs are isomorphic. . Let's analyze some game boards using graph theory to determine
if they have the same structure despite having different appearances.
1270 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                       Figure 12.48 Two Game Boards
          EXAMPLE 12.14
        Deciding If Graphs are Isomorphic
        A teacher uses games to teach her students about colors and numbers as shown in Figure 12.48.
        In the Colors Game, shown in Figure A, each player begins in the space marked START and proceeds in a
        counterclockwise direction. On each turn, the player spins a spinner marked 1 and 2 and moves forward the number of
        spaces shown on the spinner. If the player lands on a space marked with any color other than white, the player must
        move forward or back to the other space of the same color. The first player to land in or pass the space marked END
        wins.
        In the Clock Game, shown in Figure B, each player begins in the space marked START and proceeds in a clockwise
        direction. On each turn, the player spins a spinner marked 1 and 2 and moves forward the number of spaces shown on
        the spinner. In the same turn, the player must read the number in the space and move forward the number of spaces
        indicated by a positive value or backward the number of spaces indicated by a negative value. Then the turn ends. The
        first player to land in or pass the space marked END wins.
        Draw a graph or multigraph to represent each game in which the vertices are the spaces and the edges represent the
        ability of a player to move between the spaces either by a spin or as dictated by a marked color or number. (We will
        ignore the direction of motion for simplicity.) Transform one of the graphs to show that it is isomorphic to the other and
        explain what this tells you about the games.

             Solution
        The graph representing the Clock Game can be transformed as shown in Figure 12.49 so that we can see that the graphs
        are isomorphic. There is a correspondence between their vertices in such a way that any adjacent pair in one graph
        corresponds to an adjacent pair in the other graph.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1271

                                               Figure 12.49 Graphs for Clock Game and Colors Game
This tells us that the games are essentially the same game with the same moves even though the games appear to be
different.

        YOUR TURN 12.14
  1. Let's compare the games in Figures A and B. In the game Diamonds, shown in Figure A, each player begins in the

      space marked START and proceeds in a counterclockwise direction. On each turn, the player rolls a six-sided die
      and moves forward the number of spaces shown on the die. If the player lands on a space marked with a
      diamond, the player jumps to the next space marked with a diamond and stops there. The first player to land in
      or pass the space marked END wins. In the Dots game, shown in Figure B, each player begins in the space
      marked 1 and proceeds in numerical order through the numbered spaces. On each turn, the player rolls a six-
      sided die and moves forward the number of spaces shown on the die. When a player lands on a space marked
      with a green dot, they immediately move to the space indicated by the arrow. Construct a graph to represent
      each gameboard such that each vertex represented a space on the game board and each edge represented the
      ability of a player to move directly from one space to the next. For example, in the Dots game, the vertex
      representing space 3 would be adjacent to 2, 4, and 6. Identify at least three differences between a graph based
      on Diamonds and a graph based on Dots to show the graphs are not isomorphic.
1272 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                                  Two Game Boards
                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Elizabeth Magie
          Game designer, engineer, comedian, and political activist, Elizabeth Magie designed a game called "Landlord's Game"
          to educate fellow citizens about the dangers of monopolies and the benefits of wealth redistribution through a land
          tax. Magie, whose father had campaigned with Abraham Lincoln, was a proponent of a land tax, an idea popularized
          by Henry George's 1879 book, Progress and Poverty. She designed the game to be played by two sets of rules for
          comparison. In one version, the goal was to dominate opponents by creating monopolies, leaving one wealthy player
          standing in the end. In the other version, all the players were rewarded when a monopoly was created through a
          simulated land tax. She patented this game for the first time in 1904. Does the game board in Figure 12.50 look
          familiar?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1273

        Figure 12.50 Landlord's Game Patent (credit: "Landlord's Game Patent" Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
  That's right! A modified version of the game was obtained from friends by a man named Charles Darrow who
  renamed it Monopoly and sold to Parker Brothers. Parker Brothers later paid Magie $500 for the right to her patent
  on it. The property tax version was left behind, and the modern game of Monopoly was born. (Mary Pilon, Monopoly's
  Lost Female Inventor, September 1, 2018, National Women's History Museum, "Monopoly's Lost Female Inventor,"
  (https://openstax.org/r/womens_history)

Identifying and Naming Isomorphisms

When two graphs are isomorphic, meaning they have the same structure, there is a correspondence between their
vertices, which can be named by listing corresponding pairs of vertices. This list of corresponding pairs of vertices in
such a way that any adjacent pair in one graph corresponds to an adjacent pair in the other graph is called an
isomorphism. Consider the isomorphic graphs in Figure 12.38. In Figure 12.51, we could replace the labels Graph F with
the labels from Graph A and have an identical graph, as in Figure 12.52.

                                                 Figure 12.51 Identical Graphs with Different Labels
1274 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                    Figure 12.52 Corresponding Vertices
        So, we can identify an isomorphism between Graph A and Graph F by listing the corresponding pairs of vertices: b-g, c-h,
        d-i, and e-j. Notice that b is adjacent to c and g is adjacent to h. This must be the case since b corresponds to g and c
        corresponds to h. The same is true for other pairs of adjacent vertices.
        An isomorphism between graphs is not necessarily unique. There can be more than one isomorphism between two
        graphs. We can see how to form a different isomorphism between Graph A and Graph F from Figure 12.33 by rotating
        Graph F clockwise and comparing the rotated version of F to Graph A as in YOUR TURN 12.13. Now, we can see that a
        second isomorphism exists, which has the correspondence: b-j, d-h, c-i, and e-g as shown in Figure 12.53.

                                                          Figure 12.53 Transforming Graph F into Graph A
              When you name isomorphisms, one way to check that your answer is reasonable is to make sure that the degrees of
              corresponding vertices are equal.
               VIDEO
               Determine If Two Graphs Are Isomorphic and Identify the Isomorphism (https://openstax.org/r/Determine_If_Two)
          EXAMPLE 12.15
        Identifying Isomorphisms
        In Example 12.13, we showed that the Graphs B1 and B2 in Figure 12.45 are isomorphic. In Figure 12.54, labels have been
        assigned to the vertices of Graphs B1 and B2. Identify an isomorphism between them by listing corresponding pairs of
        vertices.

                                                                   Figure 12.54 Two Isomorphic Graphs
             Solution
        Figure 12.47 showed how to transform Graph B1 to get Graph B2. In Figure 12.55, we will do the same, but this time we
        will include the labels.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1275

                                                   Figure 12.55 Transform Graph B1 into Graph B2
From YOUR TURN 12.13, we can see the corresponding vertices: a-q, d-p, c-r, and b-s, which is an isomorphism of the two
graphs.

        YOUR TURN 12.15
  1. Graphs E and T are isomorphic. Name two isomorphisms.

                                                                       Graph E and Graph T
  EXAMPLE 12.16
Recognizing an Isomorphism
Determine whether Graphs G and S in Figure 12.56 are isomorphic. If not, explain how they are different. If so, name the
isomorphism.

                                                            Figure 12.56 Graph G and Graph S
     Solution
Step 1: Check for any differences.
  · Vertices: Graphs G and S each have six vertices.
  · Edges: Graphs G and S each have six edges.
  · Degrees: Each graph also has two vertices of degree 1, two vertices of degree 2, and two vertices of degree 3.
  · Cycles: From Figure 12.57, we can see that Graph G contains a quadrilateral cycle (b, f, d, c) but Graph S has no
      quadrilaterals. Also, Graph S contains a triangle cycle (m, r, o) but Graph G has no triangles. This means that the
      graphs are not isomorphic.

                                                            Figure 12.57 Comparing Subgraphs
1276 12 · Graph Theory

        Step 2: This step is not necessary because we now know Graphs G and S are not isomorphic.

                YOUR TURN 12.16
          1. Three students have been asked to determine if Graphs E and T are isomorphic and justify their answers.

                                                                               Graph E and Graph T
              Javier believes that Graphs E and T are not isomorphic because Graph E contains a triangle cycle and Graph T
               does not. He supports his conclusion with the graphs shown.

                                                                             Javier's Highlighted Cycle
              Maubi also believes that Graphs E and T are not isomorphic, but says that it is because Graph T has a
              quadrilateral cycle (p, q, r, s) while Graph E does not. Caden believes that Graphs E and T are isomorphic. She
              said one isomorphism is a-p, b-q, c-s, and d-r. Determine who is correct, who is incorrect, and explain how you
               know.

     Complementary Graphs

        Suppose that you are a camp counselor at Camp Woebegone and you are holding a camp Olympics with four events. The
        campers have signed up for the events. You drew a graph in Figure 12.58 to help you visualize which events have
        campers in common.

                                                      Figure 12.58 Graph of Events with Campers in Common
        Graph E in Figure 12.58 shows that some of the same campers will be in events a and b, as well as b and d, c and d, and a
        and c. What do you think the graph would look like that represented the events that do not have campers in common? It
        would have the same vertices, but any pair of adjacent edges in Graph E, would not be adjacent in the new graph, and
        vice versa. This is called a complementary graph, as shown in Figure 12.59. Two graphs are complementary if they have
        the same set of vertices, but any vertices that are adjacent in one, are not adjacent in the other. In this case, we can say
        that one graph is the complement of the other.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1277

                                                          Figure 12.59 Graphs of Camp Olympics
One way to find the complement of a graph is to draw the complete graph with the same number of vertices and remove
all the edges that were in the original graph. Let's say you wanted to find the complement of Graph E from Figure 12.59,
and you didn't already know it was Graph F. You could start with the complete graph with four vertices and remove the
edges that are in Graph E as shown in Figure 12.60.

                                              Figure 12.60 Use Complete Graph to Find Complement
  EXAMPLE 12.17
Finding a Complement
A particular high school has end-of-course exams in (E3) English 3, (E4) English 4, (M) Advanced Math, (C) Calculus, (W)
World History, (U) U.S. History, (B) Biology, and (P) Physics. No English 3 students are taking English 4, World History, or
Biology; no English 4 students are also in Calculus, Advanced Math, U.S. History, or Physics; no Physics students are also
taking Advanced Math; No World History students are also taking U.S. History; and no Advanced Math students are also
taking Calculus.
 1. Create a graph in which the vertices represent the exams, and an edge between a pair of vertices indicates that

      there are no students taking both exams.
 2. Find the complement of the graph in part 1.
 3. Explain what the graph in part 2 represents.

     Solution
 1. In Figure 12.61, we have drawn a vertex for each exam and edges between any vertices that have no students in

      common.

                                               Figure 12.61 Graph of Exams with No Students in Common
 2. One way to get the complement of the graph in Figure 12.61 is to draw a complete graph with the same number of

      vertices and remove the edges they have in common as shown in Figure 12.62.
1278 12 · Graph Theory

                                                      Figure 12.62 Remove Unwanted Edges from Complete Graph
              The final graph of the complement is in Figure 12.63.

                                                          Figure 12.63 Graph of Exams with Students in Common
         3. In the graph in Figure 12.63, the vertices are still the exams, and a pair of adjacent vertices represents a pair of

              exams that have students in common.
                YOUR TURN 12.17

          1. Find the complement of the Graph H.

        When two graphs are really the same graph, they have the same missing edges. So, when two graphs have a lot of
        edges, it may actually be easier to determine if they are isomorphic by looking at which edges are missing rather than
        which edges are included. In other words, we can determine if two graphs are isomorphic by checking if their
        complements are isomorphic.

          EXAMPLE 12.18
        Using a Complement to Find an Isomorphism
        Use Figure 12.64 to answer each question.

                                                                             Figure 12.64 Graph K
         1. Find the complement of Graph K.
         2. Identify an isomorphism between the complement of Graph K from part 1, and the complement of Graph H in YOUR

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1279

      TURN 12.17.
 3. Confirm that the correspondence between the vertices you found in part 2 also gives an isomorphism between

      Graph H from YOUR TURN 12.17, and Graph K from Figure 12.64.
     Solution
 1. The complement of Graph K can be found by removing the edges of Graph K from a complete graph with the same
      vertices as shown in Figure 12.65.

                                                         Figure 12.65 Find Complement of Graph K
 2. An isomorphism between the complement of Graph K and the complement of Graph H is A-M, C-L, E-N, B-O, and D-

      P, which is confirmed by transforming the complement of Graph K in Figure 12.66.

                                            Figure 12.66 Isomorphism between Complements of K and H
 3. Figure 12.67 shows how Graph K can be transformed into Graph H to confirm that the correspondence is A-M, C-L,

      E-N, B-O, and D-P also gives an isomorphism between Graph K and Graph H.

                                                        Figure 12.67 Isomorphism between K and H
This means we now have three conditions that guarantee two graphs are isomorphic.
First Way: One graph can be transformed into the other without breaking existing connections or adding new ones.
Second Way: There is a correspondence between their vertices in such a way that any adjacent pair in one graph
corresponds to an adjacent pair in the other graph.
Third Way: Their complements are isomorphic.
If any one of these statements is true, then they are all true. If any one of these statements is false, then they are all
false.

        YOUR TURN 12.18
  1. Suppose that a Graph M is a complete graph and Graph N is the complement of M. What are the degrees of the

      vertices of Graph N? How do you know?

  WORK IT OUT
  Here is an activity you can do with a few of your classmates that will build your graph comparison skills.
1280 12 · Graph Theory

          Step 1: Draw a planar graph with the following characteristics: exactly five vertices, one vertex of degree four, at least
          two vertices of degree three, and exactly eight edges. Give names to the vertices. Make sure you do not use the same
          letters or numbers to label your vertices as your classmates do.

          Step 2: Analyze your graph. What is the degree of each vertex? Does your graph have any cyclic subgraphs? If so, list
          them and indicate their sizes.

          Step 3: Draw and analyze the complement of your graph. How many edges and vertices does it have? What is the
          degree of each vertex? Does the complementary graph have any cyclic subgraphs? If so, list them and indicate their
          sizes.

          Step 4: Compare your graphs to each of your classmates' graphs. Does your graph have the same number of edges
          and vertices as the graph of your classmate? Does your graph have the same size cyclic subgraphs as the graph of
          your classmate? How does the complement of your graph compare to the complement of the graph of your
          classmate? Determine if your graph is isomorphic to your classmates' graph. If so, give a correspondence that
          demonstrates the isomorphism. If not, explain how you know.

     Check Your Understanding

        For the following exercises, determine whether each statement is always true, sometimes true, or never true.
            14. Two graphs are isomorphic, and the graphs have the same structure.
            15. A graph with four vertices is isomorphic to a graph with five vertices.
            16. The sums of the degrees of the vertices of two graphs are equal, but the two graphs are not isomorphic.
            17. Two graphs are isomorphic, but the graphs have a different number of edges.
            18. One graph can be transformed to look like a second graph without removing or adding any connections, and
                   the two graphs are isomorphic.
            19. Two graphs are isomorphic, and there is more than one isomorphism between the two graphs.
            20. Two graphs have the same number of vertices, but there is no isomorphism between them.
            21. There is a correspondence between the vertices of Graph A and the vertices of Graph B such that the adjacent
                  vertices in Graph A always correspond to vertices of Graph B, but the two graphs are not isomorphic
            22. Two graphs have the same number of edges, the same number of vertices, vertices of the same degree, and
                   have all the same subgraphs, but they are not isomorphic
            23. Two graphs are isomorphic, and the sum of the degrees of the vertices of one equals the sum of the degrees of
                   the other graph.
            24. If two graphs are isomorphic, then their complements are isomorphic.

             SECTION 12.3 EXERCISES

        Use the figure to answer the following exercises. A pair of graphs is given. Identify three differences between them that
        demonstrate the graphs are not isomorphic.

              1. G and H
              2. G and I
              3. G and J
              4. G and K
              5. G and L
              6. H and I
              7. H and J
              8. H and K
              9. H and L
            10. I and J
            11. I and K

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.3 · Comparing Graphs 1281

    12. I and L
    13. J and K
    14. K and L
Use the figure to answer the following exercises. In each exercise, a pair of graphs is given. Determine if one graph is a
subgraph of the other graph, or the two graphs are isomorphic.

    15. P and Q
    16. P and R
    17. P and U
    18. Q and R
    19. Q and S
    20. Q and T
    21. Q and V
    22. S and V
    23. T and U
    24. U and V
Use the figure to answer the following exercises. In each exercise, a pair of graphs is given. Either give a reason that the
graphs are not isomorphic, or show how one of the graphs can be transformed to look like the other.

    25. A and B
    26. A and C
    27. A and D
    28. B and C
    29. B and D
    30. C and D
Use the figure to answer the following exercises. Determine if one graph is a subgraph of the other graph, or the two
graphs are isomorphic. If they are isomorphic, name an isomorphism. If one is a subgraph of the other, indicate a
correspondence between the vertices that demonstrates the relationship.

    31. W and Z
    32. X and Y
    33. X and Z
Use the figure to answer the following exercises.
1282 12 · Graph Theory

            34. Find the complement of Graph W.
            35. Find the complement of Graph Y.
            36. Find the complement of Graph X.
            37. Find an isomorphism between the complement of W and the complement of Y if one exists. If not, explain how

                   you know.
            38. Are W and Y isomorphic? Explain how you know.
            39. Find an isomorphism between the complement of W and the Complement of X if one Exists. If not, explain how

                   you know.
            40. Are W and X isomorphic? Explain how you know.
        41. Find the complement of the graph in the given figure representing direct flights between south Florida airports.

              Explain what the graph represents.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                        12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1283

12.4 Navigating Graphs

        Figure 12.68 Visitors navigate a garden maze. (credit: "Longleat Maze" by Niki Odolphie/Wikimedia, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe and identify walks, trails, paths, and circuits.
 2. Solve application problems using walks, trails, paths, and circuits.
 3. Identify the chromatic number of a graph.
 4. Describe the Four-Color Problem.
 5. Solve applications using graph colorings.
Now that we know the basic parts of graphs and we can distinguish one graph from another, it is time to really put our
graphs to work for us. Many applications of graph theory involve navigating through a graph very much like you would
navigate through a maze. Imagine that you are at the entrance to a maze. Your goal is to get from one point to another
as efficiently as possible. Maybe there are treasures hidden along the way that make straying from the shortest path
worthwhile, or maybe you just need to get to the end fast. Either way, you definitely want to avoid any wrong turns that
would cause unnecessary backtracking. Luckily, graph theory is here to help!

Walks

Suppose Figure 12.69 is a maze you want to solve. You want to get from the start to the end.

                                                                     Figure 12.69 Your Maze
You can approach this task any way you want. The only rule is that you can't climb over the wall. To put this in the context
of graph theory, let's imagine that at every intersection and every turn, there is a vertex. The edges that join the vertices
must stay within the walls. The graph within the maze would look like Figure 12.70.
1284 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                   Figure 12.70 The Graph in Your Maze
        One approach to solving a maze is to just start walking. It is not the most efficient approach. You might cross through
        the same intersection twice. You might backtrack a bit. It's okay. We are just out for a walk. It might look something like
        the black sequence of vertices and edges in Figure 12.71.

                                                      Figure 12.71 The Walk Through the Graph in Your Maze
        This type of sequence of adjacent vertices and edges is actually called a walk (or directed walk) in graph theory too!
        A walk can be identified by naming the sequence of its vertices (or by naming the sequence of its edges if those are
        labeled). Let's take the graph out of the context of the maze and give each vertex a name and each edge of the walk a
        direction as in Figure 12.72.

                                                               Figure 12.72 The Graph without Your Maze
        The name of this walk from p to r is p  q  o  n  i  j  c  d  c  j  k  s  r. When a particular edge on our
        graph was traveled in both directions, it had arrows in both directions and the letters of vertices that were visited more
        than once had to be repeated in the name of the walk.

              Not every list of vertices or list of edges makes a path. The order must take into account the way in which the edges
              and vertices are connected. The list must be a sequence, which means they are in order. No edges or vertices can be
              skipped and you cannot go off the graph.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1285

                                                             Figure 12.73 A Walk or Not a Walk?
The highlighted edges Graph Y in Figure 12.73 represent a walk between f and b. The highlighted edges in Graph X do
not represent a walk between f and b, because there is a turn at a point that is not a vertex. This is like climbing over a
wall when you are walking through a maze. Another way of saying this is that b  d  f is not a walk, because there is no
edge between b and d.

      A point on a graph where two edges cross is not a vertex.
  EXAMPLE 12.19
Naming a Walk Through A House
Figure 12.74 shows the floor plan of a house. Use the floor plan to answer each question.

                                                             Figure 12.74 Floor Plan of a House
 1. Draw a graph to represent the floor plan in which each vertex represents a different room (or hallway) and edges

      represent doorways between rooms.
 2. Name a walk through the house that begins in the living room, ends in the garage and visits each room (or hallway)

      at least once.
     Solution
 1. Step 1: We will need a vertex for each room and it is convenient to label them according to the names of the rooms.
      Visualize the scenario in your head as shown in Figure 12.75. You don't have to write this step on your paper.
1286 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                    Figure 12.75 Assigning Vertices to Rooms
               Step 2: Draw a graph to represent the scenario. Start with the vertices. Then connect those vertices that share a
               doorway in the floorplan as shown in Figure 12.76.

                                                                       Figure 12.76 Graph of the Floor plan
         2. Step 1: Draw a path that begins at vertex L, representing the living room, and ending at vertex G, representing the

               garage making sure to visit every room at least once. There are many ways this can be done. You may want to
               number the edges to keep track of their order. One example is shown in Figure 12.77.

                                                                    Figure 12.77 Draw the Path from L to G
               Step 2: Name the path that you followed by listing the vertices in the order you visited them.
              LRLKLHBHMHG

                YOUR TURN 12.19
          1. Recall from the Graph Basics section that a graph in which there are multiple edges between the same pair of

               vertices is called a multigraph. The figure shows a map of the four bridges that link Staten Island to Brooklyn and
               New Jersey and a multigraph representing the map. In the multigraph, the edges are labeled instead of the
              vertices. The edges represent the bridges, G (Goethals Bridge), B (Bayonne Bridge), C (Outerbridge Crossing),
              and V (Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge). The vertices represent New Jersey, Staten Island, and Brooklyn.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1287

                                                       Map and Multigraph of Staten Island Bridges
      A path can be named by a sequences of edges instead of a sequence of vertices. Determine which of the
      following sequence of edges is a walk.
       a. B  V  C  G  C
       b. V  C  B  G  C
        c. C  V  G  B  B
       d. G  V  B  V  C

Paths and Trails

A walk is the most basic way of navigating a graph because it has no restrictions except staying on the graph. When
there are restrictions on which vertices or edges we can visit, we will call the walk by a different name. For example, if we
want to find a walk that avoids travelling the same edge twice, we will say we want to find a trail (or directed trail). If we
want to find a walk that avoids visiting the same vertex twice, we will say, we want to find a path (or directed path).
Walks, trails, and paths are all related.
 1. All paths are trails, but trails that visit the same vertex twice are not paths.
 2. All trails are walks, but walks in which an edge is visited twice would not be trails.
We can visualize the relationship as in Figure 12.78.

                                                           Figure 12.78 Walks, Trails, and Paths
Let's practice identifying walks, trails, and paths using the graphs in Figure 12.79.
1288 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                        Figure 12.79 Graphs A and K
          EXAMPLE 12.20
        Identifying Walks, Paths, and Trails
        Consider each sequence of vertices from Graph A in Figure 12.79. Determine if it is only a walk, both a walk and a path,
        both a walk and a trail, all three, or none of these.
         1. b  c  d  e  f
         2. c  b  d  b  e
         3. c  f  e  d  b  c
         4. b  e  f  c  b  d

             Solution
         1. First, check to see if the sequence of vertices is a walk by making sure that the vertices are consecutive. As you can

              see in Figure 12.80, there is no edge between vertex c and vertex d.

                                                                                        Figure 12.80
              This means that the sequence is not a walk. If it is not a walk, then it can't be a path and it cannot be a trail, so, it is
              none of these.
         2. First, check to see if the sequence is a walk. As you can see in Figure 12.81, the vertices are consecutive.

                                                                                        Figure 12.81
              This means that the sequence is a walk. Since the vertex b is visited twice, this walk is not a path. Since edge is
              traveled twice, this walk is not a trail. So, the sequence is only a walk.
         3. First, check to see if the sequence is a walk. We can see in Figure 12.82 that the vertices are consecutive, which
              means it is a walk.

                                                                                        Figure 12.82
              Next, check to see if any vertex is visited twice. Remember, we do not consider beginning and ending at the same

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1289

      vertex to be visiting a vertex twice. So, no vertex was visited twice. This means we have a walk that is also a path.
      Next check to see if any edge was visited twice; none were. So, the sequence is a walk, a path, and a trail.
 4. First, check to see if the sequence is a walk. We can see in Figure 12.83 that the vertices are consecutive, which
      means it is a walk.

                                                                               Figure 12.83
      Next check to see if any vertex is visited twice. Since vertex b is visited twice, this is not a path. Finally, check to see if
      any edges are traveled twice. Since no edges are traveled twice, this is a trail. So, the sequence of vertices is a walk
      and a trail.

        YOUR TURN 12.20

  Consider each sequence of vertices from Graph K in Figure 12.106. Determine if it is only a walk, both a walk and a
  path, both a walk and a trail, all three, or none of these.

      1. n  q  o  p
      2. p  n  q  o  n  m
      3. m  n  o  p  q

       VIDEO
      Walks, Trails, and Paths in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/walks_trails_paths)

Circuits

In many applications of graph theory, such as creating efficient delivery routes, beginning and ending at the same
location is a requirement. When a walk, path, or trail end at the same location or vertex they began, we call it closed.
Otherwise, we call it open (does not begin and end at the same location or vertex). Some examples of closed walks,
closed trails, and closed paths are given in in the following table.
1290 12 · Graph Theory

                                   DESCRIPTION                         EXAMPLE  CHARACTERISTICS
A closed walk is a walk that begins and ends at the same vertex.
                                                                                     Alternating
                                                                                    sequence of
                                                                                    vertices and

                                                                                         edges

                                                                                 Begins and ends
                                                                                at the same vertex

                                                                       dfbcfd

A closed trail is a trail that begins and ends at the same vertex. It               No repeated
                         is commonly called a circuit.                                  edges

                                                                                 Begins and ends
                                                                                at the same vertex

                                                                       dfbcfed

A closed path is a path that begins and ends at the same vertex.                    No repeated
    It is also referred to as a directed cycle because it travels                edges or vertices
                          through a cyclic subgraph.
                                                                                 Begins and ends
                                                                                at the same vertex

                                                                                                        dfbcd

Table 12.4 Closed Walks, Trails, and Paths

Since walks, trails, and paths are all related, closed walks, circuits, and directed cycles are related too.
 1. All circuits are closed walks, but closed walks that visit the same edge twice are not circuits.
 2. All directed cycles are circuits, but circuits in which a vertex is visited twice are not directed cycles.
We can visualize the relationship as in Figure 12.84.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1291

                                              Figure 12.84 Closed Walks, Circuits, and Directed Cycles
The same circuit can be named using any of its vertices as a starting point. For example, the circuit d  f  b  c  d can
also be referred to in the following ways.
a  b  c  d  a is the same as

Let's practice working with closed walks, circuits (closed trails), and directed cycles (closed paths). In the graph in Figure
12.85, the vertices are major central and south Florida airports. The edges are direct flights between them.

                                               Figure 12.85 Major Central and South Florida Airports
  EXAMPLE 12.21
Determining a Closed Walk, Circuit, or Directed Cycle
Suppose that you need to travel by air from Miami (MIA) to Orlando (MCO) and you were restricted to flights represented
on the graph. For the trip to Orlando, you decide to purchase tickets with a layover in Key West (EYW) as shown in Figure
12.86, but you still have to decide on the return trip. Determine if your roundtrip itinerary is a closed walk, a circuit, and/
or a directed cycle, based on the return trip described in each part.
1292 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                      Figure 12.86 MIA to EYW to MCO
         1. You returned to Miami (MIA) by reversing your route.
         2. Your direct flight back left Orlando (MCO) but was diverted to Fort Lauderdale (FLL)! From there you flew to Tampa

               (TPA) before returning to Miami (MIA).
             Solution
         1. The whole trip was MIA  EYW  MCO  EYW  MIA. This is a closed walk, because it is a walk that begins and ends
               at the same vertex. It is not a circuit, because it repeats edges. If it is not a circuit, then it cannot be a directed cycle.
         2. The whole trip was MIA  EYW  MCO  FLL  TPA  MIA. This is a closed walk, because it is a walk that begins and
               ends at the same vertex. It is a circuit because no edges were repeated. It is also a directed cycle because no
               vertices were repeated either. So, it is all three!

                YOUR TURN 12.21
          Suppose that you want to travel from Palm Beach (PBI) to any other city listed in Figure 12.113 and then return to
          Palm Beach.

              1. Why is it impossible to find an itinerary that is a circuit?
              2. How is this related to the degree of the vertex PBI?

               VIDEO
               Closed Walks, Closed Trails (Circuits), and Closed Paths (Directed Cycles) in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/
               closed_walks)

     Graph Colorings

        In this section so far, we have looked at how to navigate graphs by proceeding from one vertex to another in a sequence
        that does not skip any vertices, but in some applications we may want to skip vertices. Remember the camp Olympics at
        Camp Woebegone in Comparing Graphs? You were planning a camp Olympics with four events. The campers signed up
        for the events. You drew a graph to help you visualize which events have campers in common. The vertices of Graph E in
        Figure 12.87 represent the events and adjacent vertices indicate that there are campers who are participating in both.

                                                                  Figure 12.87 Graphs of Camp Olympics
        In this case, we do NOT want events represented by two adjacent vertices to occur in the same timeslot, because that
        would prevent the campers who wanted to participate in both from doing so. We can use the graph in Figure 12.87 to
        count the timeslots we need so there are no conflicts. Let's assign each timeslot a different color. We could categorize
        events that happen at 1 pm as Red; 2 pm, Purple; 3 pm, Blue; and 4 pm, Green. Then assign different colors to any pair
        of adjacent vertices to ensure that the events they represent do not end up in the same timeslot. Figure 12.88 shows
        several of the ways to do this while obeying the rule that no pair of adjacent vertices can be the same color.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1293

                                                                Figure 12.88 Graph Colorings
In Figure 12.88, the graphs with vertices colored so that no adjacent vertices are the same color are called graph
colorings. Notice that Graph 3 has the fewest colors, which means it shows us how to have the fewest number of
timeslots. The events marked in red, a and d, can be held at the same time because they are not adjacent and do not
have conflicts. Also, the events marked in purple, b and c, can be held at the same time. We would not need green or
blue timeslots at all!
A graph that uses colors is called an -coloring. The smallest number of colors needed to color a particular graph is
called its chromatic number.
Graph colorings can be used in many applications like the scheduling scenario at camp Woebegone. Let's look at how
they work in more detail. Figure 12.89 shows two different colorings of a particular graph. Coloring A is called a four-
coloring, because it uses four colors, red (R), green (G), blue (B), and purple (P). Coloring B is called a three-coloring
because it uses three. The colors allow us to visually subdivide the graphs into groups. The only rule is that adjacent
vertices are different colors so that they are in different groups.

                                                    Figure 12.89 Two Colorings of the Same Graph
It turns out that a three-coloring is the best we can do with the graph in Figure 12.89. No matter how many different
patterns you try with only two colors, you will never find one in which the adjacent vertices are always different colors. In
other words, the graph has a chromatic number of three. For large graphs, computer assistance is usually required to
find the chromatic numbers. There is no formula for finding the chromatic number of a graph, but there are some facts
that are helpful in Table 12.5.
1294 12 · Graph Theory                          Example

                                Fact

               Recall that planar graphs are
              untangled; that is, they can be
            drawn on a flat surface so that no
           two edges are crossing. If a graph
            is planar, it can be colored with
              four colors or possibly fewer.

   Each vertex in a complete graph is
      adjacent to every other vertex
        forcing us to color them all
     different colors.The chromatic

    number of a complete graph is
       the same as the number of
                     vertices.

   If a graph has a clique, a complete
   subgraph, then each vertex in the
   clique must have a different color
   and the vertices outside the clique
    may or may not have even more
   colors. The chromatic number of
  a graph is at least the number of

     vertices in its biggest clique.

Table 12.5 Facts about Graph Colorings

Creating Colorings to Solve Problems

Let's see how these facts can help us color the graph in Figure 12.90.
  · Since the graph is planar, the chromatic number is no more than four.
  · The graph is not complete, but it has complete subgraphs of three vertices. In other words, it has triangles like the
      one shown with blue vertices in Figure 12.90. This means that the chromatic number is at least three.

                                                            Figure 12.90 A Graph with Triangles
We know we can color this graph in three or four colors. It is usually best to start by coloring the vertex of highest degree
as shown in Figure 12.91. In this case, we used red (R). The color is not important.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1295

                                                    Figure 12.91 Color Highest Degree Vertex First
We want to color as many of the vertices the same color as possible; so, we look at all the vertices that are not adjacent
to the red vertex and begin to color them, red starting with the one among them of highest degree. Since the only
vertices that are not adjacent are both degree 2, choose either one and color it red as shown in Figure 12.92.

                                          Figure 12.92 Color More Red from Highest to Lowest Degree
Now, there is only one vertex left that is not adjacent to a red; so, color it red. Of the remaining vertices, the highest
degree is four; so, color one of the vertices of degree four in a different color. These two steps are shown in Figure 12.93.

                                             Figure 12.93 Complete the Reds and Start Another Color
Repeat the same procedure. There are three remaining vertices that are not adjacent to a blue. Color as many blue as
possible, with priority going to vertices of higher degree as shown in Figure 12.94.

                                                     Figure 12.94 Repeat Procedure for Color Blue
All the remaining vertices are adjacent to blue. So, it is time to repeat the procedure with another color as shown in
Figure 12.95.
1296 12 · Graph Theory

                                                            Figure 12.95 Repeat Procedure for Color Purple
        All the vertices are now colored with a three-coloring so we know the chromatic number is at most three, but we knew
        the chromatic number was at least three because the graph has a triangle. So, we are now certain it is exactly three.

               VIDEO
               Coloring Graphs Part 1: Coloring and Identifying Chromatic Number (https://openstax.org/r/
               Coloring_and_Identifying)
        Suppose the vertices of the graph in Figure 12.96 represented the nine events in the Camp Woebegone Olympics, and
        edges join any events that have campers in common, but nonadjacent vertices do not.

                                               Figure 12.96 Coloring for Nine Event Camp Woebegone Olympics
        Any vertices of the same color are nonadjacent; so, they have no conflicts. Since this graph is a three-coloring, all nine
        events could be scheduled in just three timeslots!

          EXAMPLE 12.22
        Understanding Chromatic Numbers
        In Example 12.17, we discussed a high school, which holds end-of-course exams in (E3) English 3, (E4) English 4, (M)
        Advanced Math, (C) Calculus, (W) World History, (U) U.S. History, (B) Biology, and (P) Physics. We were given a list of
        courses that had no students in common. We used that information to find the graph in Figure 12.63, which shows
        edges between exams with students in common. Use the graph we found in Example 12.17 to answer each question.

                                                      Figure 12.97 Graph of Exams with Students in Common
         1. The graph contains a clique of size 4 formed by the vertices P, E3, C, and U. What does this tell you about the

               chromatic number?
         2. The graph is not planar, meaning that you cannot untangle it. What does this tell you about the chromatic number?
         3. Create a coloring by coloring vertex of highest degree first, coloring as many other vertices as possible each color

               from highest to lowest degree, then repeating this process for the remaining vertices.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1297

4. Do you know what the minimum number of timeslots is? If so, what is it and how do you know? If not, what are the
     possibilities?
    Solution

1. We would need four different colors just for the clique with four vertices; so, the chromatic number is at least four.
2. It is possible for the chromatic number to be greater than four.
3. The process is shown in Table 12.6.

This is the original graph. Vertex B has   Color vertex B. Vertex E3 is the only   Color vertex E3 the same color.
                highest degree.           remaining vertex that is NOT adjacent     Vertices P, U, W, and C are the
                                                                                   remaining vertices with highest
                                                                 to B.
                                                                                       degree. Pick one to color.

Color vertex P a new color. Vertices E4   Color vertex M the same color. Vertex    Color vertex E4 the same color.
 and M are NOT adjacent to P, and M        E4 is the only remaining vertex NOT       Vertices U, W, and C are the

             has higher degree.                        adjacent to P or M.         remaining vertices with highest
                                                                                       degree. Pick one to color.

  Color U a new color. Vertex W is the    Color vertex W the same color. Vertex    Color vertex C a new color. The
only remaining vertex NOT adjacent to     C is the only remaining vertex that has  coloring is final. We used four

                         U.                             NOT been colored.                           colors.

Table 12.6 Coloring the Graph

     The last graph in Table 12.6 is the final coloring.
4. Yes, the minimum number of times slots is the chromatic number. We knew the chromatic number had to be at least
1298 12 · Graph Theory

               four because there was a clique with four vertices. Now we have found a four-coloring of the graph which tells us
               that the chromatic number is at most four. So, we know four must be the chromatic number.

              The procedure used in Example 22 to color the graph is not guaranteed to result in a graph that has the minimum
              number of colors possible, but it is usually results in a coloring that is close to the chromatic number.

                YOUR TURN 12.22
          The given figure shows the same graph colored in several ways. The largest clique of the graph has three vertices.
          Use this information to answer each question.

                                                                  Possible Colorings of the Same Graph
              1. Is the graph planar? What does your answer tell you about the chromatic number?
              2. What is the lowest possible chromatic number of this graph based on the size of any cliques?
              3. What are the possible chromatic numbers?
              4. Which graph or graphs meet the definition of a valid graph coloring?
              5. Draw an -coloring for the graph where is the answer to Exercise 1.

     The Four Color Problem

                                    Figure 12.98 Using only four colors, no two adjacent regions have the same color.
        The idea of coloring graphs to solve problems was inspired by one of the most famous problems in mathematics, the
        "four color problem." The idea was that, no matter how complicated a map might be, only four colors were needed to
        color the map so that no two regions that shared a boundary would be the same color. For many years, everyone
        suspected this to be true, because no one could create a map that needed more than four colors, but they couldn't prove
        it was true in general. Finally, graphs were used to solve the problem!

               VIDEO
               The Four Color Map Theorem - Numberphile (https://openstax.org/r/The_Four)
        We saw how maps can be represented as graphs in Graph Basics. Figure 12.99 from Example 12.4 shows a map of the
        midwestern region of the United States.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1299

                                                         Figure 12.99 Map of Midwestern States
Figure 12.100 shows how this map can be associated with a graph in which each vertex represents a state and each edge
indicates the states that share a common boundary. Figure 12.101 shows the final graph.

                         Figure 12.100 Edge Assigned to Each Pair of Midwestern States with Common Border

                     Figure 12.101 Final Graph Representing Common Boundaries between Midwestern States
Notice that the graph representing the common boundaries between midwestern states is planar, meaning that it can be
drawn on a flat surface without edges crossing. As we have seen, any planar graph has a chromatic number of four or
less. This very well-known fact is called the Four-Color Theorem, or Four-Color Map Theorem.
1300 12 · Graph Theory

               VIDEO
               Coloring Graphs Part 2: Coloring Maps and the Four Color Problem (https://openstax.org/r/Coloring_Maps)

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

          Four-Color Theorem
          In the 19th century, Francis Guthrie was coloring a map of British counties and noticed that he could color so that no
          two adjacent counties were the same color using only four colors. This seemed to be the case for other maps as well,
          but he could not figure out why. He shared this with his brother, Frederick, who subsequently took the problem to his
          professor, August De Morgan, one of the most famous mathematicians of all time. De Morgan never was able to solve
          the problem, but he shared it with his colleagues. The problem continued to intrigue and perplex mathematicians for
          over a hundred years, inspiring discoveries in several areas of mathematics. It was finally proven by Kenneth Appel
          and Wolfgang Haken from the University of Illinois in 1976 using a combination of computer-aided calculations and
          graph theory. This was the first time in history that a mathematical theorem was proven using a computer! (Jesus
          Najera, "The Four-Color Theorem," Cantor's Paradise, a Medium publication, October 22, 2019)

          EXAMPLE 12.23

        Using Four Colors or Fewer to Color a Graph
        Find a coloring of the graph in Figure 12.99, which uses four colors or fewer. Use the resulting coloring as a guide to
        recolor the map in Figure 12.101. How many colors did you use? Does this support the conclusion of the Four-Color
        Theorem? If so, how?

             Solution
        The steps to color the graph are shown in Table 12.7.

Step 1: Graph with degrees of vertices   Step 2: Color vertex IA any color.   Step 3: Color either MI or IN the
                     labeled.                                                            same color as IA.
                                        Vertices ND, KS, MI, OH, and IN are
      Vertex IA has highest degree.                NOT adjacent to IA.          Vertex ND and KS are the only
                                                                             remaining vertices not adjacent to
                                        MI and IN have highest degree, 3.
                                                                                            a red vertex.

                                                                                   They both have degree 2.

Table 12.7 Steps to Color Graph of Midwestern States

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1301

   Step 4: Since KS and ND are not      Step 5: Choose one of the vertices of     Step 6: Choose one of WI, IL, or
adjacent to each other, we can save a  degree 4, SD, to color with a new color,                MO to color.
step and color both red. The highest
 degreeof remaining vertices is four.   blue. The vertices WI, IL, MO, IN,and               We color WI blue.
                                             OH are NOT adjacent to blue.
                                                                                 MO, IN and OH are NOT adjacent
                                           WI, IL, and MO have the highest                         to blue.
                                                            degree.
                                                                                   MO has the highest degree of
                                                                                                    these.

Step 7: Color MO blue. All remaining    Step 8: Since MN, IL, and NE are not        Step 9: Since vertex OH is not
     vertices are adjacent to blue.    adjacent, save steps and color all three  adjacent to purple, color it purple.

  Choose a new color. Four vertices                the new color, purple.                This is the final graph.
remain, MN, NE, IL, and OH. MN, NE,
                                       Vertex OH is the only remaining vertex            We used three colors.
   and IL have the highest degree.             that has NOT been colored.

Table 12.7 Steps to Color Graph of Midwestern States

The final graph in Table 12.7 shows how we would color the map. In Figure 12.102 we have colored the map to
correspond to the colors on the graph.
1302 12 · Graph Theory

                                                           Figure 12.102 Midwestern States in Three Colors
        We used three colors to color the graph. This supports the Four-Color Theorem, because the graph is planar and its
        chromatic number is less than four.

                YOUR TURN 12.23
          1. The first figure shows a map of the Island of Oahu in the State of Hawaii divided into regions, and the second

               figure shows a graph of the map. What is the chromatic number? Find a graph coloring that reflects the
               chromatic number of the graph.

                                 Map of Oahu

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1303

                                      Graph Representing Common Boundaries between Regions of Oahu

        WHO KNEW?
  Coloring A Möbius Strip
  Have you ever heard of a möbius strip? It is a flat object with only one side. This might sound theoretical, but you can
  make one for yourself. Take a narrow strip of paper, make a half twist in it, and tape the ends together. To prove to
  yourself that it has only one side, pick a point anywhere on the paper and start drawing a line. You can draw the line
  continuously without lifting your pen from the paper and eventually, you will get back to the point at which you
  started. Since you never had to flip over the paper, you have just proved it has one side!
  Now, you might be wondering what this has to do with Graph Theory. It turns out that a map drawn on a möbius strip
  cannot necessarily be drawn using four colors. This doesn't contradict the Four-Color Theorem, which only applies to
  graphs that are planar. A möbius strip does not live on a "plane," or flat surface, which means the maps are not always
  planar like those drawn on a flat piece of paper. In the case of a möbius strip, it is the Six-Color Map Theorem! Figure
  12.103 is an example of a möbius strip with a map that requires five colors.

                                                   Figure 12.103 A Five-Coloring on a Möbius Strip

       VIDEO
      Neil deGrasse Tyson Explains the Möbius Strip (https://openstax.org/r/Neil_de_Grasse)

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, determine whether each statement is always true or sometimes true.
    25. A trail is a path.
    26. A trail is a walk.
    27. A walk is a path.
    28. A circuit is a trail.
    29. A directed cycle is a path.
    30. A circuit is a directed cycle.
    31. A directed cycle is a circuit.
    32. If a graph has an -coloring, then its chromatic number is .
    33. If the chromatic number of a graph is , then it has an -coloring.
    34. If a graph is planar, then it has a chromatic number of at most four.
1304 12 · Graph Theory

        For the following exercise, fill in the blanks to make the statement true.
            35. A walk that ____________ is a trail.
            36. A trail that ____________ is a circuit.
            37. A circuit that ___________ is a directed cycle.
            38. A closed walk that ____________ is a circuit.
            39. A complete graph with vertices has a chromatic number of_____.
            40. A graph with a clique with -vertices has a chromatic number of _________ .

             SECTION 12.4 EXERCISES

        For the following exercises, identify each sequence of vertices from the figure as a walk, trail, and/or path. Select all
        that apply.

              1. A  B  F  G  K  J  F  B
              2. G  K  O  N  J  K  L
              3. F  J  K  G  B  A
              4. I  J  K  L  K  J  N
              5. M  N  O  K  L  H
              6. A  F  K  P
              7. N  J  F  B  C  G  F  E
              8. E  F  J  I  E
        For the following exercises, identify each sequence of vertices from Figure 12.134 as a closed walk, circuit (closed trail),
        and/or directed cycle (closed path). Select all that apply.
              9. A  B  F  G  K  J  F  B  A
            10. G  K  O  N  J  K  L
            11. F  J  N  O  K  J  I  E  F
            12. I  J  K  G  F  E  I
            13. M  N  O  K  J  I  M
            14. N  J  F  B  C  G  F  J  N
            15. A  B  G  F  E  A
            16. E  F  G  K  J  F  B  A  E
        For the following exercises, use the graphs shown. Identify the graph or graphs with the given characteristics.

            17. The colors do not follow the definition of a graph coloring.
            18. The graph is a two-coloring.
            19. The graph is a three-coloring.
            20. The graph is a four-coloring.
            21. The graph is planar.
            22. The graph has a chromatic number of two.
            23. Fewer colors could be used to color the graph.
            24. The chromatic number is more than four.
            25. The Four-Color Theorem applies to the graph.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1305

For the following exercises, complete the sequence of vertices from the graph to create the indicated kind of closed
walk.

    26. Closed path: a  b        a
    27. Closed path that visits edge ed twice: e  d        e
    28. Directed cycle: e  a        e
    29. Directed cycle: b  d        b
    30. Circuit that visits vertex d twice: b  c  d        b
    31. Circuit that visits vertex f twice: g  h  f        g
For the following exercises, use the graphs shown.

32. Find the chromatic number  for graph 1 and give an  -coloring.
33. Find the chromatic number  for graph 2 and give an  -coloring.
34. Find the chromatic number  for graph 3 and give an  -coloring.
35. Find the chromatic number  for graph 4 and give an  -coloring.

For the following exercises, indicate the smallest and largest possible chromatic number of the graph described.
    36. The graph has 15 vertices and contains a clique with 9 vertices.
    37. A planar graph with 100 vertices and a clique with 3 vertices.
    38. A planar graph with more than 2 vertices and no cliques.
    39. A complete graph with 2,123 vertices.

40. In chess, a knight can move in any direction, but it must move two spaces then turn and move one more space.
      The 8 possible moves a knight can make from a space in the center of a five-by-five grid are shown in the first
      figure. A knight's tour is a sequence of moves by a knight on a chessboard (of any size) such that the knight visits
      every square exactly once. If the knight's tour brings the knight back to its starting position on the board, it is
      called a closed knight's tour. Otherwise, it is called an open knight's tour. Determine if the closed knight's tour in
      the second figure is most accurately described as a closed walk, a circuit, or a directed cycle. Explain your
      reasoning.
1306 12 · Graph Theory

        41. An open knight's tour on a five-by-five board is shown in the figure. Is it most accurately described as a walk, a trail,
              or a path?

        42. A knight's tour is not possible on a four-by-four board like the one shown in the figure. Find an open tour of the
              board in which the knight is permitted to travel through a given space more than once to achieve the goal of
              visiting every space. Is your tour most accurately described as a walk, trail, or path? Explain why.

        The neighborhood of Pines West has three cul-de-sacs that meet at an intersection as shown in the figure. A postal
        delivery person starts at the intersection and visits each house in a cul-de-sac once, returns to the intersection, visits
        each house in the next cul-de-sac, and so on, returning to the intersection when finished.

            43. Describe how the route can be represented as a graph. If there is no backtracking, in other words, the person
                   never reverses direction, is the route followed by the postal delivery person best described as a walk, trail, path,
                   closed walk, circuit, or directed cycle? Explain your reasoning.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Navigating Graphs 1307

    44. Draw the graph for the route described in the neighborhood. Find its chromatic number. Find a map coloring
          that shows the chromatic number.

45. When radio towers are within range of each other, they must use different frequencies. In the graph, the vertices
      represent the towsers, and the edges indicate the towers are in range of each other. Use graph colorings to
      determine the number of frequencies needed to avoid two towers in the same range being assigned the same
      frequency. Give an example of a coloring to support your conclusion.

46. A Sudoku puzzle consists of a nine-by-nine grid which is subdivided into nine three-by-three smaller grids. Given
      an incomplete grid, the goal is to complete it in such a way that each row contains the numbers 1 through 9, each
      column contains the numbers 1 through 9, and each three by three grid contains the numbers 1 through 9 as
      shown in the figure. If a graph were drawn with a vertex to represent each entry in the grid, what should the edges
      represent so that a nine-coloring of the graph would be a solution to the puzzle?
1308 12 · Graph Theory

        At a wedding reception, the bride and groom would like their family and friends to get to know each other better. They
        have decided that if two people know each other, they will not seat them at the same table. The following is a list of
        guests and who they know. Guests A, B, C, and D all know each other; guests E, F, G, and H all know each other; guests
        I, J, and K all know each other; guests P, Q and R all know each other, guests L, M, and O all know each other.
        Additionally, I knows D and I knows G, J knows M, K knows P, N knows L, and N knows O.

            47. Draw a graph to show the relationships.
            48. Determine the minimum number of tables needed to seat the guests so that they will sit with people they don't

                   know.
            49. Give a coloring to support your conclusion.
        The map of the states of Imaginaria is given. Use the figure to answer the following exercises.

            50. Draw a graph to represent the map.
            51. Determine the chromatic number of the graph you found.
            52. Give a graph coloring that supports your answer in the previous question.
            53. Color the provided map to correspond with the coloring you found in the previous question.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                     12.5 · Euler Circuits 1309

12.5 Euler Circuits

Figure 12.104 Delivery trucks move goods from place to place. (credit: "Mack Midliner" by Jason Lawrence/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Determine if a graph is connected.
 2. State the Chinese postman problem.
 3. Describe and identify Euler Circuits.
 4. Apply the Euler Circuits Theorem.
 5. Evaluate Euler Circuits in real-world applications.

The delivery of goods is a huge part of our daily lives. From the factory to the distribution center, to the local vendor, or
to your front door, nearly every product that you buy has been shipped multiple times to get to you. If the cost and time
of that delivery is too great, you will not be able to afford the product. Delivery personnel have to leave from one
location, deliver the goods to various places, and then return to their original location and do all of this in an organized
way without losing money. How do delivery services find the most efficient delivery route? The answer lies in graph
theory.

Connectedness

Before we can talk about finding the best delivery route, we have to make sure there is a route at all. For example,
suppose that you were tasked with visiting every airport on the graph in Figure 12.105 by plane. Could you accomplish
that task, only taking direct flight paths between airports listed on this graph? In other words, are all the airports
connected by paths? Or are some of the airports disconnected from the others?
1310 12 · Graph Theory

                                                      Figure 12.105 Major Central and South Florida Airports
        In Figure 12.105, we can see TPA is adjacent to PBI, FLL, MIA, and EYW. Also, there is a path between TPA and MCO
        through FLL. This indicates there is a path between each pair of vertices. So, it is possible to travel to each of these
        airports only taking direct flight paths and visiting no other airports. In other words, the graph is connected because
        there is a path joining every pair of vertices on the graph. Notice that if one vertex is connected to each of the others in a
        graph, then all the vertices are connected to each other. So, one way to determine if a graph is connected is to focus on a
        single vertex and determine if there is a path between that vertex and each of the others. If so, the graph is connected. If
        not, the graph is disconnected, which means at least one pair of vertices in a graph is not joined by a path. Let's take a
       closer look at graph X in Figure 12.106. Focus on vertex a. There is a path between vertices a and b, but there is no path
       between vertex a and vertex c. So, Graph X is disconnected.

                                                               Figure 12.106 Connected vs. Disconnected
        When you are working with a planar graph, you can also determine if a graph is connected by untangling it. If you draw
       it so that so that none of the edges are overlapping, like we did with Graph X in Figure 12.106, it is easier to see that the
        graph is disconnected.

                                                                    Figure 12.107 Untangling Graph X
       Versions 2 and 3 of Graph X in Figure 12.107 each have the same number of vertices, number of edges, degrees of the
        vertices, and pairs of adjacent vertices as version 1. In other words, each version retains the same structure as the
       original graph. Since versions 2 and 3 of Graph X, do not have overlapping edges, it is easier to identify pairs of vertices
       that do not have paths between them, and it is more obvious that Graph X is disconnected. In fact, there are two
       completely separate, disconnected subgraphs, one with the vertices in {a, b, e}, and the other with the vertices {c, d, f}
       These sets of vertices together with all of their edges are called components of Graph X. A component of a graph is a
        subgraph in which there is a path between each pair of vertices in the subgraph, but no edges between any of the
        vertices in the subgraph and a vertex that is not in the subgraph.
       Now let's focus on Graph Y from Figure 12.106. As in Graph X, there is a path between vertices a and b, as well as
       between vertices a and e, but Graph Y is different from Graph X because of vertex g. Not only is there a path between
       vertices a and g, but vertex g bridges the gap between a and c with the path a  b  g  c. Similarly, there is a path

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1311

between vertices a and d and vertices a and f: a  b  g  d, a  b  g  d  f. Since there is a path between vertex a
and every other vertex, Graph Y is connected. You can also see this a bit more clearly by untangling Graph Y as in Figure
12.108. Even when Y is drawn so that the edges do not overlap, the graph cannot be drawn as two separate,
unconnected pieces. In other words, Graph Y has only one component with the vertices {a, b, c, d, e, f}.
We can give an alternate definition of connected and disconnected using the idea of components. A graph is connected
if it has only one component. A graph is disconnected if it has more than one component. These alternate definitions are
equivalent to the previous definitions. This means that you can confirm a graph is connected or disconnected either by
checking to see if there is a path between each vertex and each other vertex, or by identifying the number of
components. A graph is connected if it has only one component.

                                                            Figure 12.108 Untangling Graph Y
  EXAMPLE 12.24
Determining If a Graph Is Connected or Disconnected
Use Figure 12.109 to answer each question.

                                                                    Figure 12.109 Graph E
 1. Find a path between vertex a and every other vertex on the graph, if possible.
 2. Identify all the components of Graph E.
 3. Determine whether the graph is connected or disconnected and explain how you know.

     Solution
 1. The paths are a  d  b, a  d  c, and a  d.
 2. There is only one component in Graph E. It has the vertices {a, b, c, d}.
 3. The graph is connected, because there is a path between vertex a and every other vertex. We can also so that Graph

      E is connected because it has only one component.

        YOUR TURN 12.24
  1. Determine whether each graph is connected or disconnected and identify the set of vertices that make up each

      of its components.
1312 12 · Graph Theory

               VIDEO
              Connected and Disconnected Graphs in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/connected_disconnected_graphs)
          EXAMPLE 12.25
        Applying Connectedness
        The U.S. Interstate Highway System extends throughout the 48 contiguous states. It also has routes in the states of
        Hawaii and Alaska, and the commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Consider a graph representing the U.S. Interstate Highway
        System, in which there is a vertex for each of the 50 states and Puerto Rico, and an edge is drawn between any two
        vertices representing states that are connected by a highway in that system. Would this graph be connected or
        disconnected? Explain your reasoning.
             Solution
        Hawaii, Alaska, and Puerto Rico are geographically separate from the 48 contiguous states, and each from each other.
        This means that there are vertices on the graph with no path joining them to the other vertices. So the graph is
        disconnected.

                YOUR TURN 12.25
          1. "Six degrees of separation" is the idea that any two people on Earth are connected by at most six social

              connections. Assume that this is true. Consider a graph in which each vertex is a person on Earth, and each edge
              is a social connection. Would this graph be connected or disconnected? Explain your reasoning.

     Origin of Euler Circuits

        The city of Konigsberg, modern day Kaliningrad, Russia, has waterways that divide up the city. In the 1700s, the city had
        seven bridges over the various waterways. The map of those bridges is shown in Figure 12.110. The question as to
        whether it was possible to find a route that crossed each bridge exactly once and return to the starting point was known
        as the Konigsberg Bridge Problem. In 1735, one of the most influential mathematicians of all time, Leonard Euler, solved
        the problem using an area of mathematics that he created himself, graph theory!

        Figure 12.110 Map of the Bridges of Konigsberg in 1700s (credit: "Konigsberg Bridge" by Merian Erben/Wikimedia
        Commons, Public Domain)
        Euler drew a multigraph in which each vertex represented a land mass, and each edge represented a bridge connecting
        them, as shown in Figure 12.111. Remember from Navigating Graphs that a circuit is a trail, so it never repeats an edge,

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1313

and it is closed, so it begins and ends at the same vertex. Euler pointed out that the Konigsberg Bridge Problem was the
same as asking this graph theory question: Is it possible to find a circuit that crosses every edge? Since then, circuits (or
closed trails) that visit every edge in a graph exactly once have come to be known as Euler circuits in honor of Leonard
Euler.

       VIDEO
      Recognizing Euler Trails and Euler Circuits (https://openstax.org/r/Euler_trails_circuits)
Euler was able to prove that, in order to have an Euler circuit, the degrees of all the vertices of a graph have to be even.
He also proved that any graph with that characteristic must have an Euler circuit. So, saying that a connected graph is
Eulerian is the same as saying it has vertices with all even degrees, known as the Eulerian circuit theorem.

                                                      Figure 12.111 Graph of Konigsberg Bridges
To understand why the Euler circuit theorem is true, think about a vertex of degree 3 on any graph, as shown in Figure
12.112.

                                                             Figure 12.112 A Vertex of Degree 3
First imagine the vertex of degree 3 shown in Figure 12.112 is not the starting vertex. At some point, each edge must be
traveled. The first time one of the three edges is traveled, the direction will be toward the vertex, and the second time it
will be away from the vertex. Then, at some point, the third edge must be traveled coming in toward the vertex again.
This is a problem, because the only way to get back to the starting vertex is to then visit one of the three edges a second
time. So, this vertex cannot be part of an Euler circuit.
Next imagine the vertex of degree 3 shown in Figure 12.112 is the starting vertex. The first time one of the edges is
traveled, the direction is away from the vertex. At some point, the second edge will be traveled coming in toward the
vertex, and the third edge will be the way back out, but the starting vertex is also the ending vertex in a circuit. The only
way to return to the vertex is now to travel one of the edges a second time. So, again, this vertex cannot be part of an
Euler circuit.
For the same reason that a vertex of degree 3 can never be part of an Euler circuit, a vertex of any odd degree cannot
either. We can use this fact and the graph in Figure 12.113 to solve the Konigsberg Bridge Problem. Since the degrees of
the vertices of the graph in Figure 12.112 are not even, the graph is not Eulerian and it cannot have an Euler circuit. This
means it is not possible to travel through the city of Konigsberg, crossing every bridge exactly once, and returning to
your starting position.
1314 12 · Graph Theory

                                              Figure 12.113 Degrees of Vertices in Konigsberg Bridge Multigraph
               VIDEO
              Existence of Euler Circuits in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/existence_Euler_circuits)

     Chinese Postman Problem

        At Camp Woebegone, campers travel the waterways in canoes. As part of the Camp Woebegone Olympics, you will hold
        a canoeing race. You have placed a checkpoint on each of the 11 different streams. The competition requires each team
        to travel each stream, pass through the checkpoints in any order, and return to the starting line, as shown in the Figure
        12.114.

                                                            Figure 12.114 Map of Canoe Event Checkpoints
        Since the teams want to go as fast as possible, they would like to find the shortest route through the course that visits
        each checkpoint and returns to the starting line. If possible, they would also like to avoid backtracking. Let's visualize the
        course as a multigraph in which the vertices represent turns and the edges represent checkpoints as in Figure 12.115.

                                                                Figure 12.115 Multigraph of Canoe Event
        The teams would like to find a closed walk that repeats as few edges as possible while still visiting every edge. If they
        never repeat an edge, then they have found a closed trail, which is a circuit. That circuit must cover all edges; so, it would
        be an Euler circuit. The task of finding a shortest circuit that visits every edge of a connected graph is often referred to as
        the Chinese postman problem. The name Chinese postman problem was coined in honor of the Chinese
        mathematician named Kwan Mei-Ko in 1960 who first studied the problem.
        If a graph has an Euler circuit, that will always be the best solution to a Chinese postman problem. Let's determine if the
        multigraph of the course has an Euler circuit by looking at the degrees of the vertices in Figure 12.116. Since the degrees
        of the vertices are all even, and the graph is connected, the graph is Eulerian. It is possible for a team to complete the
        canoe course in such a way that they pass through each checkpoint exactly once and return to the starting line.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1315

                                            Figure 12.116 Degrees of Vertices in Graph of Canoe Event
  EXAMPLE 12.26
Understanding Eulerian Graphs
A postal delivery person must deliver mail to every block on every street in a local subdivision. Figure 12.117 is a map of
the subdivision. Use the map to answer each question.

                                                              Figure 12.117 Map of Subdivision
 1. Draw a graph or multigraph to represent the subdivision in which the vertices represent the intersections, and the

      edges represent streets.
 2. Is your graph connected? Explain how you know.
 3. Determine the degrees of the vertices in the graph.
 4. Is your graph an Eulerian graph?
 5. Is it possible for the postal delivery person to visit each block on each street exactly once? Justify your answer.

     Solution
 1. The graph is in Figure 12.118.

                                                                Figure 12.118 Graph of Subdivision
 2. The graph is connected. It has only one component and there is a path between each pair of vertices.
 3. There are four corner vertices of degree 2, there are eight exterior vertices of degree 3, and there are four interior

      vertices of degree 4.
 4. The graph is not Eulerian because it has vertices of odd degree.
 5. No. Since the graph is not Eulerian, there is no Euler circuit, which means that there is no route that would pass

      through every edge exactly once.

        YOUR TURN 12.26
  A pest control service has at least one customer on every block of every street or cul-de-sac in a neighborhood. Use
1316 12 · Graph Theory

          the map of the neighborhood to answer each question.

                                                                             Map of Neighborhood
              1. Draw a graph or multigraph of the neighborhood in which the vertices represent intersections, and the edges

                   represent the streets between them.
              2. Is your graph connected? Explain how you know.
              3. Determine the degrees of the vertices in the graph.
              4. Is your graph an Eulerian graph?
              5. Is it possible for the postal delivery person to visit each block on each street exactly once and start and end at

                   the same position? Justify your answer.

     Identifying Euler Circuits

        Solving the Chinese postman problem requires finding a shortest circuit through any graph or multigraph that visits
        every edge. In the case of Eulerian graphs, this means finding an Euler circuit. The method we will use is to find any
        circuit in the graph, then find a second circuit starting at a vertex from the first circuit that uses only edges that were not
        in the first circuit, then find a third circuit starting at a vertex from either of the first two circuits that uses only edges that
        were not in the first two circuits, and then continue this process until all edges have been used. In the end, you will be
        able to link all the circuits together into one large Euler circuit.
        Let's find an Euler circuit in the map of the Camp Woebegone canoe race. In Figure 12.119, we have labeled the edges of
        the multigraph so that the circuits can be named. In a multigraph it is necessary to name circuits using edges and
        vertices because there can be more than one edge between adjacent vertices.

                                          Figure 12.119 Multigraph of Canoe Race with Vertices and Edges Labeled
        We will begin with vertex 1 because it represents the starting line in this application. In general, you can start at any
        vertex you want. Find any circuit beginning and ending with vertex 1. Remember, a circuit is a trail, so it doesn't pass
       through any edge more than once. Figure 12.120 shows one possible circuit that we could use as the first circuit, 1  A 
       2  B  3  C  4  G  5  J  1.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1317

                                                                   Figure 12.120 First Circuit
From the edges that remain, we can form two more circuits that each start at one of the vertices along the first circuit.
Starting at vertex 3 we can use 3  H  5  I  1  K  3 and starting at vertex 2 we can use 2  D  6  E  7  F  2,
as shown in Figure 12.121.

                                                         Figure 12.121 Second and Third Circuits
Now that each of the edges is included in one and only once circuit, we can create one large circuit by inserting the
second and third circuits into the first. We will insert them at their starting vertices 2 and 3

becomes

Finally, we can name the circuit using vertices, 1  2  6  7  2  3  5  1  3  4  5  1, or edges, A  D  E  F 
B  H  I  K  C  G  J.
Let's review the steps we used to find this Eulerian Circuit.
Steps to Find an Euler Circuit in an Eulerian Graph
Step 1 - Find a circuit beginning and ending at any point on the graph. If the circuit crosses every edges of the graph, the
circuit you found is an Euler circuit. If not, move on to step 2.
Step 2 - Beginning at a vertex on a circuit you already found, find a circuit that only includes edges that have not
previously been crossed. If every edge has been crossed by one of the circuits you have found, move on to Step 3.
Otherwise, repeat Step 2.
Step 3 - Now that you have found circuits that cover all of the edges in the graph, combine them into an Euler circuit. You
can do this by inserting any of the circuits into another circuit with a common vertex repeatedly until there is one long
circuit.

  EXAMPLE 12.27
Finding an Euler Circuit
Use Figure 12.122 to answer each question.
1318 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                            Figure 12.122 Graph F
         1. Verify the Graph F is Eulerian.
         2. Find an Euler circuit that begins and ends at vertex c.

             Solution
         1. The graph is connected because it has only one component. Also, each of the vertices in graph F has even degree as

              shown in Figure 12.123. So, the graph is Eulerian.

                                                                Figure 12.123 Degrees of Vertices in Graph F
         2. Step 1: Beginning at vertex c, identify circuit c  e  b  c as shown in Figure 12.124. Since this circuit does not

              cover every edge in the graph, move on to Step 2.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                12.5 · Euler Circuits 1319

                                                           Figure 12.124 First Circuit in Graph F
    Step 2: Find another circuit beginning at one of the vertices in the first circuit, using only edges that have not been
    used in the first circuit. It is possible to do this using either vertex c or vertex b. In Figure 12.125, we have used
    vertex b as the starting and ending point for a second circuit, b  d  c  a  b. Since all edges have been crossed
    by one of the two circuits, move on to Step 3.

                                                         Figure 12.125 Second Circuit in Graph F
    Step 3: Combine the two circuits into one. Replace vertex b in the first circuit with the whole second circuit that
    begins at vertex b.

                                                                                                                 .
    An Euler circuit that begins at vertex c is c  e  b  d  c  a  b  c.

      YOUR TURN 12.27
Use Graphs X and Y to answer each question.
1320 12 · Graph Theory

              1. Which graph does not have an Euler circuit? Explain how you know.
              2. Find an Euler circuit in the other graph.

     Eulerization

        The Chinese postman problem doesn't only apply to Eulerian graphs. Recall the postal delivery person who needed to
        deliver mail to every block of every street in a subdivision. We used the map in Figure 12.126 to create the graph in
        Figure 12.127.

                                                              Figure 12.126 Map of Subdivision

                                                            Figure 12.127 Graph of Subdivision
Since the graph of the subdivision has vertices of odd degree, there is no Euler circuit. This means that there is no route
through the subdivision that visits every block of every street without repeating a block. What should our delivery person
do? They need to repeat as few blocks as possible. The technique we will use to find a closed walk that repeats as few
edges as possible is called eulerization. This method adds duplicate edges to a graph to create vertices of even degree
so that the graph will have an Euler circuit.
In Figure 12.128, the eight vertices of odd degree in the graph of the subdivision are circled in green. We have added
duplicate edges between the pairs of vertices, which changes the degrees of the vertices to even degrees so the
resulting multigraph has an Euler circuit. In other words, we have eulerized the graph.

                                 Figure 12.128 An Eulerized Graph

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1321

The duplicate edges in the eulerized graph correspond to blocks that our delivery person would have to travel twice. By
keeping these duplicate edges to a minimum, we ensure the shortest possible route. It can be challenging to determine
the fewest duplicate edges needed to eulerize a graph, but you can never do better than half the number of odd
vertices. In the graph in Figure 12.128, we have found a way to fix the eight vertices of odd degree with only four
duplicate edges. Since four is half of eight, we will never do better.

      IMPORTANT! The duplicate edges that we add indicate places where the route will pass twice. An entirely new edge
      between two vertices that were not previously adjacent would indicate that our postal delivery person created a new
      road through someone's property! So, we can duplicate existing edges, but we cannot create new ones.

  EXAMPLE 12.28
Eulerizing Graphs
Use Graph A and multigraphs B, C, D, and E given in Figure 12.129 to answer the questions.

                                               Figure 12.129 Graph A and Multigraphs B through E
 1. Which of the multigraphs are not eulerizations of Graph A? Explain your answer.
 2. Which eulerization of Graph A uses the fewest duplicate edges? How many does it use?
 3. Is it possible to eulerize Graph A using fewer duplicate edges than your answer to part 2? If so, give an example. If

      not, explain why not.
     Solution
 1. Multigraph B is not an eulerization of A because the edge N between vertices c and d is not a duplicate of an
      existing edge. Multigraph E is not an eulerization of A because vertices b and e have odd degree.
 2. Multigraph C uses 3 duplicate edges while multigraph D only uses 2. So, D uses the fewest.
 3. Since there were four vertices in Graph A, the fewest number of edges that could possibly eulerize the graph is half
      of four, which is two. So, it is not possible to eulerize Graph A using fewer edges.

        YOUR TURN 12.28
  1. Create an eulerization using the fewest duplicate edges possible for Graph Z.

                                                                                Graph Z

      IMPORTANT! Since only duplicate edges can be added to eulerize a graph, it is not possible to eulerize a
      disconnected graph.
1322 12 · Graph Theory

          WORK IT OUT

          Figure 12.130 Map of the Magical Land of Oz (credit: "Map of Oz within the surrounding deserts" by L. Frank Baum/
          Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
          In The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, written by L. Frank Baum and illustrated by W. W. Denslow, the region of the Emerald
          City lies at the center of the magical land of Oz, with Gillikin Country to the north, Winkie Country to the east,
          Munchkin Country to the west, and Quadling Country to the south. Munchkin Country and Winkie Country each
          shares a border with Gillikin Country and Quadling Country. Let's apply graph theory to Dorothy's famous journey
          through Oz. Draw a graph in which each vertex is one of the regions of Oz. Then answer each question:
           1. Is there an Euler trail circuit that Dorothy could follow, instead of the yellow brick road, to lead her from the land

                 of the Munchkins, through all the regions of Oz and back, passing over each border exactly once? If not, how
                 could the graph be Eulerized most efficiently?
           2. What is the chromatic number of the graph? Find a graph coloring that demonstrates your answer and use it to
                 draw and color a graph of Oz.

     Check Your Understanding

        For the following exercises, determine whether each statement is always true, sometimes true, or never true.
            41. A disconnected graph has only one component.
            42. A graph that has all vertices of even degree is connected.
            43. There is a route through the city of Konigsberg that a person may pass over each bridge exactly once and
                   return to the starting point.
            44. A graph with vertices of all even degree is Eulerian.
            45. An Eulerian graph has all vertices of even degree.
            46. An Euler circuit is a closed trail.
            47. An Euler circuit is a closed path
            48. To eulerize a graph, add new edges between previously nonadjacent vertices until no vertices have odd degree.
            49. To eulerize a graph, add duplicate edges between adjacent vertices until no vertices have odd degree.
            50. The number of duplicate edges required to eulerize a graph is half the number of vertices of odd degree.

             SECTION 12.5 EXERCISES

        Use Graphs A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I to answer the following exercises. Identify any graph or graphs with the given
        characteristics or indicate that none do.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1323

     1. Connected
     2. Disconnected
     3. Exactly two components
     4. Exactly three components
     5. Exactly four components
     6. Exactly five components
     7. At least one vertex of odd degree
     8. All vertices of even degree
     9. An Euler circuit
    10. A path between vertex j and each other vertex on the same graph
Use the graphs in the previous exercise to answer the following exercises. For each exercise, list the set of vertices for
each component in the given graph.
    11. Graph B
    12. Graph E
    13. Graph F
    14. Multigraph I
Use the graphs in the initial exercise to answer the following exercises. For each exercise, a graph and a vertex on the
graph are given. Find a path between the given vertex and each other vertex on the graph. If this is not possible,
indicate that it is not.
    15. Graph A, vertex c.
    16. Graph B, vertex m.
    17. Graph D, vertex x.
    18. Graph F, vertex w.
    19. Graph G, vertex a.
    20. Graph H, vertex e.
Use the graphs in the initial exercise to answer the following exercises. For each exercise, a graph and a vertex on the
graph are given. Find an Euler circuit beginning and ending at the given vertex if one exists. If no Euler circuits exist,
explain how you know that they do not.
    21. Graph A, vertex c.
    22. Graph B, vertex k.
    23. Graph D, vertex w.
    24. Graph G, vertex b.
1324 12 · Graph Theory

            25. Graph H, vertex o.
            26. Multigraph I, vertex p.
        For the following exercises, use the connected graphs. In each exercise, a graph is indicated. Determine if the graph is
        Eulerian or not and explain how you know. If it is Eulerian, give an example of an Euler circuit. If it is not, state which
        edge or edges you would duplicate to eulerize the graph.

            27. Graph J
            28. Graph K
            29. Multigraph L
            30. Graph M
        31. The figure shows a map of zoo exhibits A through P with walkways shown in gray. Draw a graph, or multigraph, to

              represent the routes through the zoo in which the edges represent walkways and the vertices represent turns and
              intersections, which are each marked with a star. Notice that there is exactly one exhibit between each pair of
              adjacent vertices. Label the edges with the corresponding exhibit. Use it to determine if it is possible for a visitor to
              begin at the entrance, view each exhibit exactly once, and end back at the entrance. If it is possible, give an
              example of a circuit on the graph that would represent a route the visitor could take. If it is not possible, explain
              why.

        The figure shows the map of the exhibits at an indoor aquarium with hallways shown in gray. Turns and intersections
        of hallways are marked with stars.

            32. Use the Euler circuit theorem and a graph in which the edges represent hallways and the vertices represent
                   turns and intersections to explain why a visitor to the aquarium cannot start at the entrance, visit every exhibit
                   exactly once, and return to the entrance.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  12.5 · Euler Circuits 1325

    33. Use an eulerization of the graph you found to determine the least amount of backtracking necessary to allow a
          visitor to begin at the entrance, see every exhibit at least once, and return to the entrance. How many hallways
          must be covered twice? Explain your reasoning.

The map of the states of Imaginaria is given.
    34. Use a graph to determine if it is possible to travel through Imaginaria crossing each the border between each
          pair of states exactly once, and returning to the state in which you started.

    35. Use an eulerization of the graph you found to determine the fewest borders that must be covered twice in
          order to cross each border at least once and return to the state in which you started. Explain your reasoning.
1326 12 · Graph Theory

    12.6 Euler Trails

        Figure 12.131 The Pony Express mail route spanned from California to Missouri. (credit: "Map of Pony Express" by
        Nathan Hughes Hamiltonh/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Describe and identify Euler trails.
         2. Solve applications using Euler trails theorem.
         3. Identify bridges in a graph.
         4. Apply Fleury's algorithm.
         5. Evaluate Euler trails in real-world applications.
        We used Euler circuits to help us solve problems in which we needed a route that started and ended at the same place.
        In many applications, it is not necessary for the route to end where it began. In other words, we may not be looking at
        circuits, but trails, like the old Pony Express trail that led from Sacramento, California in the west to St. Joseph, Missouri
        in the east, never backtracking.

     Euler Trails

        If we need a trail that visits every edge in a graph, this would be called an Euler trail. Since trails are walks that do not
        repeat edges, an Euler trail visits every edge exactly once.

          EXAMPLE 12.29
        Recognizing Euler Trails
        Use Figure 12.132 to determine if each series of vertices represents a trail, an Euler trail, both, or neither. Explain your
        reasoning.

                                                                            Figure 12.132 Graph H
         1. a  b  e  g  f  c  d  e
         2. a  b  e  g  f  c  d  e  b  a  d  g
         3. g  d  a  b  e  d  c  f  g  e

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1327

     Solution
 1. It is a trail only. It is a trail because it is a walk that doesn't cover any edges twice, but it is not an Euler trail because

      it didn't cover edges ad or dg.
 2. It is neither. It is not a trail because it visits ab and be twice. Since it is not a trail, it cannot be an Euler trail.
 3. It is both. It is a trail because it is a walk that doesn't cover any edges twice, and it is an Euler trail because it visits all

      the edges.

        YOUR TURN 12.29
  Use the figure to determine if each sequence of vertices represents an Euler trail or not. If not, explain why.

                                                                              Graph I
      1. e  f  b  a  d  c  g  h  e  d
      2. d  a  b  f  e  h  g  c
      3. d  a  b  e  f  b  e  d  c  g  h  e

The Five Rooms Puzzle

Just as Euler determined that only graphs with vertices of even degree have Euler circuits, he also realized that the only
vertices of odd degree in a graph with an Euler trail are the starting and ending vertices. For example, in Figure 12.132,
Graph H has exactly two vertices of odd degree, vertex g and vertex e. Notice the Euler trail we saw in Excercise 3 of
Example 12.29 began at vertex g and ended at vertex e.
This is consistent with what we learned about vertices off odd degree when we were studying Euler circuits. We saw that
a vertex of odd degree couldn't exist in an Euler circuit as depicted in Figure 12.133. If it was a starting vertex, at some
point we would leave the vertex and not be able to return without repeating an edge. If it was not a starting vertex, at
some point we would return and not be able to leave without repeating an edge. Since the starting and ending vertices
in an Euler trail are not the same, the start is a vertex we want to leave without returning, and the end is a vertex we
want to return to and never leave. Those two vertices must have odd degree, but the others cannot.

                                                             Figure 12.133 A Vertex of Degree 3
Let's use the Euler trail theorem to solve a puzzle so you can amaze your friends! This puzzle is called the "Five Rooms
Puzzle." Suppose that you were in a house with five rooms and the exterior. There is a doorway in every shared wall
between any two rooms and between any room and the exterior as shown in Figure 12.134. Could you find a route
through the house that passes through each doorway exactly once?
1328 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                      Figure 12.134 Five Rooms Puzzle
        Let's represent the puzzle with a graph in which vertices are rooms (or the exterior) and an edge indicates a door
        between two rooms as shown in Figure 12.135.

                                                                Figure 12.135 Graph of Five Rooms Puzzle
        To pass through each doorway exactly once means that we cross every edge in the graph exactly once. Since we have
        not been asked to start and end at the same position, but to visit each edge exactly once, we are looking for an Euler
        trail. Let's check the degrees of the vertices.

                                                       Figure 12.136 Degrees of Vertices in Five Rooms Puzzle
        Since there are more than two vertices of odd degree as shown in Figure 12.136, the graph of the five rooms puzzle
        contains no Euler path. Now you can amaze and astonish your friends!

     Bridges and Local Bridges

        Now that we know which graphs have Euler trails, let's work on a method to find them. The method we will use involves
        identifying bridges in our graphs. A bridge is an edge which, if removed, increases the number of components in a
        graph. Bridges are often referred to as cut-edges. In Figure 12.137, there are several examples of bridges. Notice that an
        edge that is not part of a cycle is always a bridge, and an edge that is part of a cycle is never a bridge.

                                                                      Figure 12.137 Graph with Bridges
        Edges bf, cg, and dg are "bridges"
        The graph in Figure 12.137 is connected, which means it has exactly one component. Each time we remove one of the
        bridges from the graph the number of components increases by one as shown in Figure 12.138. If we remove all three,
        the resulting graph in Figure 12.138 has four components.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1329

                                     Figure 12.138 Removing a Bridge Increases Number of Components
In sociology, bridges are a key part of social network analysis. Sociologists study two kinds of bridges: local bridges and
regular bridges. Regular bridges are defined the same in sociology as in graph theory, but they are unusual when
studying a large social network because it is very unlikely a group of individuals in a large social network has only one
link to the rest of the network. On the other hand, a local bridge occurs much more frequently. A local bridge is a
friendship between two individuals who have no other friends in common. If they lose touch, there is no single individual
who can pass information between them. In graph theory, a local bridge is an edge between two vertices, which, when
removed, increases the length of the shortest path between its vertices to more than two edges. In Figure 12.139, a local
bridge between vertices b and e has been removed. As a result, the shortest path between b and e is b  i  j  k  e,
which is four edges. On the other hand, if edge ab were removed, then there are still paths between a and b that cover
only two edges, like a  i  b.

                                                          Figure 12.139 Removing a Local Bridge
The significance of a local bridge in sociology is that it is the shortest communication route between two groups of
people. If the local bridge is removed, the flow of information from one group to another becomes more difficult. Let's
say that vertex b is Brielle and vertex e is Ella. Now, Brielle is less likely to hear about things like job opportunities, that
Ella many know about. This is likely to impact Brielle as well as the friends of Brielle.

  EXAMPLE 12.30
Identifying Bridges and Local Bridges
Use the graph of a social network in Figure 12.140 to answer each question.

                                                         Figure 12.140 Graph of a Social Network
 1. Identify any bridges.
 2. If all bridges were removed, how many components would there be in the resulting graph?
 3. Identify one local bridge.
 4. For the local bridge you identified in part 3, identify the shortest path between the vertices of the local bridge if the

      local bridge were removed.
1330 12 · Graph Theory

             Solution
         1. The edges ku, gh, and hi are bridges.
         2. If the bridges were all removed, there would be four components in the resulting graph, {i}, {h}, {u, v, w, x}, and {a,

              b, c, d, e, f, g, j, k, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t} as shown in Figure 12.141.

                                                          Figure 12.141 Graph of Social Network without Bridges
         3. Three local bridges are dn, ef, and qt, among others.
         4. If dn were removed, the shortest path between d and n would be d  e  f  j  o  m  n.

                YOUR TURN 12.30
          1. How many bridges and local bridges are in a complete graph with three or more vertices? Explain your

               reasoning.
               VIDEO
               Bridges and Local Bridges in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/bridges_local_bridges)

     Finding an Euler Trail with Fleury's Algorithm

        Now that we are familiar with bridges, we can use a technique called Fleury's algorithm, which is a series of steps, or
        algorithm, used to find an Euler trail in any graph that has exactly two vertices of odd degree. Here are the steps
        involved in applying Fleury's algorithm.
        Here are the steps involved in applying Fleury's algorithm.
        Step 1: Begin at either of the two vertices of odd degree.
        Step 2: Remove an edge between the vertex and any adjacent vertex that is NOT a bridge, unless there is no other
        choice, making a note of the edge you removed. Repeat this step until all edges are removed.
        Step 3: Write out the Euler trail using the sequence of vertices and edges that you found. For example, if you removed
        ab, bc, cd, de, and ef, in that order, then the Euler trail is a  b  c  d  e  f.
        Figure 12.142 shows the steps to find an Euler trail in a graph using Fleury's algorithm.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1331

                                             Figure 12.142 Using Fleury's Algorithm To Find Euler Trail
The Euler trail that was found in Figure 12.142 is t  v  w  u  t  w  y  x  v.

  EXAMPLE 12.31
Finding an Euler Trail with Fleury's Algorithm
Use Fleury's Algorithm to find an Euler trail for Graph J in Figure 12.143.

                                                                     Figure 12.143 Graph J
     Solution
Step 1: Choose one of the two vertices of odd degree, c or f, as your starting vertex. We will choose c.
Step 2: Remove edge ca, cb, or cd. None of these are cut edges so we can select any of the three. We will choose cb as
shown in Figure 12.144 to be the first edge removed.

                                                        Figure 12.144 Graph J with cb Removed
Repeat Step 2 The next choice is to remove edge ba, bd, or bf as shown in Figure 12.144, but bf is not an option since it
is a bridge. We will choose ba as shown in Figure 12.145 to be the second edge removed.

                                                   Figure 12.145 Graph J with cb and ba Removed
Repeat Step 2 for the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh edges. As shown in Figure 12.145, until we get to the seventh
edge there is only one option each time, ac, cd, db, and bf in that order. For the seventh edge, we must choose between
1332 12 · Graph Theory

        fe and fg. Neither of these are bridges. We choose fe. Figure 12.146 shows that ac, cd, db, bf, and fe have been removed.

                                                         Figure 12.146 Graph J with Seven Edges Removed
        Repeat Step 2 for the eight, ninth, tenth, and eleventh edges. As shown in Figure 12.146, there is only one option for
        each of these edges, eh, hi, ig, and gf, in that order.
        Step 3: Write out the Euler trail using the vertices in the sequence that the edges were removed. We removed cb, ba, ac,
        cd, db, bf, fe, eh, hi, ig, and gf, in that order. The Euler trail is c  b  a  c  d  b  f  e  h  i  g  f.

              TIP! To avoid errors, count the number of edges in your graph and make sure thatyour Euler trail represents that
              number of edges.

                YOUR TURN 12.31
          Use Graph L to fill in the blanks to complete the steps in Fleury's algorithm.

                                                                                     Graph L
              1. The two vertices that can be used as the starting vertex are ____ and s.
              2. If sq is the first edge removed, the three options for the second edge to be removed are qr, ___, and ___;

                   however, ___ cannot be chosen because it is a ________________.
              3. If qr is the second edge removed, the next four edges to be removed must be ___, ___, ___, and ___, in that

                   order.
              4. After qn is removed, the three options for the next edge to be removed are no, ___, and ___, however, ___

                   cannot be chosen because it is a _____________.
              5. If no is the next edge removed, the last four edges removed will be ___, ___, ___, and ___, in that order.
              6. The final Euler trail using the answers to parts 1 through 5 is _________________________.

        In the previous section, we found Euler circuits using an algorithm that involved joining circuits together into one large
        circuit. You can also use Fleury's algorithm to find Euler circuits in any graph with vertices of all even degree. In that case,
        you can start at any vertex that you would like to use.
        Step 1: Begin at any vertex.
        Step 2: Remove an edge between the vertex and any adjacent vertex that is NOT a bridge, unless there is no other
        choice, making a note of the edge you removed. Repeat this step until all edges are removed.
        Step 3: Write out the Euler circuit using the sequence of vertices and edges that you found. For example, if you removed
        ab, bc, cd, de, and ea, in that order, then the Euler circuit is a  b  c  d  e  a.

               VIDEO
              Fluery's Algorithm to Find an Euler Circuit (https://openstax.org/r/Fleurys_algorithm)
              IMPORTANT! Since a circuit is a closed trail, every Euler circuit is also an Euler trail, but when we say Euler trail in this

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.6 · Euler Trails 1333

      chapter, we are referring to an open Euler trail that begins and ends at different vertices.

  EXAMPLE 12.32
Finding an Euler Circuit or Euler Trail Using Fleury's Algorithm
Use Fleury's algorithm to find either an Euler circuit or Euler trail in Graph G in Figure 12.147.

                                                                    Figure 12.147 Graph G

     Solution
Graph G has all vertices of even degree so it has an Euler circuit.

Step 1: Choose any vertex. We will choose vertex j.

Step 2: Remove one of the four edges that meet at vertex j. Since jn is a bridge, we must remove either jh, ji, or jk. We
remove ji as shown in Figure 12.148.

                                                    Figure 12.148 Graph G with 1 Edge Removed

Repeat Step 2: Since id is a bridge, we can remove either ih or ik next. We remove ih, and then the only option is to
remove hj as shown in Figure 12.149.

                                                    Figure 12.149 Graph G with 3 Edges Removed

Repeat Step 2: Since jn is a bridge, the next edge removed must be jk, and then the only option is to remove ki followed
by id as shown in Figure 12.149. Even though id is a bridge, it can be removed because it is the only option at this point.
Figure 12.150 shows Graph G with these additional edges removed.

Figure 12.150 Graph G with 6 Edges Removed
1334 12 · Graph Theory

        Repeat Step 2: Choose any one of the edges db, dc, or de. We remove dc as shown in Figure 12.151.

                                                            Figure 12.151 Graph G with 7 Edges Removed
        Repeat Step 2: Since co is a bridge, choose cb next. We remove cb, then bd, and then de as shown in Figure 12.152.

                                                           Figure 12.152 Graph G with 10 Edges Removed
        Repeat Step 2: Next, remove ec and co. Then choose any of op, pn, or om. We remove on as shown in Figure 12.153.

                                                           Figure 12.153 Graph G with 13 Edges Removed
        Repeat Step 2: Next, remove either nm, np, or nj, but nj is a So, we remove nm as shown in Figure 12.154.

                                                           Figure 12.154 Graph G with 14 Edges Removed
        Repeat Step 2: Next, remove mo, op, pn, and nj. And we are done!
        Step 3: Notice that the algorithm brought us back to the vertex where we started, forming an Euler circuit. Write out the
        Euler circuit:
        jihjkidcbdeconmopnj

                YOUR TURN 12.32
          1. Find an Euler circuit or trail through the graph using Fleury's algorithm.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1335

                                                                                Graph T

  WORK IT OUT

  We have discussed a lot of subtle concepts in this section. Let's make sure we are all on the same page. Work with a
  partner to explain why each of the following facts about bridges are true. Support your explanations with definitions
  and graphs.
   1. When a bridge is removed from a graph, the number of components increases.
   2. A bridge is never part of a circuit.
   3. An edge that is part of a triangle is never a local bridge.

Check Your Understanding

Fill in the blank to make the statement true.
    51. An Euler trail is a trail that visits each ___________ exactly once.
    52. __________ algorithm is a procedure for finding an Euler trail or circuit.
    53. An Euler _____ always begins and ends at the same vertex, but an Euler _____ does not.
    54. When a bridge is removed from a graph, the number of ________ is increased by one.
    55. When a __________ is removed from a graph, the shortest path between its vertices will be greater than two.
    56. When using Fleury's algorithm to find an Euler trail, never remove a _________ unless it is the only option.

        SECTION 12.6 EXERCISES

Use the figure to answer the following exercises. Identify the graph(s) with the given characteristics, if any.

     1. Connected
     2. All vertices of even degree
     3. Exactly two vertices of odd degree
     4. Has an Euler trail
     5. Has an Euler circuit
     6. Has neither an Euler trail nor an Euler circuit
     7. ab is a bridge
     8. ef is a bridge
     9. ab is a local bridge
    10. ef is a local bridge
Use the figure to answer the following exercises. In each exercise, a graph and a sequence of vertices are given.
Determine whether each sequence of vertices is an Euler trail, an Euler circuit, or neither for the graph. If it is neither,
explain why.
1336 12 · Graph Theory

            11. Graph A, w  x  y  z  w  u  t  s  v  u
            12. Graph A, u  v  s  t  u  w  z  y  x  w
            13. Graph A, s  t  u  v  u  w  z  y  x  w
            14. Graph A, w  x  y  z  w  v  u  t  s  v
            15. Graph B, u  v  w  x  r  u  t  s  y  z  u
            16. Graph B, v  w  x  r  u  z  y  s  t  u
            17. Graph C, s  t  u  v  w  x  s
            18. Graph C, t  u  x  w  u  s  t  v  w
            19. Graph D, t  r  s  t  u  v  t  x  v  w  x  y  z  x
            20. Graph D, x  v  w  x  y  z  x  t  r  s  t  u  v  t
        Use the figure to answer the following exercises. For each graph, identify a bridge if one exists. If it does not, state so. If
        it does, identify any components that are created when the bridge is removed.

            21. Graph A
            22. Graph B
            23. Graph C
            24. Graph D
        Use the figuree to answer the following exercises. For each graph, identify a local bridge if one exists. If it does not,
        state so. If it does, find a shortest path between the vertices of the local bridge if the local bridge is removed.

            25. Graph A
            26. Graph B
            27. Graph C
            28. Graph D
        Use the graphs to answer the following exercises. In each exercise, a graph is given. Find two Euler trails in each graph
        using Fleury's algorithm.

            29. Graph Q

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1337

    30. Graph R
    31. Graph S
    32. In chess, a knight can move in any direction, but it must move two spaces then turn and move one more space.

          The eight possible moves a knight can make from a given space are shown in the figure.

          A graph in which each vertex represents a space on a five-by-six game board and each edge represents a move
          a knight could make is shown in the figure.

          A knight's tour is a sequence of moves by a knight on a chessboard (of any size) such that the knight visits every
          square exactly once. If the knight's tour brings the knight back to its starting position on the board, it is called a
          closed knight's tour. Otherwise, it is called an open knight's tour. Determine if the closed knight's tour in the
          figure is most accurately described as a trail, a circuit, an Euler trail, or an Euler circuit of the graph of all
          possible knight moves. Explain your reasoning.

33. Determine if the open knight's tour in the figure is most accurately described as a trail, a circuit, an Euler trail, or
      an Euler circuit of the graph of all possible knight moves on a five-by-five game board. Explain your reasoning.
1338 12 · Graph Theory

        34. The neighborhood of Pines West has three cul-de-sacs that meet at an intersection as shown in the figure. A postal
              delivery person starts at the intersection and visits each house in a cul-de-sac once, returns to the intersection,
              visits each house in the next cul-de-sac, and so on, returning to the intersection when finished. Describe how the
              route can be represented as a graph. If there is no backtracking, in other words, the person never reverses
              direction, is the route followed by the postal delivery person best described as a trail, a circuit, an Euler trail, or an
              Euler circuit? Explain your reasoning.

        35. Recall that the bridges of Konigsberg can be represented as a multigraph as shown in the figure. We have seen
              that no route through Konigsberg passes over each bridge exactly once and returns to the starting point. Is there
              a route that passes over each bridge exactly once but does not begin and end at the same point? Explain your
              reasoning.

        36. The figure shows the map of the exhibits at an indoor aquarium. Use a graph in which the edges represent
              hallways and the vertices represent turns and intersections to explain why a visitor to the aquarium cannot start at
              one of the turns or intersections, passes by every exhibit exactly once, and end at one of the turns or intersections.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.6 · Euler Trails 1339

37. The map of the states of Imaginaria is given. Use a graph to determine if it is possible to begin in one state, travel
      through Imaginaria crossing the border between each pair of states exactly once, and end in a different state. If it
      is possible, find such a route. If it is not, explain why.
1340 12 · Graph Theory

    12.7 Hamilton Cycles

        Figure 12.155 The symmetries of an icosahedron, with 30 edges, 20 faces, and 12 vertices, can be analyzed using graph
        theory. (credit: "Really big icosahedron" by Clayton Shonkwiler/Wikimedia, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Describe and identify Hamilton cycles.
         2. Compute the number of Hamilton cycles in a complete graph.
         3. Apply and evaluate weighted graphs.
        In Euler Circuits and Euler Trails, we looked for circuits and paths that visited each edge of a graph exactly once. In this
        section, we will look for circuits that visit each vertex exactly once. Like many concepts in graph theory, the idea of a
        circuit that visits each vertex once was inspired by games and puzzles. As early as the 9th century, Indian and Islamic
        intellectuals wondered whether it was possible for a knight to visit every space on a chess board of a given size, which is
        equivalent to visiting every vertex of a graph that represents the chess board.
        In 1857, a mathematician named William Rowan Hamilton invented a puzzle in which players were asked to find a route
        along the edges of a dodecahedron (see Figure 12.156), which visited every vertex exactly once. Let's explore how graph
        theory provides insight into these games as well as practical applications such as the Traveling Salesperson Problem.

                                                                        Figure 12.156 A Dodecahedron

     Hamilton's Puzzle

        Before we look at the solution to Hamilton's puzzle, let's review some vocabulary we used in Figure 12.157. It will be
        helpful to remember that directed cycle is a type of circuit that doesn't repeat any edges or vertices.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              12.7 · Hamilton Cycles 1341

                                             Figure 12.157 Closed Walks, Circuits, and Directed Cycles
The goal of Hamilton's puzzle was to find a route along the edges of the dodecahedron, which visits each vertex exactly
once. A dodecahedron is a three-dimensional space figure with faces that are all pentagons as we saw in Figure 12.156.
Since it is easier to visualize two dimensions rather than three, we will flatten out the dodecahedron and look at the
edges and vertices on a flat surface. Graph A in Figure 12.158 shows a two-dimensional graph of the edges and vertices,
and Graph B shows an untangled version of Graph A in which no edges are crossing. Graph B in Figure 12.158 is very
similar to the design of the game board that Hamilton invented for his puzzle.

                                                                         Untangle graph

                                          Figure 12.158 Graph of Edges and Vertices of Dodecahedron
We can see that this is a planar graph because it can be "untangled." In order to solve Hamilton's puzzle, we need to find
a circuit that visits every vertex once. A solution is shown in Figure 12.159.

                                                                                                                              >
                                                                      In three Dimensions

                                                     Figure 12.159 A Solution to Hamilton's Puzzle
A circuit that doesn't repeat any vertices, like the one in Figure 12.159, is called a directed cycle. So, we can most
accurately say that Hamilton's puzzle asks us to find a directed cycle that visits every vertex in a graph exactly once.
Because Hamilton created and solved this puzzle, these special circuits were named Hamilton cycles, or Hamilton
1342 12 · Graph Theory

        circuits.
                 WHO KNEW?

          Icosian Game
          When Hamilton invented his puzzle in the 19th century, it was originally called the Icosian game. This was a reference
          to an icosahedron, not a dodecahedron. Why? Hamilton was actually interested in the symmetries of icosahedrons. It
          turns out that these two space figures are related to each other. The dodecahedron has 30 edges, 20 faces, and 12
          vertices, while the icosahedron has 30 edges, 12 faces, and 20 vertices. By relating the vertices of the dodecahedron
          to the faces of the icosahedron, Hamilton was able to make the mathematical connections necessary to use graph
          theory and dodecahedrons to make discoveries about the symmetries of icosahedrons.

     Hamilton Cycles vs. Euler Circuits

        Let's practice naming and identifying Hamilton cycles, as well as distinguishing them from Euler circuits. It is important
        to remember that Euler circuits visit all edges without repetition, while Hamilton cycles visit all vertices without
        repetition. Hamilton cycles are named by their vertices just like all circuits. An example is given in Figure 12.160.

                                                                Figure 12.160 Hamilton Cycle in Graph Z
        Notice that the Hamilton cycle a  b  c  d for Graph Z in Figure 12.160 is NOT an Euler circuit, because it does not visit
        edge . Some Hamilton cycles are also Euler circuits while some are not, and some Euler circuits are Hamilton cycles
        while some are not.

              TIP! Sometimes students confuse Euler circuits with Hamilton cycles. To help you remember, think of the E in Euler
              as standing for Edge.

          EXAMPLE 12.33
        Differentiating between Hamilton Cycles or Euler Circuits
        Use Figure 12.161 to determine whether the given circuit is a Hamilton cycle, an Euler circuit, both, or neither.

                                                                            Figure 12.161 Graph Q
         1. a  b  c  e  h  g  f  d  a
         2. g  e  h  g  f  d  a  b  d  g
         3. a  b  c  e  h  g  f  d  b  e  g  d  a

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             12.7 · Hamilton Cycles 1343

    Solution
1. This circuit is a Hamilton cycle only. It visits each vertex exactly once, so, it is a Hamilton cycle. It is not an Euler

     circuit because it doesn't visit all of the edges.
2. This circuit is neither Hamilton cycle nor an Euler circuit. It doesn't visit vertex , so, it is not a Hamilton cycle. It also

     doesn't visit edges and , so, it is not an Euler circuit.
3. This circuit is an Euler circuit only. It visits several vertices more than once; so, it is not a Hamilton cycle. It visits

     every edge exactly once, so, it is an Euler circuit.

     TIP! Euler circuits never skip a vertex, so, they only fail to be Hamilton cycles when they visit a vertex more than
     once. Hamilton cycles never visit any edges twice, so, they only fail to be Euler circuits when they skip edges.

       YOUR TURN 12.33

1. Consider the figure shown. Is the circuit a  b  f  e  h  i  g  d  c  a an Euler circuit, a Hamilton cycle,
     or both?

                                                                                Graph T

Notice that the graph is a cycle. A cycle will always be Eulerian because all vertices are degree 2. Moreover, any circuit in
the graph will always be both an Euler circuit and a Hamilton cycle. It is not always as easy to determine if a graph has a
Hamilton cycle as it is to see that it has an Euler circuit, but there is a large group of graphs that we know will always
have Hamilton cycles, the complete graphs. Since all vertices in a complete graph are adjacent, we can always find a
directed cycle that visits all the vertices. For example, look at the directed six-cycle, n  o  p  q  r  s, in the
complete graph with six vertices in Figure 12.162.

            Figure 12.162 Directed Cycle in Complete Graph

That is not the only directed six-cycle in the graph though. We could find another just be reversing the direction, and we
could find even more by using different edges. So, how many Hamilton cycles are in a complete graph with vertices?
Before we tackle this problem, let's look at a shorthand notation that we use in mathematics which will be helpful to us.

Factorials

In many areas of mathematics, we must calculate products like              or                                                  ,

products that involve multiplying all the counting numbers from a particular number down to 1. Imagine that the

product happened to be all the numbers from 100 down to 1. That's a lot of writing! Instead of writing all of that out,

mathematicians came up with a shorthand notation. For example, instead of      , we write , which is

read "7 factorial." In other words, the product of all the counting numbers from down to 1 is called factorial and it is
1344 12 · Graph Theory

written

EXAMPLE 12.34

Evaluating Factorials

Evaluate and            for           .

Solution
                                and

YOUR TURN 12.34

1. Evaluate and                  for     .

A common use for factorials is counting the number of ways to arrange objects. Suppose that there were three students,
Aryana, Byron, and Carlos, who wanted to line up in a row. How many arrangements are possible? There are six
possibilities: ABC, ACB, BAC, BCA, CAB, or CBA. Notice that there were three students being arranged, and the number of
possible arrangements is three.

  FORMULA

  The number of ways to arrange distinct objects is .

  EXAMPLE 12.35

Counting Arrangements of Letters
Find the number of ways to arrange the letters a, b, c, and d.

     Solution

        YOUR TURN 12.35

  1. Find the number of ways to arrange the letters v, w, x, y, and z.

Counting Hamilton Cycles in Complete Graphs

Now, let's get back to answering the question of how many Hamilton cycles are in a complete graph. In Table 12.8, we
have drawn all the four cycles in a complete graph with four vertices. Remember, cycles can be named starting with any
vertex in the cycle, but we will name them starting with vertex .

Access for free at openstax.org
                  Complete Graph            Cycle                     Cycle                  12.7 · Hamilton Cycles 1345

                                                                                    Cycle

                  Cycle Name Clockwise      (a, b, c, d)              (a, b, d, c)  (a, c, b, d)

Cycle Name Counterclockwise                 (a, d, c, b)              (a, c, d, b)  (a, d, b, c)

Table 12.8 Four-Cycles in Complete Graph with Four Vertices

Table 12.8 shows that there are three unique four-cycles in a complete graph with four vertices. Notice that there were

two ways to name each cycle, one reading the vertices in a clockwise direction and one reading the vertices in a

counterclockwise direction. This is important to us because we are interested in Hamilton cycles, which are directed
cycles. Although the cycles (a, b, c, d) and (a, d, c, b) are the same cycle, the directed cycles, a  b  c  d  a and a  d
 c  b  a, which travel the same route in reverse order are considered different directed cycles, as shown in Table

12.9.

                  Complete Graph            Cycle                     Cycle         Cycle

                  Clockwise Hamilton Cycle

                                                       abcda abdca acbda
Counter-clockwise Hamilton Cycle

                                            adcba acdba adbca

Table 12.9 Hamilton Cycles in a Complete Graph with Four Vertices

The six directed four-cycles in Table 12.9 are the only distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with four vertices. Six

is also the number of ways to arrange the three letters b, c, and d. (Do you see why?) The number of ways to arrange

three letters is  . Similarly, the number of Hamilton cycles in a graph with five vertices is the number of

ways to arrange four letters, which is      . In general, to find the number of Hamilton cycles in a graph,

we take one less than the number of vertices and find its factorial.
1346 12 · Graph Theory

          FORMULA
          The number of distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with vertices is

          EXAMPLE 12.36
        Counting Hamilton Cycles in a Complete Graph
        How many Hamilton cycles are in the complete graph in Figure 12.163?

     Solution                                Figure 12.163 Complete Graph L            Hamilton cycles.
There are five vertices in the graph. Using       , we have

      YOUR TURN 12.36
1. How many Hamilton cycles are in the graph?

                                                                        Complete Graph R

Weighted Graphs

Suppose that an officer in the U.S. Air Force who is stationed at Vandenberg Air Force base must drive to visit three other
California Air Force bases before returning to Vandenberg. The officer needs to visit each base once. The vertices in the
graph in Figure 12.164 represent the four U.S. Air Force bases, Vandenberg, Edwards, Los Angeles, and Beale. The edges
are labeled to with the driving distance between each pair of cities.

                                               Figure 12.164 Graph of Four California Air Force Bases
The graph in Figure 12.164 is called a weighted graph, because each edge has been assigned a value or weight. The
weights can represent quantities such as time, distance, money, or any quantity associated with the adjacent vertices
joined by the edges. The total weight of any walk, trail, or path is the sum of the weights of the edges it visits.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          12.7 · Hamilton Cycles 1347

Notice that the officer's trip can be represented as a Hamilton cycle, because each of the four vertices in the graph is
visited exactly once.

EXAMPLE 12.37

Finding Hamilton Cycles of Lowest Weight
Use Figure 12.164 and the given Hamilton cycles to answer the following questions.
VLEBV
VLBEV
VELBV
VBELV

1. Which of the Hamilton cycles (directed cycles) lie on the same cycle (undirected cycle) in the graph?
2. Find the total weight of each cycle.
3. Of the four, which of the Hamilton cycles describes the shortest trip for the officer? Describe the route.

Solution

1. V  L  E  B  V and V  B  E  L  V follow the same edges in reverse order.

2. Any Hamilton cycles that lie on the same cycle will have the same edges and the same total weight.

V  L  E  B  V and V  B  E  L  V each have total weight                                                 .

V  L  B  E  V has a total weight                                            .

V  E  L  B  V has a total weight                                            .

3. Hamilton cycles V  L  E  B  V and V  B  E  L  V each have the lowest total weight. The officer would take
     the route from Vandenberg, to Los Angeles, to Edwards, to Beale, and back to Vandenberg, or reverse that route.

      YOUR TURN 12.37
1. Find the weight of the Hamilton cycle m  o  p  n  q  m in the given figure.

                             Weighted Complete Graph with Five Vertices

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, fill in the blank to make the statement true.

57. A Hamilton cycle is a circuit that visits each ___________ exactly once.

58. A __________ graph with  vertices has  Hamilton cycles.

For the following exercises, fill in the blank with is or is not to make the statement true.
    59. A Hamilton cycle ________ a circuit.
    60. A Hamilton cycle that visits every edge ________ an Euler circuit.
    61. A Hamilton cycle ________ different from a Hamilton circuit.
    62. An Euler circuit that visits every vertex ________ a Hamilton cycle.
    63. The total weight of a trail _______ the sum of the weights of the edges visited by the trail.
    64. A weighted graph _______ always a complete graph.
    65. The number of ways to arrange n objects _______
    66. Every cycle ____ a circuit.
1348 12 · Graph Theory

             SECTION 12.7 EXERCISES

        For the following exercises, use the figure to determine whether the sequence of vertices in the given graph is a
        Hamilton cycle, an Euler circuit, both, or neither.

              1. Graph A: f  b  g  e  d  c  f
              2. Graph A: g  b  f  c  d  e  g
              3. Graph A: d  e  g  d  f  b  g  f  c  d
              4. Graph L: h  i  k  n  j  h
              5. Graph L: n  i  h  j  m  k  n
              6. Graph L: j  i  n  k  i  j  k  m  j
              7. Graph U: v  w  r  s  t  o  q  v
              8. Graph U: w  q  r  s  t  o  v  w
        For the following exercises, use the figure to find a circuit that fits the description.

              9. A Hamilton cycle in Graph P that begins at vertex c.
            10. An Euler circuit in Graph P that begins at vertex c.
            11. A directed cycle in Graph P that is NOT a Hamilton cycle, and explain why it is not a Hamilton cycle.
            12. A directed circuit in Graph P that is NOT an Euler circuit, and explain why it is not an Euler circuit.
            13. A Hamilton cycle in Graph Q that begins at vertex n.
            14. An Euler circuit in Graph Q that begins at vertex n.
            15. A directed cycle in Graph Q that is NOT a Hamilton cycle, and explain why it is not a Hamilton cycle.
            16. A directed circuit in Graph Q that is NOT an Euler circuit, and explain why it is not an Euler circuit.
        17. Use the results of Exercises 9-16 to make an observation about which tends to involve a longer sequence of

              vertices, Hamilton cycles or Euler circuits. Explain why you think this is.
        For the following exercises, evaluate the factorial expression for the given value of .

            18.
            19.
            20.
            21.
        For the following exercises, find the number of arrangements letters in the given word.
            22. have
            23. teamwork
            24. anime
            25. making
        For the following exercises, find the number of Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with the given number of vertices.
            26. 12 vertices
            27. 13 vertices
            28. 9 vertices

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             12.7 · Hamilton Cycles 1349

29. 8 vertices
30. vertices

For the following exercises, given the number of Hamilton cycles in a complete graph, determine the number of

vertices.

31.        Hamilton cycles

32.        Hamilton cycles

33.             Hamilton cycles

34. Hamilton cycles

For the following exercises, all the distinct Hamilton cycles for a complete graph are given. Indicate which pairs of

Hamilton cycles (directed cycles) lie on the same cycle (undirected cycle) in the graph.

    35.
           1. b  a  c  d  b
           2. b  a  d  c  b
           3. b  c  a  d  b
           4. b  c  d  a  b
           5. b  d  a  c  b
           6. b  d  c  a  b

36.        ifghei
       1.  ifgehi
       2.  ifhgei
       3.  ifhegi
       4.  ifeghi
       5.  ifehgi
       6.  igfhei
       7.  igfehi
       8.  ighfei
       9.  ighefi
           igefhi
     10.   igehfi
     11.   ihgfei
     12.   ihgefi
     13.   ihfgei
     14.   ihfegi
     15.   ihegfi
     16.   ihefgi
     17.   ieghfi
     18.   iegfhi
     19.   iehgfi
     20.   iehfgi
     21.   iefghi
     22.   iefhgi
     23.
     24.

For the following exercises, use the figure to find the weight of the given Hamilton cycle.

37. q  r  s  v  y  x  w  t  u  q
38. u  y  x  w  t  q  r  s  v  u
39. y  v  s  r  u  q  t  w  x  y
40. u  v  s  r  q  t  w  x  y  u
1350 12 · Graph Theory

        41. The neighborhood of Pines West has three cul-de-sacs that meet at an intersection as shown. A postal delivery
              person starts at the intersection and visits each house in a cul-de-sac once, returns to the intersection, visits each
              house in the next cul-de-sac, and so on, returning to the intersection when finished. Describe how the route can be
              represented as a graph. If there is no backtracking, in other words, the person never reverses direction, is the
              route followed by the postal delivery person best described as a trail, an Euler circuit, a Hamilton cycle, or neither?
              Explain your reasoning.

        42. In chess, a knight can move in any direction, but it must move two spaces then turn and move one more space.
              The 8 possible moves a knight can make from a given space are shown in the figure.

              A graph in which each vertex represents a space on a five-by-six game board and each edge represents a move a
              knight could make is shown in the figure.

              A knight's tour is a sequence of moves by a knight on a chessboard (of any size) such that the knight visits every
              square exactly once. If the knight's tour brings the knight back to its starting position on the board, it is called a
              closed knight's tour. Otherwise, it is called an open knight's tour.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1351

      Determine if the closed knight's tour in Figure 12.239 is most accurately described as an Euler circuit or a Hamilton
      cycle, or both, of the graph of all possible knight moves. Explain your reasoning.

12.8 Hamilton Paths

Figure 12.165 A school bus picks up children along a planned route. (credit: "Kids at School Bus Stop" by Ty Hatch/Flickr,
CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe and identify Hamilton paths.
 2. Evaluate Hamilton paths in real-world applications.
 3. Distinguish between Hamilton paths and Euler trails.
In the United States, school buses carry 25 million children between school and home every day. The total distance they
travel is around 6 billion kilometers per year. In the city of Boston, Massachusetts, the 2016 budget for running those
buses was $120 million dollars. In 2017, the city held a competition to find ways to cut costs and the Quantum Team
from the MIT Operations Research Center came to the rescue, using a computer algorithm to identify the most efficient
and least costly routes, which saved the city of Boston $5 million each year and even reduced daily CO2 emissions by
9,000 kilograms! (This U.S. city put an algorithm in charge of its school bus routes and saved $5 million, Sean Fleming,
World Economic Forum)
The problem the Quantum Team tackled involves graph theory. Imagine a graph in which vertices are the bus depot, the
school, and the bus stops along a particular route. The bus must start at the depot, visit every stop exactly once, and end
at the school. The route is a special kind of path that visits every vertex exactly once. Can you guess what those paths are
called?
1352 12 · Graph Theory

     Hamilton Paths

        Just as circuits that visit each vertex in a graph exactly once are called Hamilton cycles (or Hamilton circuits), paths that
        visit each vertex on a graph exactly once are called Hamilton paths. As we explore Hamilton paths, you might find it
        helpful to refresh your memory about the relationships between walks, trails, and paths by looking at Figure 12.166. We
        know that paths are walks that don't repeat any vertices or edges. So, a Hamilton path visits every vertex without
        repeating any vertices or edges. Figure 12.167 shows a path from vertex A to vertex E and a Hamilton path from vertex A
        to vertex E.

                                                                   Figure 12.166 Walks, Trails, and Paths

                                                                   Figure 12.167 Path or Hamilton Path?
          EXAMPLE 12.38
        Identifying Hamilton Paths
        Which of the following sequences of vertices is a Hamilton path for Graph Q in Figure 12.168?

                                                                            Figure 12.168 Graph Q
         1. a  d  b  c  e  g  f
         2. c  b  e  h  g  f  d  a
         3. h  e  g  d  b  e  g  f  d  a  b  c

             Solution
        Sequence 1 is a path, because it is a walk that doesn't repeat any vertices or edges, but not a Hamilton path because it
        skips vertex h. Sequence 2 is a path that visits each vertex exactly once; so, it is a Hamilton path. Sequence 3 is a walk,
        but it is not a path because it visits vertices g, e, and b each more than once; so, it cannot be a Hamilton path. So, we can

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1353

see that only sequence 2 is a Hamilton path.
        YOUR TURN 12.38

  Use the graphs to determine if the given sequence of vertices represents a Hamilton path or not.

                              Graphs A and K

1. Graph A, b  c  d  e  f
2. Graph A, b  e  f  c  b  d
3. Graph K, n  q  o  p  m

TIP! Since a Hamilton path visits each vertex exactly once, it must have the same number of vertices listed as appear
in the graph.

Finding Hamilton Paths

Suppose you were visiting an aquarium with some friends. The map of the aquarium is given in Figure 12.169. The
letters represent the exhibits.

                                                         Figure 12.169 Map of Aquarium Exhibits
Figure 12.170 shows a graph of the aquarium in which each vertex represents an exhibit and each edge is a route
1354 12 · Graph Theory

        between the pair of exhibits that doesn't bypass another exhibit.

                                                                      Figure 12.170 Graph of Aquarium
        Let's see if we can plan a tour of the exhibits that visits each exhibit exactly once, beginning at exhibit O and ending at
        exhibit C. Suppose that, after exhibit O, we plan to visit exhibit Q and then exhibit M. After M, should we plan to visit N, L,
        or R? Take a look at Figure 12.171. If R is not chosen next, that will cause a problem later on. Do you see what it is?

                                                                Figure 12.171 Choosing Vertex L, N, or R
        If L or N is chosen next, the only way to get to R later will be to go from S to R, and then we will not be able to continue
        without repeating a vertex. So, we will pick R next, and then the only option is S. After S we have another choice to make.
        As shown in Figure 12.172, the next choice is between B and E. Keeping in mind that the goal is to end at C, which would
        be the better choice?

                                                                  Figure 12.172 Choosing Vertex B or E
        If you said vertex B, you are right! Otherwise, we will not be able to visit B later. After B, the only option is E. Then we can
        choose either D or G. Either will work fine. Let's choose G as shown in Figure 12.173. After G, you must visit H, but should
        you visit K or L after that?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1355

                                                           Figure 12.173 Choose Vertex L or K
If you said to go to vertex L next, you are right! Otherwise, it will be impossible to visit N without repeating a vertex. So,
next is L, then N, then K, and then at J you have another decision to make we can see in Figure 12.174. Should you
choose F, I, or P next?

                                                          Figure 12.174 Choose Vertex F, I, or P
If you said P, you are right! If you choose either of the other two vertices, you will not be able to visit P later without
passing through another vertex twice. Once P is chosen, vertex I must be next followed by F. Then you have to choose
between A and D as shown in Figure 12.175.

                                                           Figure 12.175 Choose Vertex A or D
In this case, we must go to D then to A so that we can visit C without backtracking. The complete Hamilton path is shown
in Figure 12.176.
1356 12 · Graph Theory

                                                        Figure 12.176 Complete Hamilton Path from O to C
        So, one Hamilton path that begins at O and ends at C is O  Q  M  R  S  B  E  G  H  L  N  K  J  P  I  F
         D  A  C.
        There is no set sequence of steps that can be used to find a Hamilton path if it exists, but it does help to keep in mind
        where we are headed and avoid choices that will make returning to a particular vertex impossible without repeating
        vertices. Let's practice finding Hamilton paths.

          EXAMPLE 12.39
        Finding a Hamilton Path
        Use Figure 12.177 to find a Hamilton path between vertices C and D.

                                                                            Figure 12.177 Graph G
             Solution
        If we start at vertex C, A must be next. Then we must choose between B and F. If we choose F, we will have to backtrack
        to get to include B; so, we must choose B. Once we choose B, we must choose F next. After F, we choose E, because we
        want to end at D. So, a Hamilton path between C and D is C  A  B  F  E  D.

                YOUR TURN 12.39
          1. Use Figure 12.253 to find a Hamilton path between vertices C and E.

     Existence of a Hamilton Path

        It turns out that there is no Hamilton path between vertices A and E in Graph G in Figure 12.177. To understand why, let's
        imagine there is a red apple tree on one side of a bridge and a green apple tree on the other side of the bridge. Now
        suppose someone asked you to pick up all the fallen apples under each tree without crossing the bridge more than once,
        and making sure that the first apple you pick up and the last apple you pick up are both red. You would say, that is
        impossible! To have the first and last apple be red would either require leaving the green apples on the ground or
        crossing the bridge twice.
        Let's see how this relates to finding a Hamilton path between A and E in Graph G. The edge AC is a bridge because, if it
        were removed, the graph would become disconnected with two components, the component {C} and the component {A,
        B, D, E, F}. So, we can think of the vertices A, B, D, E, and F as the red apples, vertex C as the green apple, and the edge
        AC is the bridge between them as in Figure 12.178.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1357

                                                Figure 12.178 Bridge between Red and Green Apples
The creation of a Hamilton path requires a visit to each vertex, just as picking up all the apples requires a visit to each
apple. A and E are both red apples; so, a path from A to E would both start and end at a red apple, just as you were asked
to do. And you wouldn't be able to cross the bridge twice because that would mean visiting A twice, which is not allowed
in a Hamilton path. So, it is impossible to find a Hamilton path from A to E just as it was impossible to pick up all the
apples without crossing the bridge more than once. By the same reasoning, if a graph has a bridge, there will never be a
Hamilton path that begins and ends on the same side of that bridge, meaning beginning and ending at vertices that
would be in the same component if the bridge were removed from the graph.

  EXAMPLE 12.40
Finding a Hamilton Path If One Exists
Find a Hamilton path from vertex s to vertex v for each graph in Figure 12.179 or indicate that there is none.

                                                           Figure 12.179 Graphs A, B, C, and D
     Solution
Graph A: Edge uw is a bridge connecting component {s, t, u, v} to the component {w, x, y, z}. There is no Hamilton path
from vertex s to vertex v because they would be part of the same component if the bridge uw were removed.
Graph B: There are no bridges in Graph B. The only method we have to determine if a Hamilton path from vertex s to
vertex v exists is to try every possibility. From vertex s, we can visit either vertex y or vertex t. We will try vertex y first and
then come back to see what happens with vertex t. After visiting y, we must visit z and then u, but then we have to
decide between vertices r, t, and v next as shown in Figure 12.180.

                                                          Figure 12.180 Choose Vertex r, t, or v
Vertex v is not an option since we want to end at v. Vertex t is not an option since that would force us to go to visit s a
second time. So, we must go to vertex r next. After vertex r, we must visit x, then w, then v, but we missed vertex t as
shown in Figure 12.181.
1358 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                       Figure 12.181 Missed Vertex t
        Let's go back to the beginning and choose t instead of y. After t, we must go to u and then we have a choice to make
        between r, v, and z as shown in Figure 12.182.

                                                                  Figure 12.182 Choose Vertex v, r, or z
        Vertex v is not an option since we want to end at v. Vertex z is not an option since that would force us to go y and then to
        visit s a second time. So, we must go to vertex r next. After r, we must go to x then w then v, where we have to stop even
        though we have missed vertices y and z, as shown in Figure 12.183.

                                                                  Figure 12.183 Missed Vertices y and z
        So, we have tried every possible route and there are no Hamilton paths between s and v in Graph B.
        Graph C: In Graph C, there is a Hamilton path, s  t  u  x  w  v.
        Graph D: In Graph D, there is a bridge, tx, which would form components {r, s, t, u, q} and {v, w, x, y, z} if it were
        removed. Since s and v would be in different components, it is possible there is a Hamilton path between them. The only
        way to know is to try all possibilities. If we begin at s, we can go to r then t, or we can go directly to t, either way, we have
        a problem as you can see in Figure 12.184.

                                                            Figure 12.184 Vertices Visited Twice or Skipped
        If we visit all the vertices in the component {r, s, t, u, q}, we will have to visit t a second time in order to cross the bridge.
        If we visit t only once, we have to skip some of the vertices. So, there is no Hamilton path between s and v.

                YOUR TURN 12.40
          Use Graph L to find a Hamilton path between each pair of vertices or indicate that there isn't one.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1359

                     Graph L

1. p to r
2. m to p
3. o to q

There is not a short way to determine if there is a Hamilton path between two vertices on a graph that works in every
situation. However, there are a few common situations that can help us to quickly determine that there is no Hamilton
path. Some of these are listed in Table 12.10.

           Scenario                                                             Diagram

Scenario 1 If an edge ab is a bridge, then there is no Hamilton path between a
 pair of vertices that are on the same side of edge ab. We saw this in Graph A

                                          of Example 12.40.

                                                                                No Hamilton path between any two
                                                                                      vertices in the component
                                                                                                 {a, c, d, f}.

                                                                                No Hamilton path between any two
                                                                                        vertices in {b, e, h, g, i}.

Scenario 2 If an edge ab is a bridge with at least three components on each
side, then there is no Hamilton path beginning or ending at a or b. We saw

                             this in Graph D of Example 12.40.

                                                                                No Hamilton path beginning or
                                                                                          ending at a or b.

Scenario 3 If a graph is composed of two cycles joined only at a single vertex
 p, and v is any vertex that is NOT adjacent to p, then there are no Hamilton
  paths beginning or ending at p. We saw this in Graph B of Example 12.40.

                                                                                                                        No Hamilton path can be formed
                                                                                                                     starting or ending at vertices, r, v,
                                                                                                                    or u because they are not adjacent

                                                                                                                                         to p.

Table 12.10 Some Impossible Hamilton Paths

      There are also many other situations in which a Hamilton path is not possible. These are just a few that you will
      encounter.

Hamilton Path or Euler Trail?

We learned in Euler Trails that an Euler trail visits each edge exactly once, whereas a Hamilton path visits each vertex
exactly once. Let's practice distinguishing between the two.
1360 12 · Graph Theory

          EXAMPLE 12.41
        Distinguishing between Hamilton Path and Euler Trail
        Use Figure 12.185 to determine if the given sequence of vertices is a Hamilton path, an Euler trail, both, or neither.

                                 Figure 12.185 Graphs A, F, and K

1. Graph A, e  b  a  e  d  c  b
2. Graph F, f  g  j  h  i
3. Graph K, k  l  m  n  o

    Solution
1. Since the sequence covers every edge once but visits vertices more than once, it is only an Euler trail.
2. Since the sequence visits every vertex exactly once but skips some edges, it is only a Hamilton path.
3. Since the sequence visits each edge and each vertex exactly once, it is both an Euler trail and a Hamilton path.

        YOUR TURN 12.41

  Use Figure 12.262 to determine if the given sequence of vertices is a Hamilton path, an Euler trail, both, or neither.
      1. Graph A, a  b  e  d  c
      2. Graph F, g  h  i  j  h  f  g  j  f  i
      3. Graph K, o  n  m  l

  WORK IT OUT

  As we saw in Figure 12.130, the Emerald City lies at the center of the Magical Land of Oz, with Gillikin Country to the
  north, Winkie Country to the east, Munchkin Country to the west, and Quadling Country to the south. Munchkin
  Country and Winkie Country each shares a border with Gillikin Country and Quadling Country. Let's apply graph
  theory to Dorothy's famous journey through Oz one more time!

  Draw a graph in which each vertex is one of the regions of Oz. Is there a Hamilton path that Dorothy could follow,
  instead of the yellow brick road, to lead her from the land of the Munchkins, through all the regions of Oz exactly
  once, and end in the Emerald City? If so, what might it be? Compare your results with those of a classmate.

Check Your Understanding

For the following exercises, fill in the blank with the same as or different from to make the statement true.
    67. Unlike in a Hamilton cycle, the vertex where the Hamilton path begins is _________ the vertex where the
          Hamilton path ends.
    68. If a sequence of vertices represents a Hamilton path, the number of vertices listed should be _______ the
          number of vertices in the whole graph.
    69. To determine if a graph has a Hamilton path, use a method that is _________ the method used to determine if a
          graph has an Euler trail.
    70. If a graph with a bridge has a Hamilton path, the starting vertex should be on the side of the bridge that is
          ________ the side of the bridge with the ending vertex.

71. A path between two vertices of a graph that visits each vertex of the graph exactly once is called an Euler path.
       a. True

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1361

       b. False

72. Any graph that has exactly two vertices of odd degree has a Hamilton path.
       a. True
       b. False

73. If a graph is composed of two cycles joined only at a single vertex p, then no Hamilton path can be formed starting
      or ending at any vertex that is adjacent to p.
       a. True
       b. False

74. If an edge ab is a bridge with at least three components on each side, then there is no Hamilton path between
      vertex a and any vertex on the other side of edge ab.
       a. True
       b. False

        SECTION 12.8 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, use the figure to determine whether the sequence of vertices in the given graph is a
Hamilton path, an Euler trail, both, or neither.

     1. Graph G: f  b  g  e  d  c
     2. Graph G: g  b  f  c  d  e
     3. Graph G: f  b  g  d  f  c  d  e  g
     4. Graph W: v  w  r  s  t  o  q
     5. Graph W: s  r  w  v  q  o  t
     6. Graph N: h  i  k  n  j  h
     7. Graph N: n  i  h  j  m
     8. Graph N: m  j  h  i  k  n  i  j  k
For the following exercises, use the figure to explain why the given sequence of vertices does not represent a Hamilton
path.

     9. Graph A: t  s  v  u  x  w  y  z
    10. Graph B: w  x  r  u  z  y  s  t  u  v
    11. Graph C: s  u  w  v  t
    12. Graph D: r   t  q  u  t  x  v  w  x  z  y
For the following exercises, use the figure to find a path that fits the description or indicate which scenario from the
figure makes it impossible.
1362 12 · Graph Theory

            13. A Hamilton path in Graph H that begins at vertex c and ends at vertex e.
            14. A Hamilton path in Graph Q that begins at vertex n and ends at vertex h.
            15. A Hamilton path in Graph H that begins at vertex c and ends at vertex g.
            16. A Hamilton path in Graph Q that begins at vertex m and ends at vertex j.
            17. A Hamilton path in Graph H that begins at vertex g.
            18. A Hamilton path in Graph Q that begins at vertex i.
            19. A path between n and j in Graph Q that is NOT a Hamilton path, and explain why it is not a Hamilton path.
            20. A path between a and c in Graph H that is NOT a Hamilton path, and explain why it is not a Hamilton path.
        21. In chess, a knight can move in any direction, but it must move two spaces then turn and move one more space.

              The eight possible moves a knight can make from a given space are shown in the figure.

              A knight's tour is a sequence of moves by a knight on a chessboard (of any size) such that the knight visits every
              square exactly once. If the knight's tour brings the knight back to its starting position on the board, it is called a
              closed knight's tour. Otherwise, it is called an open knight's tour. Determine if the Knight's tour shown in the figure
              is a Hamilton path, an Euler trail, or both, for the graph of all possible knight moves on an eight-by-eight chess
              board in which the vertices are spaces on the board and the edges indicate that the knight can move directly from
              one space to the other. Explain your reasoning.

        Recall from the section Euler Circuits, as part of the Camp Woebegone Olympics, there is a canoeing race with a

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                               12.8 · Hamilton Paths 1363

checkpoint on each of the 11 different streams as shown in the figure. The contestants must visit each checkpoint.

    22. Draw a graph in which the vertices represent checkpoints, and an edge indicates that it is possible to travel
          from one checkpoint to the next without passing through another checkpoint.

    23. Find a Hamilton path beginning at vertex A and ending at vertex E.
    24. What does this Hamilton path represent in the context of the race?
The figure shows a map of zoo exhibits A through P. Use it to answer each question.

    25. Draw a graph to represent the routes through the zoo in which the edges represent walkways and the vertices
          represent exhibits. Two vertices are connected if a person can walk between the exhibits they represent without
          passing another exhibit.

    26. Use the graph you created to find a route that begins at exhibit M, ends at exhibit J, and visits each exhibit
          exactly once.
1364 12 · Graph Theory

    12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem

Figure 12.186 Each door on the route of a traveling salesperson can be represented as a vertex on a graph. (credit:
"Three in a row, Heriot Row" by Jason Mason/Flickr, CC BY 2.1)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Distinguish between brute force algorithms and greedy algorithms.
 2. List all distinct Hamilton cycles of a complete graph.
 3. Apply brute force method to solve traveling salesperson applications.
 4. Apply nearest neighbor method to solve traveling salesperson applications.

We looked at Hamilton cycles and paths in the previous sections Hamilton Cycles and Hamilton Paths. In this section, we
will analyze Hamilton cycles in complete weighted graphs to find the shortest route to visit a number of locations and
return to the starting point. Besides the many routing applications in which we need the shortest distance, there are also
applications in which we search for the route that is least expensive or takes the least time. Here are a few less common
applications that you can read about on a website set up by the mathematics department at the University of Waterloo
in Ontario, Canada: (https://openstax.org/r/University_of_Waterloo)

· Design of fiber optic networks
· Minimizing fuel expenses for repositioning satellites
· Development of semi-conductors for microchips
· A technique for mapping mammalian chromosomes in genome sequencing

Before we look at approaches to solving applications like these, let's discuss the two types of algorithms we will use.

Brute Force and Greedy Algorithms

An algorithm is a sequence of steps that can be used to solve a particular problem. We have solved many problems in
this chapter, and the procedures that we used were different types of algorithms. In this section, we will use two
common types of algorithms, a brute force algorithm and a greedy algorithm. A brute force algorithm begins by
listing every possible solution and applying each one until the best solution is found. A greedy algorithm approaches a
problem in stages, making the apparent best choice at each stage, then linking the choices together into an overall
solution which may or may not be the best solution.

To understand the difference between these two algorithms, consider the tree diagram in Figure 12.187. Suppose we

want to find the path from left to right with the largest total sum. For example, branch A in the tree diagram has a sum

of  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1365

                                                       Figure 12.187 Points Along Different Paths
To be certain that you pick the branch with greatest sum, you could list each sum from each of the different branches:
A:
B:
C:
D:
E:
F:
G:
H:
Then we know with certainty that branch E has the greatest sum.

                                                                   Figure 12.188 Branch E
Now suppose that you wanted to find the branch with the highest value, but you only were shown the tree diagram in
phases, one step at a time.
1366 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                    Figure 12.189 Tree Diagram Phase 1
        After phase 1, you would have chosen the branch with 10 and 7. So far, you are following the same branch. Let's look at
        the next phase.

                                                                    Figure 12.190 Tree Diagram Phase 2
        After phase 2, based on the information you have, you will choose the branch with 10, 7 and 4. Now, you are following a
        different branch than before, but it is the best choice based on the information you have. Let's look at the last phase.

                                                                    Figure 12.191 Tree Diagram Phase 3
        After phase 3, you will choose branch G which has a sum of 32.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1367

The process of adding the values on each branch and selecting the highest sum is an example of a brute force algorithm
because all options were explored in detail. The process of choosing the branch in phases, based on the best choice at
each phase is a greedy algorithm. Although a brute force algorithm gives us the ideal solution, it can take a very long
time to implement. Imagine a tree diagram with thousands or even millions of branches. It might not be possible to
check all the sums. A greedy algorithm, on the other hand, can be completed in a relatively short time, and generally
leads to good solutions, but not necessarily the ideal solution.

EXAMPLE 12.42

Distinguishing between Brute Force and Greedy Algorithms

A cashier rings up a sale for $4.63 cents in U.S. currency. The customer pays with a $5 bill. The cashier would like to give

the customer $0.37 in change using the fewest coins possible. The coins that can be used are quarters ($0.25), dimes

($0.10), nickels ($0.05), and pennies ($0.01). The cashier starts by selecting the coin of highest value less than or equal to

$0.37, which is a quarter. This leaves            . The cashier selects the coin of highest value less than or

equal to $0.12, which is a dime. This leaves              . The cashier selects the coin of highest value less than

or equal to $0.02, which is a penny. This leaves          . The cashier selects the coin of highest value less

than or equal to $0.01, which is a penny. This leaves no remainder. The cashier used one quarter, one dime, and two

pennies, which is four coins. Use this information to answer the following questions.

1. Is the cashier's approach an example of a greedy algorithm or a brute force algorithm? Explain how you know.
2. The cashier's solution is the best solution. In other words, four is the fewest number of coins possible. Is this

     consistent with the results of an algorithm of this kind? Explain your reasoning.

    Solution
1. The approach the cashier used is an example of a greedy algorithm, because the problem was approached in

     phases and the best choice was made at each phase. Also, it is not a brute force algorithm, because the cashier did
     not attempt to list out all possible combinations of coins to reach this conclusion.
2. Yes, it is consistent. A greedy algorithm does not always yield the best result, but sometimes it does.

        YOUR TURN 12.42

  1. Suppose that you lost the combination to a combination lock that consisted of three digits, and each was
      selected from the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. You desperately need to open the lock without breaking it. You
      decide to check all possible combinations methodically, 000, then 001, then 002, and so on until you find the
      right combination. Is this an example of a brute force algorithm or a greedy algorithm?

The Traveling Salesperson Problem

Now let's focus our attention on the graph theory application known as the traveling salesperson problem (TSP) in
which we must find the shortest route to visit a number of locations and return to the starting point.

Recall from Hamilton Cycles, the officer in the U.S. Air Force who is stationed at Vandenberg Air Force base and must
drive to visit three other California Air Force bases before returning to Vandenberg. The officer needed to visit each base
once. We looked at the weighted graph in Figure 12.192 representing the four U.S. Air Force bases: Vandenberg,
Edwards, Los Angeles, and Beal and the distances between them.

               Figure 12.192 Graph of Four California Air Force Bases
1368 12 · Graph Theory

Any route that visits each base and returns to the start would be a Hamilton cycle on the graph. If the officer wants to
travel the shortest distance, this will correspond to a Hamilton cycle of lowest weight. We saw in Table 12.11 that there
are six distinct Hamilton cycles (directed cycles) in a complete graph with four vertices, but some lie on the same cycle
(undirected cycle) in the graph.

                        Complete Graph  Cycle  Cycle                            Cycle

                    Clockwise Hamilton Cycle

                                                                     abcda abdca acbda
               Counterclockwise Hamilton Cycle

                                                                     adcba acdba adbca
            Table 12.11 Hamilton Cycles in a Complete Graph with Four Vertices
Since the distance between bases is the same in either direction, it does not matter if the officer travels clockwise or
counterclockwise. So, there are really only three possible distances as shown in Figure 12.193.

                                        Figure 12.193 Three Possible Distances

The possible distances are:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1369

So, a Hamilton cycle of least weight is V  B  E  L  V (or the reverse direction). The officer should travel from
Vandenberg to Beal to Edwards, to Los Angeles, and back to Vandenberg.

Finding Weights of All Hamilton Cycles in Complete Graphs

Notice that we listed all of the Hamilton cycles and found their weights when we solved the TSP about the officer from
Vandenberg. This is a skill you will need to practice. To make sure you don't miss any, you can calculate the number of
possible Hamilton cycles in a complete graph. It is also helpful to know that half of the directed cycles in a complete
graph are the same cycle in reverse direction, so, you only have to calculate half the number of possible weights, and the
rest are duplicates.

FORMULA

In a complete graph with vertices,

· The number of distinct Hamilton cycles is  .

· There are at most           different weights of Hamilton cycles.

TIP! When listing all the distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph, you can start them all at any vertex you
choose. Remember, the cycle a  b  c  a is the same cycle as b  c  a  b so there is no need to list both.

EXAMPLE 12.43

Calculating Possible Weights of Hamilton Cycles
Suppose you have a complete weighted graph with vertices N, M, O, and P.

1. Use the formula            to calculate the number of distinct Hamilton cycles in the graph.

2. Use the formula     to calculate the greatest number of different weights possible for the Hamilton cycles.

3. Are all of the distinct Hamilton cycles listed here? How do you know?
     Cycle 1: N  M  O  P  N
     Cycle 2: N  M  P  O  N
     Cycle 3: N  O  M  P  N
     Cycle 4: N  O  P  M  N
     Cycle 5: N  P  M  O  N
     Cycle 6: N  P  O  M  N

4. Which pairs of cycles must have the same weights? How do you know?

Solution

1. There are 4 vertices; so,  . This means there are                      distinct Hamilton cycles

beginning at any given vertex.

2. Since  , there are                        possible weights.

3. Yes, they are all distinct cycles and there are 6 of them.
4. Cycles 1 and 6 have the same weight, Cycles 2 and 4 have the same weight, and Cycles 3 and 5 have the same

     weight, because these pairs follow the same route through the graph but in reverse.

TIP! When listing the possible cycles, ignore the vertex where the cycle begins and ends and focus on the ways to
arrange the letters that represent the vertices in the middle. Using a systematic approach is best; for example, if you
must arrange the letters M, O, and P, first list all those arrangements beginning with M, then beginning with O, and
then beginning with P, as we did in Example 12.42.

      YOUR TURN 12.43

1. A complete weighted graph has vertices V, W, X, Y, and Z. List all the distinct Hamilton cycles. Use V as the
    starting vertex. Identify the pairs of cycles that have the same weight because they are reverses of each other.
1370 12 · Graph Theory

     The Brute Force Method

        The method we have been using to find a Hamilton cycle of least weight in a complete graph is a brute force algorithm,
        so it is called the brute force method. The steps in the brute force method are:
        Step 1: Calculate the number of distinct Hamilton cycles and the number of possible weights.
        Step 2: List all possible Hamilton cycles.
        Step 3: Find the weight of each cycle.
        Step 4: Identify the Hamilton cycle of lowest weight.

          EXAMPLE 12.44

        Applying the Brute Force Method
        On the next assignment, the air force officer must leave from Travis Air Force base, visit Beal, Edwards, and Vandenberg
        Air Force bases each exactly once and return to Travis Air Force base. There is no need to visit Los Angeles Air Force base.
        Use Figure 12.194 to find the shortest route.

                   Figure 12.194 Distances between Five California Air Force Bases

Solution

Step 1: Since there are 4 vertices, there will be  cycles, but half of them will be the reverse of the others;

so, there will be  possible distances.

Step 2: List all the Hamilton cycles in the subgraph of the graph in Figure 12.195.

                                                  Figure 12.195 Subgraph with Cities B, E, T, and V
To find the 6 cycles, focus on the three vertices in the middle, B, E, and V. The arrangements of these vertices are BEV,
BVE, EBV, EVB, VBE, and VEB. These would correspond to the 6 cycles:
1: T  B  E  V  T
2: T  B  V  E  T
3: T  E  B  V  T
4: T  E  V  B  T
5: T  V  B  E  T

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1371

6: T  V  E  B  T
Step 3: Find the weight of each path. You can reduce your work by observing the cycles that are reverses of each other.
1:
2:
3:
4: Reverse of cycle 2, 1071
5: Reverse of cycle 3, 1572
6: Reverse of cycle 1, 1097
Step 4: Identify a Hamilton cycle of least weight.
The second path, T  B  V  E  T, and its reverse, T  E  V  B  T, have the least weight. The solution is that the
officer should travel from Travis Air Force base to Beal Air Force Base, to Vandenberg Air Force base, to Edwards Air Force
base, and return to Travis Air Force base, or the same route in reverse.

      YOUR TURN 12.44

1. Suppose that the Air Force officer needed to leave from Travis Air Force base, visit each of Beal, Edwards, and Los
    Angeles Air Force bases exactly once and return to Travis. Use Figure 12.278 to find the shortest route.

Now suppose that the officer needed a cycle that visited all 5 of the Air Force bases in Figure 12.194. There would be

different arrangements of vertices and                                                                    distances to compare

using the brute force method. If you consider 10 Air Force bases, there would be
                                                                              different arrangements and

distances to consider. There must be another way!

The Nearest Neighbor Method

When the brute force method is impractical for solving a traveling salesperson problem, an alternative is a greedy
algorithm known as the nearest neighbor method, which always visit the closest or least costly place first. This method
finds a Hamilton cycle of relatively low weight in a complete graph in which, at each phase, the next vertex is chosen by
comparing the edges between the current vertex and the remaining vertices to find the lowest weight. Since the nearest
neighbor method is a greedy algorithm, it usually doesn't give the best solution, but it usually gives a solution that is
"good enough." Most importantly, the number of steps will be the number of vertices. That's right! A problem with 10
vertices requires 10 steps, not 362,880. Let's look at an example to see how it works.

Suppose that a candidate for governor wants to hold rallies around the state. They plan to leave their home in city A, visit
cities B, C, D, E, and F each once, and return home. The airfare between cities is indicated in the graph in Figure 12.196.
1372 12 · Graph Theory

                                             Figure 12.196 Airfares between Cities A, B, C, D, E, and F
Let's help the candidate keep costs of travel down by applying the nearest neighbor method to find a Hamilton cycle that
has a reasonably low weight. Begin by marking starting vertex as for "visited 1st." Then to compare the weights of the
edges between A and vertices adjacent to A: $250, $210, $300, $200, and $100 as shown in Figure 12.197. The lowest of
these is $100, which is the edge between A and F.

                                                         Figure 12.197 Finding the Second Vertex
Mark F as for "visited 2nd" then compare the weights of the edges between F and the remaining vertices adjacent to
F: $170, $330, $150 and $350 as shown in Figure 12.198. The lowest of these is $150, which is the edge between F and D.

Mark D as                                        Figure 12.198 Finding the Third Vertex
           for "visited 3rd." Next, compare the weights of the edges between D and the remaining vertices adjacent to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1373

D: $120, $310, and $270 as shown in Figure 12.199. The lowest of these is $120, which is the edge between D and B.

                                                         Figure 12.199 Finding the Fourth Vertex
So, mark B as for "visited 4th." Finally, compare the weights of the edges between B and the remaining vertices
adjacent to B: $160 and $220 as shown in Figure 12.200. The lower amount is $160, which is the edge between B and E.

                                                           Figure 12.200 Finding the Fifth Vertex
Now you can mark E as and mark the only remaining vertex, which is C, as . This is shown in Figure 12.201. Make a
note of the weight of the edge from E to C, which is $180, and from C back to A, which is $210.
1374 12 · Graph Theory

                                                          Figure 12.201 Finding the Sixth Vertex

The Hamilton cycle we found is A  F  D  B  E  C  A. The weight of the circuit is
                                                                         . This may or may not be the route with the lowest cost, but there is a

good chance it is very close since the weights are most of the lowest weights on the graph and we found it in six steps
instead of finding 120 different Hamilton cycles and calculating 60 weights. Let's summarize the procedure that we used.

Step 1: Select the starting vertex and label  for "visited 1st." Identify the edge of lowest weight between  and the
remaining vertices.

Step 2: Label the vertex at the end of the edge of lowest weight that you found in previous step as where the
subscript n indicates the order the vertex is visited. Identify the edge of lowest weight between and the vertices that
remain to be visited.

Step 3: If vertices remain that have not been visited, repeat Step 2. Otherwise, a Hamilton cycle of low weight is
                                       .

EXAMPLE 12.45

Using the Nearest Neighbor Method
Suppose that the candidate for governor wants to hold rallies around the state but time before the election is very
limited. They would like to leave their home in city A, visit cities B, C, D, E, and F each once, and return home. The airfare
between cities is not as important as the time of travel, which is indicated in Figure 12.202. Use the nearest neighbor
method to find a route with relatively low travel time. What is the total travel time of the route that you found?

     Solution                       Figure 12.202 Travel Times between Cities A, B, C, D, E and F
Step 1: Label vertex A as        . The edge of lowest weight between A and the remaining vertices is 85 min between A and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1375

D.

Step 2: Label vertex D as . The edge of lowest weight between D and the vertices that remain to be visited, B, C, E, and
F, is 70 min between D and F.

Repeat Step 2: Label vertex F as . The edge of lowest weight between F and the vertices that remain to be visited, B, C,
and E, is 75 min between F and C.

Repeat Step 2: Label vertex C as . The edge of lowest weight between C and the vertices that remain to be visited, B
and E, is 100 min between C and B.

Repeat Step 2: Label vertex B as  . The only vertex that remains to be visited is E. The weight of the edge between B
and E is 95 min.

Step 3: A Hamilton cycle of low weight is A  D  F  C  B  E  A. So, a route of relatively low travel time is A to D to F
to C to B to E and back to A. The total travel time of this route is:

        YOUR TURN 12.45

  1. Use the nearest neighbor method to find a Hamilton cycle of relatively low weight beginning and ending at
      vertex D in Figure 12.240 and find its total weight. Give your answer in hours and minutes.

Check Your Understanding

75. The advantage of a greedy algorithm is that it is more efficient.
       a. True
       b. False

76. The disadvantage of a brute force algorithm is that it does not always give the ideal solution.
       a. True
       b. False

77. The nearest neighbor method is an example of a brute force algorithm.
       a. True
       b. False

78. The brute force method is an example of a greedy algorithm.
       a. True
       b. False

79. The brute force method is used to find a Hamilton cycle of least weight in a complete graph.
       a. True
       b. False

80. The nearest neighbor method is used to find the ideal solution to the traveling salesperson problem.
       a. True
       b. False

81. The traveling salesman problem involves finding the shortest route to travel between two points.
       a. True
       b. False

82. The traveling salesman problem can be represented as finding a Hamilton cycle of least weight on a weighted
      graph.
       a. True
       b. False
1376 12 · Graph Theory

83. There is always more than one Hamilton cycle of least weight, a given Hamilton cycle and the reverse of that
      Hamilton cycle.
       a. True
       b. False

84. The greatest possible number of distinct weights for the Hamilton cycles of a complete graph with  vertices is (
      -1)!
       a. True
       b. False

        SECTION 12.9 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, determine whether the algorithm described is a greedy algorithm or a brute force
algorithm.

     1. The algorithm for creating graph colorings in the section Navigating Graphs involved coloring the vertex of
          highest degree first, coloring as many other vertices as possible each color from highest to lowest degree, then
          repeating this process for the remaining vertices.

     2. Pallets of goods are to be transported on 10 flatbed trucks which have weight limits. To determine which goods
          will be shipped together, all the possible ways to divide the goods into 10 groups is listed and the total weight of
          each group is calculated.

     3. A wedding planner is creating a seating arrangement for the reception dinner. The couple has provided a list of
          which guests must be seated together. The wedding planner prefers to use the fewest tables possible so that
          there is more space to mingle at the reception. The planner creates a list of all possible seating arrangements
          and selects one that meets these criteria.

     4. Packages must be loaded into freight cars to be transported by train. It is preferred to use the fewest freight
          cars possible to keep the costs down. As each freight car is packed, the package with the largest girth that will
          fit in the freight car is loaded and this is repeated until the freight car can hold no more packages. When a
          freight car can hold no more packages, the next freight car is loaded.

For the following exercises, use the figure to calculate the number of distinct Hamilton cycles beginning at the given
vertex in the given graph. How many of those could possibly result in a different weight?

     5. Graph A, vertex a
     6. Graph B, vertex e
     7. Graph C, vertex k
     8. Graph D, vertex o
For the following exercises, use the figure to list all the distinct Hamilton cycles beginning at the given vertex in the
given graph. Indicate which pairs of Hamilton cycles are reverses of each other.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                         12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1377

     9. Graph A, vertex a
    10. Graph B, vertex e
    11. Graph C, vertex k
    12. Graph D, vertex o
For the following exercises, use the figure to find a Hamilton cycle of least weight for the given graph, beginning at the
given vertex, and using the brute force method. What is the weight of the cycle?

    13. Graph A, vertex a
    14. Graph B, vertex e
    15. Graph C, vertex k
    16. Graph D, vertex o
For the following exercises, use the figure to find a Hamilton cycle of low weight for the given graph, beginning at the
given vertex, and using the nearest neighbor method. What is the weight of the cycle?

    17. Graph A, vertex a
    18. Graph B, vertex e
    19. Graph C, vertex k
    20. Graph D, vertex o
1378 12 · Graph Theory

For the following exercises, use your solutions to Exercises 13-20 to compare the results of the brute force method to
the results of the nearest neighbor method for each graph. Indicate whether the Hamilton cycle was the same or
different and whether the weights were the same or different. If the weights are different, indicate which method gave
the lower weight. Are your observations consistent with the characteristics of brute force algorithms and greedy
algorithms? Explain your reasoning.

    21. Graph A, vertex a
    22. Graph B, vertex e
    23. Graph C, vertex k
    24. Graph D, vertex o

For the following exercises, use the table to create a complete weighted graph in which the vertices are the given cities,
and the weights are the distances between them.

                                                     Cities U V W X Y Z

                                 U  0 89 37 49 54 28

                                 V  89 0 76 68 92 112

                                 W 37 76 0 45 52 49

                                 X  49 68 45 0 66 47

                                 Y  54 92 52 66 0 29

                                 Z  28 112 49 47 29 0

                                 Distances between Cities U, V, W, X, Y, and Z in
                                 kilometers

    25. U, V, W, X
    26. U, W, Y, Z
    27. U, X, Y, Z
    28. U, V, W, X, Y
    29. U, W, X, Y, Z
    30. U, V, W, X, Y, Z

For the following exercises, use your solutions to Exercises 25-30 and the nearest neighbor method to find a Hamilton
cycle to solve the traveling salesperson problem of finding a reasonably short route to leave from city U, visit each of
the other cities listed and return to city U. Indicate the distance required to travel the route you found.

    31. U, V, W, X
    32. U, W, Y, Z
    33. U, X, Y, Z
    34. U, V, W, X, Y
    35. U, W, X, Y, Z
    36. U, V, W, X, Y, Z

For the following exercises, use your solutions to Exercises 25-30 and the brute force method to find a Hamilton cycle
of lowest weight to solve the traveling salesperson problem of finding a shortest route to leave from city U, visit each of
the other cities listed and return to city U. Indicate the distance required to travel the route you found.

    37. U, V, W, X
    38. U, W, Y, Z
    39. U, X, Y, Z
    40. U, V, W, X, Y
    41. U, W, X, Y, Z

For the following exercises, use your solutions to the indicated exercises to compare the results of the brute force
method to the results of the nearest neighbor method for each traveling salesman problem of finding a reasonably
short route to leave from city U, visit each of the other cities listed and return to city U. Indicate whether the greedy
algorithm resulted in a Hamilton cycle of the same weight, lower weight, or higher weight. Is this consistent with the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         12.9 · Traveling Salesperson Problem 1379

characteristics of brute force algorithms and greedy algorithms? Explain your reasoning
    42. Exercises 32 and 38: U, W, Y, Z
    43. Exercises 31 and 37: U, V, W, X
    44. Exercises 34 and 40: U, V, W, X, Y
    45. Exercises 35 and 41: U, W, X, Y, Z
    46. Exercises 33 and 39: U, X, Y, Z

The products at a particular factory are manufactured in phases. The same equipment is utilized for each phase, but it
must be formatted differently to accomplish different tasks. The transition time to convert between a format for one
task and another task varies. The times are given in Table 12.13. In the following exercises, use the table and the
nearest neighbor method to find an order in which to complete the tasks, which keeps the transition times down and
ends with the same set up as it began so that the factory is ready to start the next batch. Assume that there are no
restrictions on which tasks can be completed in which order. Hint: The nearest neighbor algorithm may give a different
result depending on which vertex is the starting vertex, so, you must check all possibilities.

                         Task A  B  CDE  FG

                         A  0 75 130 45 120 70 100

                         B  75   0 140 65 115 25 60

                         C 130 140 0 35 55 20 125

                         D  45 65 35 0 50 30 40

                         E 120 115 55 50 0 95 145

                         F  70 25 20 30 95 0 15

                         G 100 60 125 40 145 15 0

                         Manufacturing Equipment Transition Times in Minutes

47. A, C, D, F, G
48. B, D, E, F, G
49. A, B, C, D, E, F
50. B, C, D, E, F, G
51. A, B, C, D, E, F, G
1380 12 · Graph Theory

    12.10 Trees

        Figure 12.203 In graph theory, graphs known as trees have structures in common with live trees. (credit: "Row of trees in
        Roslev" by AKA CJ/Flickr, Public Domain)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Describe and identify trees.
         2. Determine a spanning tree for a connected graph.
         3. Find the minimum spanning tree for a weighted graph.
         4. Solve application problems involving trees.
        We saved the best for last! In this last section, we will discuss arguably the most fun kinds of graphs, trees. Have you
        every researched your family tree? Family trees are a perfect example of the kind of trees we study in graph theory. One
        of the characteristics of a family tree graph is that it never loops back around, because no one is their own grandparent!

     What Is A Tree?

        Whether we are talking about a family tree or a tree in a forest, none of the branches ever loops back around and rejoins
        the trunk. This means that a tree has no cyclic subgraphs, or is acyclic. A tree also has only one component. So, a tree is
        a connected acyclic graph. Here are some graphs that have the same characteristic. Each of the graphs in Figure 12.204
        is a tree.

                                                                     Figure 12.204 Graphs T, P, and S
        Let's practice determining whether a graph is a tree. To do this, check if a graph is connected and has no cycles.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      12.10 · Trees 1381

  EXAMPLE 12.46

Identifying Trees
Identify any trees in Figure 12.205. If a graph is not a tree, explain how you know.

                                                          Figure 12.205 Graphs M, N, and P
   Solution
· Graph M is not a tree because it contains the cycle (b, c, f).
· Graph N is not a tree because it is not connected. It has two components, one with vertices h, i, j, and another with
    vertices k, l, m.
· Graph P is a tree. It has no cycles and it is connected.

      YOUR TURN 12.46

1. There are some configurations that are commonly used when setting up computer networks. Several of them are
    shown in the given figure. Which of the configurations in the figure appear to have the characteristics of a tree
    graph? If a configuration does not appear to have the characteristics of a tree graph, explain how you know.

                                                               Common Network Configurations

Types of Trees

Mathematicians have had a lot of fun naming graphs that are trees or that contain trees. For example, the graph in
Figure 12.206 is not a tree, but it contains two components, one containing vertices a through d, and the other
containing vertices e through g, each of which would be a tree on its own. This type of structure is called a forest. There
1382 12 · Graph Theory

        are also interesting names for trees with certain characteristics.
          · A path graph or linear graph is a tree graph that has exactly two vertices of degree 1 such that the only other
              vertices form a single path between them, which means that it can be drawn as a straight line.
          · A star tree is a tree that has exactly one vertex of degree greater than 1 called a root, and all other vertices are
              adjacent to it.
          · A starlike tree is a tree that has a single root and several paths attached to it.
          · A caterpillar tree is a tree that has a central path that can have vertices of any degree, with each vertex not on the
              central path being adjacent to a vertex on the central path and having a degree of one.
          · A lobster tree is a tree that has a central path that can have vertices of any degree, with paths consisting of either
              one or two edges attached to the central path.

        Examples of each of these types of structures are given in Figure 12.207.

                                                                         Figure 12.206 Forest Graph F

                                                                       Figure 12.207 Six Types of Trees

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1383

  EXAMPLE 12.47
Identifying Types of Trees
Each graph in Figure 12.208 is one of the special types of trees we have been discussing. Identify the type of tree.

                                                               Figure 12.208 Graphs U and V
     Solution
Graph U has a central path a  b  d  f  i  l  o  q. Each vertex that is not on the path has degree 1 and is adjacent
to a vertex that is on the path. So, U is a caterpillar tree.
Graph V is a path graph because it is a single path connecting exactly two vertices of degree one, r  s  u  v  w.

        YOUR TURN 12.47
  Of the network configurations from Figure 12.297, which, if any, has the characteristics of a

      1. Star tree?
      2. Caterpillar tree?
      3. Path graph?

Characteristics of Trees

As we study trees, it is helpful to be familiar with some of their characteristics. For example, if you add an edge to a tree
graph between any two existing vertices, you will create a cycle, and the resulting graph is no longer a tree. Some
examples are shown in Figure 12.209. Adding edge bj to Graph T creates cycle (b, c, i, j). Adding edge rt to Graph P
creates cycle (r, s, t). Adding edge tv to Graph S creates cycle (t, u, v).

                                                           Figure 12.209 Adding Edges to Trees
It is also true that removing an edge from a tree graph will increase the number of components and the graph will no
longer be connected. In fact, you can see in Figure 12.210 that removing one or more edges can create a forest.
Removing edge qr from Graph P creates a graph with two components, one with vertices o, p and q, and the other with
1384 12 · Graph Theory

        vertices r, s, and t. Removing edge uw from Graph S creates two components, one with just vertex w and the other with
        the rest of the vertices. When two edges were removed from Graph T, edge bf and edge cd, creates a graph with three
        components as shown in Figure 12.210.

                                                                Figure 12.210 Removing Edges from Trees
        A very useful characteristic of tree graphs is that the number of edges is always one less than the number of vertices. In
        fact, any connected graph in which the number of edges is one less than the number of vertices is guaranteed to be a
        tree. Some examples are given in Figure 12.211.

         Figure 12.211 Number of Vertices and Edges in Trees vs. Other Graphs

FORMULA

The number of edges in a tree graph with vertices is          .

A connected graph with n vertices and  edges is a tree graph.

  EXAMPLE 12.48

Exploring Characteristics of Trees
Use Graphs I and J in Figure 12.212 to answer each question.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        12.10 · Trees 1385

                                                               Figure 12.212 Graphs I and J

1. Which vertices are in each of the components that remain when edge be is removed from Graph I?
2. Determine the number of edges and the number of vertices in Graph J. Explain how this confirms that Graph J is a

     tree.
3. What kind of cycle is created if edge im is added to Graph J?

    Solution
1. When edge be is removed, there are two components that remain. One component includes vertices a, b, and c. The

     other component includes vertices d, e, and f.
2. There are seven vertices and six edges in Graph J. This confirms that Graph J is a tree because the number of edges

     is one less than the number of vertices.
3. The pentagon (i, h, j, l, m) is created when edge im is added to Graph J.

      YOUR TURN 12.48

Use Graphs I and J in Figure 12.301 to answer each question.
    1. Which vertices are in each of the components that remain when edge jl is removed from Graph J?
    2. Determine the number of edges and the number of vertices in Graph I. Explain how this confirms that Graph I
         is a tree.
    3. What kind of cycle is created if edge cf is added to Graph I?

WHO KNEW?

Graph Theory in the Movies

In the 1997 film Good Will Hunting, the main character, Will, played by Matt Damon, solves what is supposed to be an

exceptionally difficult graph theory problem, "Draw all the homeomorphically irreducible trees of size  ." That

sounds terrifying! But don't panic. Watch this great Numberphile video to see why this is actually a problem you can

do at home!

       VIDEO
      The Problem in Good Will Hunting by Numberphile (https://openstax.org/r/Hunting_Numberphile)

Spanning Trees

Suppose that you planned to set up your own computer network with four devices. One option is to use a "mesh
topology" like the one in Figure 12.213, in which each device is connected directly to every other device in the network.
1386 12 · Graph Theory

                                                           Figure 12.213 Common Network Configurations
        The mesh topology for four devices could be represented by the complete Graph A1 in Figure 12.214 where the vertices
        represent the devices, and the edges represent network connections. However, the devices could be networked using
        fewer connections. Graphs A2, A3, and A4 of Figure 12.214 show configurations in which three of the six edges have been
        removed. Each of the Graphs A2, A3 and A4 in Figure 12.214 is a tree because it is connected and contains no cycles. Since
        Graphs A2, A3 and A4 are also subgraphs of Graph A1 that include every vertex of the original graph, they are also known
        as spanning trees.

                                                       Figure 12.214 Network Configurations for Four Devices
        By definition, spanning trees must span the whole graph by visiting all the vertices. Since spanning trees are subgraphs,
        they may only have edges between vertices that were adjacent in the original graph. Since spanning trees are trees, they
        are connected and they are acyclic. So, when deciding whether a graph is a spanning tree, check the following
        characteristics:

          · All vertices are included.
          · No vertices are adjacent that were not adjacent in the original graph.
          · The graph is connected.
          · There are no cycles.
          EXAMPLE 12.49
        Identifying Spanning Trees
        Use Figure 12.215 to determine which of graphs M1, M2, M3, and M4, are spanning trees of Q.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1387

                                                     Figure 12.215 Graphs Q, M1, M2, M3, and M4
     Solution
 1. Graph M1 is not a spanning tree of Graph Q because it has a cycle (c, d, f, e).
 2. Graph M2 is a spanning tree of Graph Q because it has all the original vertices, no vertices are adjacent in M2 that
      weren't adjacent in Graph Q, Graph M2 is connected and it contains no cycles.
 3. Graph M3 is not a spanning tree of Graph Q because vertices a and f are adjacent in Graph M3 but not in Graph Q.
 4. Graph M4 is not a spanning tree of Graph Q because it is not connected.
So, only graph M2 is a spanning tree of Graph Q.

        YOUR TURN 12.49
  Use the given figure for the following exercises.

      1. Since sq is not an edge in Graph H, Graph N1 cannot be a spanning tree of H.
            a. True
            b. False

      2. Graph N2 is a spanning tree of Graph H.
            a. True
            b. False

      3. Graph N3 is a spanning tree of Graph H.
            a. True
            b. False

      4. Since there is no path between p and t in Graph N4, it cannot be a spanning tree of any graph.
            a. True
            b. False

Constructing a Spanning Tree Using Paths

Suppose that you wanted to find a spanning tree within a graph. One approach is to find paths within the graph. You can
start at any vertex, go any direction, and create a path through the graph stopping only when you can't continue without
backtracking as shown in Figure 12.216.
1388 12 · Graph Theory

                                                       Figure 12.216 First Phase to Construct a Spanning Tree
        Once you have stopped, pick a vertex along the path you drew as a starting point for another path. Make sure to visit
        only vertices you have not visited before as shown in Figure 12.217.

                                                Figure 12.217 Intermediate Phase to Construct a Spanning Tree
        Repeat this process until all vertices have been visited as shown in Figure 12.218.

                                                      Figure 12.218 Final Phase to Construct a Spanning Tree
        The end result is a tree that spans the entire graph as shown in Figure 12.219.

                                                               Figure 12.219 The Resulting Spanning Tree
        Notice that this subgraph is a tree because it is connected and acyclic. It also visits every vertex of the original graph, so
        it is a spanning tree. However, it is not the only spanning tree for this graph. By making different turns, we could create
        any number of distinct spanning trees.

          EXAMPLE 12.50
        Constructing Spanning Trees
        Construct two distinct spanning trees for the graph in Figure 12.220.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           12.10 · Trees 1389

                                                                    Figure 12.220 Graph L

     Solution
Two possible solutions are given in Figure 12.221 and Figure 12.222.

Figure 12.221 First Spanning Tree for Graph L

                                                  Figure 12.222 Second Spanning Tree for Graph L

        YOUR TURN 12.50
  1. Construct three distinct spanning trees for Graph J.

                                                                                Graph J

Revealing Spanning Trees

Another approach to finding a spanning tree in a connected graph involves removing unwanted edges to reveal a
spanning tree. Consider Graph D in Figure 12.223.
1390 12 · Graph Theory

                                                                            Figure 12.223 Graph D
        Graph D has 10 vertices. A spanning tree of Graph D must have 9 edges, because the number of edges is one less than
        the number of vertices in any tree. Graph D has 13 edges so 4 need to be removed. To determine which 4 edges to
        remove, remember that trees do not have cycles. There are four triangles in Graph D that we need to break up. We can
        accomplish this by removing 1 edge from each of the triangles. There are many ways this can be done. Two of these
        ways are shown in Figure 12.224.

                                                         Figure 12.224 Removing Four Edges from Graph D
               VIDEO
               Spanning Trees in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/Spanning_Trees_in_Graph_Theory)
          EXAMPLE 12.51
        Removing Edges to Find Spanning Trees
        Use the graph in Figure 12.225 to answer each question.

                                                                            Figure 12.225 Graph V
         1. Determine the number of edges that must be removed to reveal a spanning tree.
         2. Name all the undirected cycles in Graph V.
         3. Find two distinct spanning trees of Graph V.

             Solution
         1. Graph V has nine vertices so a spanning tree for the graph must have 8 edges. Since Graph V has 11 edges, 3 edges

               must be removed to reveal a spanning tree.
         2. (a, c, d), (a, c, f), (a, d, c, f), and (b, e, h, i, g)
         3. To find the first spanning tree, remove edge ac, which will break up both of the triangles, remove edge cf , which will

              break up the quadrilateral, and remove be, which will break up the pentagon, to give us the spanning tree shown in
               Figure 12.226.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1391

                                            Figure 12.226 Spanning Tree Formed Removing ac, cf, and be
      To find another spanning tree, remove ad, which will break up (a, c, d) and (a, d, c, f), remove af to break up (a, c, f),
      and remove hi to break up (b, e, h, i, g). This will give us the spanning tree in Figure 12.227.

                                            Figure 12.227 Spanning Tree Formed Removing ad, af, and hi

        YOUR TURN 12.51
  1. Name three edges that you could remove from Graph V in Figure 12.316 to form a third spanning tree, different

      from those in the solution to Example 12.50 Exercise 3.

        WHO KNEW?
  Chains of Affection
  Here is a strange question to ask in a math class: Have you ever dated your ex's new partner's ex? Research suggests
  that your answer is probably no. When researchers Peter S. Bearman, James Moody, and Katherine Stovel attempted
  to compare the structure of heterosexual romantic networks at a typical midwestern high school to simulated
  networks, they found something surprising. The actual social networks were more like spanning trees than other
  possible models because there were very few short cycles. In particular, there were almost no four-cycles.

                                                              Figure 12.228 Chains of Affection
  "...the prohibition against dating (from a female perspective) one's old boyfriend's current girlfriend's old boyfriend -
  accounts for the structure of the romantic network at [the highschool]."
  In their article "Chains of Affection: The Structure of Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Networks," the researchers went
  on to explain the implications for the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. In particular, social structures
  based on tree graphs are less dense and more likely to fragment. This information can impact social policies on
  disease prevention. (Peter S. Bearman, James Moody, and Katherine Stovel, "Chains of Affection: The Structure of
  Adolescent Romantic and Sexual Networks," American Journal of Sociology Volume 110, Number 1, pp. 44-91, 2004)

Kruskal's Algorithm

In many applications of spanning trees, the graphs are weighted and we want to find the spanning tree of least possible
weight. For example, the graph might represent a computer network, and the weights might represent the cost involved
in connecting two devices. So, finding a spanning tree with the lowest possible total weight, or minimum spanning
tree, means saving money! The method that we will use to find a minimum spanning tree of a weighted graph is called
Kruskal's algorithm. The steps for Kruskal's algorithm are:
1392 12 · Graph Theory

        Step 1: Choose any edge with the minimum weight of all edges.
        Step 2: Choose another edge of minimum weight from the remaining edges. The second edge does not have to be
        connected to the first edge.
        Step 3: Choose another edge of minimum weight from the remaining edges, but do not select any edge that creates a
        cycle in the subgraph you are creating.
        Step 4: Repeat step 3 until all the vertices of the original graph are included and you have a spanning tree.

               VIDEO
               Use Kruskal's Algorithm to Find Minimum Spanning Trees in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/
               Trees_in_Graph_Theory)
          EXAMPLE 12.52
        Using Kruskal's Algorithm
        A computer network will be set up with six devices. The vertices in the graph in Figure 12.229 represent the devices, and
        the edges represent the cost of a connection. Find the network configuration that will cost the least. What is the total
        cost?

                                                          Figure 12.229 Graph of Network Connection Costs
             Solution
        A minimum spanning tree will correspond to the network configuration of least cost. We will use Kruskal's algorithm to
        find one. Since the graph has six vertices, the spanning tree will have six vertices and five edges.
        Step 1: Choose an edge of least weight. We have sorted the weights into numerical order. The least is $100. The only
        edge of this weight is edge AF as shown in Figure 12.230.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1393

                                                           Figure 12.230 Step 1 Select Edge AF
Step 2: Choose the edge of least weight of the remaining edges, which is BD with $120. Notice that the two selected
edges do not need to be adjacent to each other as shown in Figure 12.231.

                                                          Figure 12.231 Step 2 Select Edge BD
Step 3: Select the lowest weight edge of the remaining edges, as long as it does not result in a cycle. We select DF with
$150 since it does not form a cycle as shown in Figure 12.232.

                                                           Figure 12.232 Step 3 Select Edge DF
1394 12 · Graph Theory

        Repeat Step 3: Select the lowest weight edge of the remaining edges, which is BE with $160 and it does not form a cycle
        as shown in Figure 12.233. This gives us four edges so we only need to repeat step 3 once more to get the fifth edge.

                                                              Figure 12.233 Repeat Step 3 Select Edge DF
        Repeat Step 3: The lowest weight of the remaining edges is $170. Both BF and CE have a weight of $170, but BF would
        create cycle (b, d, f) and there cannot be a cycle in a spanning tree as shown in Figure 12.234.

                                                        Figure 12.234 Repeat Step 3 Do Not Select Edge BF
        So, we will select CE, which will complete the spanning tree as shown in Figure 12.235.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 12.10 · Trees 1395

                                     Figure 12.235 Repeat Step 3 Select Edge CE

The minimum spanning tree is shown in Figure 12.236. This is the configuration of the network of least cost. The

spanning tree has a total weight of  , which is the total cost of this network

configuration.

                                                      Figure 12.236 Final Minimum Spanning Tree
        YOUR TURN 12.52
  1. Find a minimum spanning tree for the weighted graph. Give its total weight.

                                                                           Weighted Graph

Check Your Understanding

85. The number of cycles in a spanning tree is one less than the number of vertices.
       a. True
1396 12 · Graph Theory

               b. False
        86. A spanning tree contains no triangles.

                a. True
               b. False
        87. A spanning tree includes every vertex of the original graph.
                a. True
               b. False
        88. There is a unique path between each pair of vertices in a spanning tree.
                a. True
               b. False
        89. A spanning tree must be connected.
                a. True
               b. False
        90. Kruskal's algorithm is a method for finding all the different spanning trees in a given graph.
                a. True
               b. False
        91. Only graphs that are trees have spanning trees.
                a. True
               b. False
        92. A minimum spanning tree of a given graph can be found using Kruskal's algorithm.
                a. True
               b. False
        93. A minimum spanning tree of a given graph is the subgraph, which is a tree, includes every vertex of the original
              graph, and which has the least weight of all spanning trees.
                a. True
               b. False
        94. If a graph contains any cut edges, they must be included in any spanning tree.
                a. True
               b. False

             SECTION 12.10 EXERCISES

        For the following exercises, refer to the figure shown.

              1. Which graphs, if any, are trees?
              2. Which graphs, if any, are not trees because they are not connected?
              3. Which graphs, if any, are not trees because they contain a cycle?
        For the following exercises, refer to the figure shown. Identify any graphs that fit the given description.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1397

     4. Tree graph
     5. Star graph
     6. Star like graph
     7. Line graph (or path graph)
     8. Lobster graph
     9. Caterpillar graph
    10. Forest graph
For the following exercises, use the figure shown to answer the questions.

    11. Determine whether Graph H1 is a spanning tree of Graph H. If not, explain how you know.

    12. Determine whether Graph H2 is a spanning tree of Graph H. If not, explain how you know.

    13. Determine whether Graph H3 is a spanning tree of Graph H. If not, explain how you know.

    14. Determine whether Graph Q1 is a spanning tree of Graph Q. If not, explain how you know.
1398 12 · Graph Theory

            15. Determine whether Graph Q2 is a spanning tree of Graph Q. If not, explain how you know.

            16. Determine whether Graph Q3 is a spanning tree of Graph Q. If not, explain how you know.

        For the following exercises, a student has been asked to construct a spanning tree for Graph O, as shown in the figure.
        The dashed lines show the first step that the student took, creating a path from vertex h to vertex d.

            17. How many more edges must be included with the dashed edges to create a spanning tree?
            18. List three unused (solid) edges from Graph O that cannot be used to complete the spanning tree.
            19. Give an example of a set of edges that do not have e as an endpoint, which would complete the spanning tree.
            20. Give an example of a set of edges that do not have f as an endpoint, which would complete the spanning tree.
        For the following exercises, a student has been asked to construct a spanning tree for Graph O, as shown in the figure.
        The dashed lines show the first step that the student took, creating a path from vertex c to vertex h.

            21. How many more edges must be included with the dashed edges to create a spanning tree?
            22. List two unused edges from Graph O that cannot be used to complete the spanning tree.
            23. Give an example of a set of edges that do not have f as an endpoint, which would complete the spanning tree.
            24. Give an example of a set of edges that have neither c nor e as an endpoint, which would complete the spanning

                   tree.
        For the following exercises, use Graphs A, B, and C.

            25. How many edges must be removed from Graph A to create a spanning tree?
            26. How many edges must be removed from Graph B to create a spanning tree?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            12.10 · Trees 1399

    27. How many edges must be removed from Graph C to create a spanning tree?
    28. Identify all the distinct cyclic subgraphs of Graph A.
    29. Identify all the cyclic subgraphs of Graph B.
    30. Identify all the cyclic subgraphs of Graph C.
    31. Draw four spanning trees of Graph A each of which includes edges vs, uv, wz and xy.
    32. Draw four spanning trees of Graph B which includes edge ut, but not ur.
    33. Draw four spanning trees of Graph C that each have only one edge with an endpoint at vertex u.
For the following exercises, use the figure shown. Draw a graph that fits the given description.

    34. S1, S2, S3 and S4 are all spanning trees.
    35. S1 and S2 are spanning trees, but S4 is not.
    36. S3 and S4 are spanning trees but S1 is not.
    37. S2 and S3 are spanning trees but S1 is not.
    38. S2 and S3 are spanning trees but S4 is not.
    39. S1, S2, and S3 are spanning trees but S4 is not.
    40. S2, S3, and S4 are spanning trees but S1 is not.
    41. S1 and S4 are spanning trees but S2 and S3 are not.
For the following exercises, use the figure shown to find the weight of the given spanning tree.

    42.

    43.

    44.
    45. Use Kruskal's algorithm to draw a minimum spanning tree for Graph Z in the provided figure. Find its weight.
1400 12 · Graph Theory

        For the following exercises, draw a minimum spanning tree for the given graph, and calculate its weight.

    46. Graph A
    47. Graph C
    48. Graph B
    49. Graph D

For the following exercises, draw a weighted graph to represent the given information. Then use the graph to find a
minimum spanning tree and give its weight. Explain what the weight represents in the given scenario.

    50. City planners are tasked with building roadways to connect locations A, B, C, and D. The cost to build the
          roadways between any given pair of locations is given in the table.

                                     A     B     C                D

                                 A - 125 320 275

                                 B 125 -      110 540

                                 C 320 110       -             1,010

                                 D 275 540 1,010                  -

                                 Construction Costs in Thousands
                                 between Locations

51. In a video game, the goal is to visit five different lands, V, W, X, Y and Z, without losing all your lives. The paths
      between the lands are rated for danger, 1 being lowest and 10 being highest. Once a path has been traversed
      successfully, it is free from danger. The ratings are given in the table.

                                 V      W     X                Y      Z

                                 V-     2     4                9      10

                                 W2     -     6                8 No Path

                                 X4     6     -                7 No Path

                                 Y9     8     7                -      5

                                 Z 10 No Path No Path 5               -

                                 Danger Ratings between Lands

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  12 · Chapter Summary 1401

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

12.1 Graph Basics

  · vertex
  · edge
  · loop
  · graph (simple graph)
  · multigraph
  · adjacent (neighboring)
  · degree

12.2 Graph Structures

  · complete
  · subgraph
  · cycle
  · cyclic subgraph
  · clique

12.3 Comparing Graphs

  · isomorphic
  · isomorphism
  · planar
  · nonplanar
  · complement
  · complementary

12.4 Navigating Graphs

  · walk (directed walk)
  · trail (directed trail)
  · path (directed path)
  · closed
  · open
  · closed walk
  · circuit (closed trail)
  · directed cycle (closed path)
  · coloring (graph coloring)
  · -coloring
  · chromatic number

12.5 Euler Circuits

  · connected
  · component
  · disconnected
  · Euler circuit
  · Eulerian graph
  · Chinese postman problem
  · Eulerization

12.6 Euler Trails

  · algorithm
  · Fleury's algorithm
  · Euler trail
  · bridge
  · local bridge
1402 12 · Chapter Summary

12.7 Hamilton Cycles

  · Hamilton cycle, or Hamilton circuit
  · factorial
  · weighted graph
  · total weight

12.8 Hamilton Paths

  · Hamilton path

12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem

  · brute force algorithm
  · greedy algorithm
  · traveling salesperson problem (TSP)
  · brute force method
  · nearest neighbor method

12.10 Trees

  · acyclic
  · tree
  · forest
  · path graph or linear graph
  · star tree
  · root
  · starlike tree
  · caterpillar tree
  · lobster tree
  · spanning tree
  · minimum spanning tree

Key Concepts

12.1 Graph Basics

  · Graphs and multigraphs represent objects as vertices and the relationships between the objects as edges.
  · The degree of a vertex is the number of edges that meet it and the degree can be zero.
  · An edge must have a vertex at each end.
  · Multigraphs may contain loops and double edges, but simple graphs may not.

12.2 Graph Structures

  · The sum of the degrees of the vertices in a graph is twice the number of edges.
  · In a complete graph every pair of vertices is adjacent.
  · A subgraph is part of a larger graph.
  · Cycles are a sequence of connected vertices that begin and end at the same vertex but never visit any vertex twice.

12.3 Comparing Graphs

  · Two graphs are isomorphic if they have the same structure.
  · When graphs are relatively small, we can use visual inspection to identify an isomorphism by transforming one

      graph into another without breaking connections or adding new ones.
  · An isomorphism between two graphs preserves adjacency.
  · If two graphs differ in number of vertices, number of edges, degrees of vertices, or types of subgraphs, they cannot

      be isomorphic.
  · When the complements of two graphs are isomorphic, so are the graphs themselves.

12.4 Navigating Graphs

  · Walks, trails, and paths are ways to navigate through a graph using a sequence of connected vertices and edges.
  · Closed walks, circuits, and directed cycles are ways to navigate from a vertex on a graph and return to the same

      vertex.
  · Colorings are a way to organize the vertices of a graph into groups so that no two members of a group are adjacent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           12 · Chapter Summary 1403

· Maps can be represented with planar graphs, which can always be colored using four colors or fewer.

12.5 Euler Circuits

· A connected graph has only one component.
· The Euler circuit theorem states that an Euler circuit exists in every connected graph in which all vertices have even

    degree, but not in disconnected graphs or any graph with one or more vertices of odd degree.
· The Chinese postman problem asks how to find the shortest closed trail that visits all edges at least once.
· If an Euler circuit exists, it is always the best solution to the Chinese postman problem.
· Eulerization is the process of adding duplicate edges to a graph so that the new multigraph has an Euler circuit.
· The minimum number of duplicated edges needed to eulerize a graph is half the number of odd vertices or more.

12.6 Euler Trails

· An Euler trail exists whenever a graph has exactly two vertices of odd degree.
· When a bridge is removed from a graph, the number of components increases.
· A bridge is never part of a circuit.
· When a local bridge is removed from a graph, the distance between vertices increases.
· An edge that is part of a triangle is never a local bridge.

12.7 Hamilton Cycles

· A Hamilton cycle is a directed cycle, or circuit, that visits each vertex exactly once.

· Some Hamilton cycles are also Euler circuits, but some are not.

· Hamilton cycles that follow the same undirected cycle in the same direction are considered the same cycle even if

they begin at a different vertex.

· The number of unique Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with n vertices is the same as the number of ways to

arrange      distinct objects.

· Weighted graphs have a value assigned to each edge, which can represent distance, time, money and other

quantities.

12.8 Hamilton Paths

· A Hamilton path visits every vertex exactly once.
· Some Hamilton paths are also Euler trails, but some are not.

12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem

· A brute force algorithm always finds the ideal solution but can be impractical whereas a greedy algorithm is efficient
    but usually does not lead to the ideal solution.

· A Hamilton cycle of lowest weight is a solution to the traveling salesperson problem.
· The brute force method finds a Hamilton cycle of lowest weight in a complete graph.
· The nearest neighbor method is a greedy algorithm that finds a Hamilton cycle of relatively low weight in a

    complete graph.

12.10 Trees

· A brute force algorithm always finds the ideal solution but can be impractical whereas a greedy algorithm is efficient
    but usually does not lead to the ideal solution.

· A Hamilton cycle of lowest weight is a solution to the traveling salesperson problem.
· The brute force method finds a Hamilton cycle of lowest weight in a complete graph.
· The nearest neighbor method is a greedy algorithm that finds a Hamilton cycle of relatively low weight in a

    complete graph.

Videos

12.1 Graph Basics

· Graph Theory: Create a Graph to Represent Common Boundaries on a Map (https://openstax.org/r/Graph_Theory)

12.2 Graph Structures

· The Mathematical Secrets of Pascal's Triangle by Wajdi Mohamed Ratemi (https://openstax.org/r/
    Wajdi_Mohamed_Ratemi)
1404 12 · Chapter Summary

12.3 Comparing Graphs

  · Determine If Two Graphs Are Isomorphic and Identify the Isomorphism (https://openstax.org/r/Determine_If_Two)

12.4 Navigating Graphs

  · Walks, Trails, and Paths in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/walks_trails_paths)
  · Closed Walks, Closed Trails (Circuits), and Closed Paths (Directed Cycles) in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/

      closed_walks)
  · Coloring Graphs Part 1: Coloring and Identifying Chromatic Number (https://openstax.org/r/

      Coloring_and_Identifying)
  · The Four Color Map Theorem - Numberphile (https://openstax.org/r/The_Four)
  · Coloring Graphs Part 2: Coloring Maps and the Four Color Problem (https://openstax.org/r/Coloring_Maps)
  · Neil deGrasse Tyson Explains the Möbius Strip (https://openstax.org/r/Neil_de_Grasse)

12.5 Euler Circuits

  · Connected and Disconnected Graphs in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/connected_disconnected_graphs)
  · Recognizing Euler Trails and Euler Circuits (https://openstax.org/r/Euler_trails_circuits)
  · Existence of Euler Circuits in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/existence_Euler_circuits)

12.6 Euler Trails

  · Bridges and Local Bridges in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/bridges_local_bridges)
  · Fluery's Algorithm to Find an Euler Circuit (https://openstax.org/r/Fleurys_algorithm)

12.10 Trees

  · The Problem in Good Will Hunting by Numberphile (https://openstax.org/r/Hunting_Numberphile)
  · Spanning Trees in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/Spanning_Trees_in_Graph_Theory)
  · Use Kruskal's Algorithm to Find Minimum Spanning Trees in Graph Theory (https://openstax.org/r/

      Trees_in_Graph_Theory)

Formula Review

12.2 Graph Structures

For the Sum of Degrees Theorem,                                              or

The number of edges in a complete graph with vertices is the sum of the whole numbers from 1 to               ,

             .

The number of edges in a complete graph with vertices is                               .

12.7 Hamilton Cycles

The number of ways to arrange distinct objects is .

The number of distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with vertices is      .

12.9 Traveling Salesperson Problem

· In a complete graph with vertices, the number of distinct Hamilton cycles is      .

· In a complete graph with vertices, there are at most    different weights of Hamilton cycles.

12.10 Trees

· The number of edges in a tree graph with vertices is    . A connected graph with n vertices and                edges is a
    tree graph.

Projects

Everyone Gets a Turn! - Graph Colorings

Let's put your knowledge of graph colorings to work! Your task is to plan a field day following these steps.

1. Select between seven and ten activities for your field day. You can look online for ideas.
2. Create a survey asking for the participants to select the three to five events in which they would most like to

     participate. Survey between seven and ten people.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    12 · Chapter Summary 1405

 3. Use the results of your survey to create a graph in which each vertex represents one of the events. A pair of vertices
      will be adjacent if there is at least one participant who would like to participate in both events.

 4. Find a minimum coloring for the graph. Explain how you found it and how you know the chromatic number of the
      graph.

 5. Use your solution to part d to determine the minimum number of timeslots you must use to ensure that everyone
      has the opportunity to participate in their top three events.

 6. Find the complement of the graph you created. Explain what the edges in this graph represent.

A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood - Euler Circuits

Let's apply what you have learned to the community in which you live. Using resources such as your county's property
appraiser's website, create a detailed graph of your neighborhood in which vertices represent turns and intersections.
Represent a large enough part of your community to include no fewer than 10 intersections or turns. Then use your
graph to answer the following questions.

 1. Label the edges of your graph.
 2. Determine if your graph is Eulerian. Explain how you know. If it is not, eulerize it.
 3. Find an Euler circuit for your graph. Give the sequence of vertices that you found.
 4. What does the Euler circuit you found in part c represent for your community?
 5. Describe an application for which this Euler circuit might be used.

Dream Vacation - Hamilton Cycles and Paths

Where in the world would you like to travel most: the Eiffel Tower in Paris, a Broadway musical in New York city, a bike
tour of Amsterdam, the Tenerife whale and dolphin cruises in the Canary Islands, the Giza Pyramid in Cairo, or maybe
the Jokhang Temple in Tibet? Let's plan your dream vacation!

 1. Which four destinations are at the top of your bucket list?
 2. Draw a complete weighted graph with five vertices representing the four destinations and your home city, and the

      weights representing the cost of travel between cities.
 3. Use a website (such as Travelocity (https://openstax.org/r/travelocity)) to find the best airfare between each pair of

      cities. List the airlines and flight numbers along with the prices. Include cost for ground transportation from the
      nearest airport if there is no airport at the destination you want to visit.
 4. Use the nearest neighbor algorithm to find a Hamilton cycle of low weight beginning and ending in your hometown.
      What is the weight of this circuit and what does it represent?
 5. Use the brute force method to find a Hamilton cycle of lowest weight beginning and ending in your hometown.
      What is the weight of this circuit? Is it the same or different from the weight of the Hamilton cycle you found in
      Exercise 4?
 6. Suppose that instead of returning home, you planned to move to your favorite location on the list, but you wanted
      to stop at the other three destinations once along the way. Where would you move? List all Hamilton paths between
      your hometown and your favorite location.
 7. Find the weights of all the Hamilton paths you found in Exercise 6.
1406 12 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Graph Basics
For the following exercises, use the given figure.

     1. Determine the number of vertices in Graph S.
     2. Identify the graph with the fewest edges.
     3. Name the vertices in Graph U.
     4. Identify any pairs of vertices in Graph S that are not adjacent.
     5. Which graphs only has vertices of degree 2?
     6. Identify the graph in which the sum of the degrees of the vertices is 16.
 7. Amazon.com has a network of warehouses that are used to move packages around the United States. Delivery
      trucks from warehouse deliver packages to other locations. These mail trucks also pick up packages to bring back
      to their home warehouse. Explain how a graph or multigraph might be drawn to model this scenario by identifying
      the objects that could be represented by vertices and the connections that could be represented by edges. Indicate
      whether a graph or a multigraph would be a better model.
 8. Eduardo has two groups of four friends, group A and group B. Within each group, each of the members of the
      group are friends with each other but not with those in the other group. The individuals in group A have no other
      friends, but the individuals in group B each has their own group of four friends, and the individuals within those
      groups are all friends with each other, but with no one outside their own group. Draw a graph to represent the
      given scenario.
Graph Structures
For the following exercises, use the given figure.

     9. Explain why Graph B is not a subgraph of Graph C.
    10. Identify any graphs that have a quadrilateral cyclic subgraph and name the vertices.
    11. Identify a clique in Graph C by listing its vertices.
    12. Draw a graph with the following characteristics: largest clique has 4 vertices, a pentagonal cyclic subgraph,

          exactly two vertices of degree 4.
    13. How many edges are in a complete graph with 12 vertices?
    14. How many triangles are in a complete graph with 11 vertices?
Comparing Graphs
15. Identify three differences between Graph 1 and Graph 2 that demonstrate the graphs are not isomorphic.

For the following exercises, use the given figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    12 · Chapter Summary 1407

    16. Determine if Graph 3 is isomorphic to Graph 4. If so, identify a correspondence between the vertices which
          demonstrates the isomorphism. If not, identify at least two characteristics that verifies this.

    17. Determine if Graph 3 is isomorphic to Graph 5. If so, identify a correspondence between the vertices that
          demonstrates the isomorphism. If not, identify a characteristic that verifies this.

    18. Consider Graph 4 and Graph 5. Determine if one graph is a subgraph of the other. If so, give a correspondence
          between vertices that demonstrates this relationship. If not, identify conflicting characteristics.

For the following exercises, use the given figure.

    19. Draw the complements of Graphs 7 and 9. Determine whether the graphs you drew are isomorphic to each
          other and explain how you know. Use this information to determine whether Graphs 7 and 8 are isomorphic.

    20. Draw the complements of Graphs 7 and 10. Determine whether the graphs you drew are isomorphic to each
          other and explain how you know. Use this information to determine whether Graphs 7 and 10 are isomorphic.

    21. Draw the complements of Graphs 8 and 9. Determine whether the graphs you drew are isomorphic to each
          other and explain how you know. Use this information to determine whether Graphs 8 and 9 are isomorphic.

Navigating Graphs
For the following exercises, use Graph A in the given figure. Consider each sequence of vertices. Determine if it is only a
walk, both a walk and a path, both a walk and a trail, all three, or none of these.

    22. e  d  b  e  f
    23. e  b  d  e  f  c  b  d
    24. e  f  b  d
For the following exercises, use Graph K in Figure 12.352. Identify each sequence of vertices as a closed walk, circuit
(closed trail), and/or directed cycle (closed path). Indicate all that apply.
    25. n  o  q  n  p  m  n
    26. m  n  o  q  n  p  o  n  m
    27. p  o  q  n  m  p
For the following exercises, use Graphs A and K in Figure 12.352.
    28. Are Graphs A and K planar graphs? What does your answer tell you about the chromatic number of each graph?
    29. How many vertices are in the largest complete subgraph of Graph A? What does this tell you about the

          chromatic number of Graph A?
    30. Create a coloring of Graph A, which uses exactly four colors, or explain why it is not possible.
    31. Create a coloring of Graph K, which uses exactly two colors, or explain why it is not possible.
    32. Determine the chromatic number of Graph A. Give a coloring that supports your conclusion.
    33. Determine the chromatic number of Graph K. Give a coloring that supports your conclusion.
1408 12 · Chapter Summary

Euler Circuits
For the following exercises, use the graphs and multigraphs shown. Identify any graphs and/or multigraphs with the
given characteristics. If there are none, state so.

    34. connected
    35. disconnected
    36. Eulerian
Euler Trails
For the following exercises, use the graphs and multigraphs in Figure 12.354.
    37. List the set of vertices for each component in Graph 13.
    38. Determine whether the sequence of edges represents an Euler circuit in Multigraph 15:

          KLNMOSTQUPR
    39. Find an Euler circuit beginning and ending at vertex g in Graph 12 if one exists. Otherwise, explain how you

          know such an Euler circuit does not exist.
    40. Give an example of a pair of edges that could be duplicated to eulerize Multigraph 14.
For the following exercises, use the graphs and multigraphs in Figure 12.354. Identify any graphs and/or multigraphs
with the given characteristics. If there are none, state so.
    41. Exactly two vertices of odd degree
    42. Has an Euler trail
    43. Has exactly one local bridge
For the following exercises, use the graphs and multigraphs in Figure 12.354. In each exercise a graph and a sequence
of vertices are given.
    44. Determine whether the sequence of edges, A  B  C  H  G  D  F  E, is an Euler trail, an Euler circuit, or

          neither for the graph. If it is neither, explain why.
    45. Suppose that an edge were added to Graph 11 between vertices s and w. Determine if the graph would have an

          Euler trail or an Euler circuit, and find one.
Hamilton Cycles
For the following exercises, refer to the graph in the given figure.

    46. A student has been asked to use Fleury's algorithm to construct an Euler trail in the given graph. The student
          decides to begin the trail at vertex d. Is this a good choice, why or why not?

    47. A student who is using Fleury's algorithm to construct an Euler trail has decided to begin with f  d  a  b 
          .... If the student is off to a good start, help the student by completing the Euler trail. If the student has made an
          error, explain the error.

    48. Use Fleury's algorithm to construct an Euler trail for Graph 16 beginning at the vertex of your choice.
For the following exercises, use the graphs from the given figures to determine whether the sequence of vertices in the
given graph is a Hamilton cycle, an Euler circuit, both, or neither.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    12 · Chapter Summary 1409

    49. Graph F. a  b  e  c  b  d  c  a
    50. Graph K. m  n  q  o  p  m
    51. Graph A. b  d  e  f  c  b  e
For the following exercises, evaluate the factorial expression for the given value of .
    52.
    53.
    54. Calculate the number of distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with 13 vertices.
For the following exercises, use the figure shown to find the weight of each Hamilton cycle.

    55. q  t  w  x  u  y  v  s  r  q
    56. w  x  y  u  v  s  r  q  t  w
Hamilton Paths
For the following exercises, use the figure shown to determine whether the sequence of vertices in the given graph is a
Hamilton path, an Euler trail, both, or neither.
1410 12 · Chapter Summary

    57. Graph A. e  b  c  f  e  b  e
    58. Graph A. b  c  f  e  d  b  e
    59. Graph K. n  q  o  p  m
    60. Graph K. o  q  m  n  p
Recall the three common scenarios in which it is not possible to have a Hamilton between two vertices.
Scenario 1: If an edge ab is a bridge, then there is no Hamilton path between a pair of vertices that are on the same
side of edge ab.
Scenario 2: If an edge ab is a bridge with at least three components on each side, then there is no Hamilton path
beginning or ending at a or b.
Scenario 3: If a graph is composrd of two cycles joined only at a single vertex p, and v is any vertex that is not adjacent
to p, then there are no Hamilton paths beginning or ending at p.
For the following exercises, identify the scenario that guarantees there is no Hamilton path between the given pair of
vertices in the given graph.

    61. Vertices a and e.
    62. Vertices d and f.
The principal of an elementary school plans to visit each classroom exactly once before leaving for the day. The floor
plan of the school is given. Use this information for the following exercises.

    63. Draw a graph to represent the floor plan for the elementary school in which each vertex is a room and an edge
          between two vertices indicates that there is a path between the two rooms that does not pass the door to
          another room.

    64. Use your graph to find a route that the principal can take beginning at the Front Office in room A, visiting each
          room exactly once (without passing by another room), and ending at room F, which is next to the exit.

    65. Would the route you found be best to trace out a Hamilton path, an Euler trail, both, or neither in the graph you
          drew? Explain how you know.

Traveling Salesperson Problem
For the following exercises, determine whether the algorithm described is a greedy algorithm or a brute force
algorithm.

    66. A lumber distributor is loading pallets onto trucks with the intention of using the fewest trucks possible to send
          a shipment. The distributor loads the pallets with the greatest length that will fit on the truck first and
          continues loading until no more pallets will fit. Then the next truck is loaded using the same approach.

    67. A traveler wants to visit five cities by airplane. The traveler lists all the possible orders in which the cities can be
          visited then calculates the best airfare for each itinerary and selects the least expensive option.

For the following exercises, list all the distinct Hamilton cycles beginning at the given vertex in the given graph. Indicate
which pairs of Hamilton cycles are reverses of each other.

Access for free at openstax.org
                    12 · Chapter Summary 1411

    68. Graph 17, vertex a
    69. Graph 18, vertex m

For the following exercises, find a Hamilton cycle of least weight for the given graph in Figure 12.362, beginning at the
given vertex, and using the brute force method. What is the weight of the cycle?

    70. Graph 18; vertex m
    71. Graph 17; vertex a

For the following exercises, find a Hamilton cycle of low weight for the given graph in Figure 12.362, beginning at the
given vertex, and using the nearest neighbor method. What is the weight of the cycle?

    72. Graph 18 vertex m
    73. Graph 17, vertex a

74. The products at a particular factory are manufactured in phases. The same equipment is utilized for each phase,
      but it must be formatted differently to accomplish different tasks. The transition time to convert between a format
      for one task and another task varies. The times are given in the table below.

Task A  B  CDE  FG

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

      Use the table to draw a graph in which the vertices represent tasks A, C, D, F, and G, and the weights of the edges
      indicate the times in minutes to transition between pairs of tasks. Use the nearest neighbor method to find an
      order in which to complete tasks A, C, D, F, and G, which keeps the transition times down and ends with the same
      set up as it began so that the factory is ready start the next batch. Assume that there are no restrictions on which
      tasks can be completed in which order. Hint: The nearest neighbor algorithm may give a different result depending
      on which vertex is the starting vertex; so, you must check all possibilities.

Trees
For the following exercises, draw a graph with the given characteristics.

    75. A tree with eight vertices, exactly two of degree three.
    76. A connected graph with eight vertices, exactly two of degree 3, which is not a tree.
1412 12 · Chapter Summary

For the following exercises, identify each type of graph in the given figure: tree graph, star graph, starlike graph, line
graph, lobster graph, caterpillar graph, and/or forest graph.

    77. Graph 19
    78. Graph 20
For the following exercises, use the figure shown to draw three possible spanning trees that fit the given description.

    79. Three spanning trees of Graph A, which include both edges be and de.
    80. Three spanning trees of Graph K, which include edges mn and oq, but do not include no.
For the following exercises, use Kruskal's Algorithm to find a minimum spanning tree of the given graph. Graph it and
calculate its weight.

    81. Graph 17
    82. Graph 18

Chapter Test

For the following Exercises, use the figure shown.

     1. Name the edges in Graph T.
     2. Identify the graph(s) with six edges.
For the following exercises, use the figure shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    12 · Chapter Summary 1413

     3. Identify any of the graphs that is a subgraph of Graph D.
     4. Identify any graphs with no cyclic subgraphs of any size.
 5. Consider Graph 4 and Graph 6 in the given figure. Determine if one graph is a subgraph of the other. If so, give a
      correspondence between vertices that demonstrates this relationship. If not, identify conflicting characteristics.

 6. For the following exercise, use Graph A in the given figure. Consider each sequence of vertices. Determine if it is
      only a walk, both a walk and a path, both a walk and a trail, all three, or none of these.

                                                                       debcf
 7. For the following exercise, use Graphs A and K in Figure 12.369. Determine the chromatic number of Graph K. Give

      a coloring that supports your conclusion.
For the following exercise, use the graphs and multigraphs in the given figure.

     8. Identify any graphs and/or multigraphs that are not Eulerian. If there are none, state so.
     9. List the set of vertices for each component in Graph 11.
    10. Find an Euler circuit beginning and ending at vertex b in Graph 12 if one exists.
11. Use Fleury's algorithm to construct an Euler trail for the given graph beginning at vertex f of your choice.

12. Use the graphs shown to determine whether the sequence of vertices d  b  c  f  e  d is a Hamilton cycle, an
      Euler circuit, both, or neither.
1414 12 · Chapter Summary

13. Calculate the number of distinct Hamilton cycles in a complete graph with 15 vertices.
14. Use the figure shown to find the weight of the given Hamilton cycle:

      twxuyvsrqt

For the following exercises, use this information: For the Halloween celebration at an elementary school, the students
from Classroom I will visit every classroom once and return to their own classroom. The floor plan of the school is
given.

    15. Draw a graph to represent the classrooms of the elementary school in which each vertex is a classroom and an
          edge between two vertices indicates that there is a path between the two rooms that does not pass the door to
          another classroom.

    16. Use your graph to find a Hamilton circuit beginning and ending at I.
    17. Explain what the Hamilton circuit you found represents for the students in Classroom I.
18. Find a Hamilton cycle of low weight for Graph 18, beginning at vertex q, and using the nearest neighborhood

      method. What is the weight of the cycle?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    12 · Chapter Summary 1415

19. Use Kruskal's Algorithm to find a minimum spanning tree for the below graph. Graph the tree and give its weight.
1416 12 · Chapter Summary
Access for free at openstax.org
                 13 · Introduction 1417

13  MATH AND...

Figure 13.1 Math can be found in many different areas and subjects. (credit: modification of work "Chemistry/Physics
Library" by University Libraries/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline

  13.1 Math and Art
  13.2 Math and the Environment
  13.3 Math and Medicine
  13.4 Math and Music
  13.5 Math and Sports

      Introduction

Where do we find math around us? Math can be found in areas that are expected and sometimes in areas that are
surprising. There are many ways that mathematical concepts, such as those in this text, are infused in the world around
us. In this chapter, we will explore a sampling of five distinct areas from everyday life where math's impact plays a
meaningful role.

Math's impact on art can be found in numerical relationships that are known to create or enhance beauty. The Fibonacci
numbers are one mathematical example that can be found in nature such as in petal count of a rose. On a different note,
a mathematical exploration can aid in making a convincing argument on how we can positively impact our environment.
Whether looking at the choices of a single individual or the larger impact offered from a collaborative effort, there are
measurable responses to positively address climate change. Turning to medicine, which has been a topic of global
importance in recent years, we will explore how math is used to determine drug dosage rates and test the validity of a
vaccine. Switching back to items of aesthetic nature, we will examine some foundational components of music which,
like art, brings beauty and joy to our lives. Finally, we will explore some ways that math is used in sports to predict future
performance and analyze tournaments styles.
1418 13 · Math and...

    13.1 Math and Art

        Figure 13.2 Sunflower seeds appear in a pattern that involves the Fibonacci sequence. (credit: "Sunflower Surprise" by
        frankieleon/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Identify and describe the golden ratio.
         2. Identify and describe the Fibonacci sequence and its application to nature.
         3. Apply the golden ratio and the Fibonacci sequence relationship.
         4. Identify and compute golden rectangles.
       Art is the expression or application of human creative skill and imagination, typically in a visual form such as painting or
       sculpture, producing works to be appreciated primarily for their beauty or emotional power.
       Oxford Dictionary
        Art, like other disciplines, is an area that combines talent and experience with education. While not everyone considers
        themself skilled at creating art, there are mathematical relationships commonly found in artistic masterpieces that drive
        what is considered attractive to the eye. Nature is full of examples of these mathematical relationships.
        Enroll in a cake decorating class and, when you learn how to create flowers out of icing, you will likely be directed as to
        the number of petals to use. Depending on the desired size of a rose flower, the recommendation for the number of
        petals to use is commonly 5, 8, or 13 petals. If learning to draw portraits, you may be surprised to learn that eyes are
        approximately halfway between the top of a person's head and their chin. Studying architecture, we find examples of
        buildings that contain golden rectangles and ratios that add to the beautifying of the design. The Parthenon (Figure
        13.3), which was built around 400 BC, as well as modern-day structures such the Washington Monument are two
        examples containing these relationships. These seemingly unrelated examples and many more highlight mathematical
        relationships that we associate with beauty in artistic form.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                          13.1 · Math and Art 1419

Figure 13.3 The Parthenon in Greece demonstrates the golden ratio. (credit: "Parthénon" by Julien Maury/Flickr, Public
Domain Mark 1.0)

Golden Ratio

The golden ratio, also known as the golden proportion, is a ratio aspect that can be found in beauty from nature to
human anatomy as well as in golden rectangles that are commonly found in building structures. The golden ratio is
expressed in nature from plants to creatures such as the starfish, honeybees, seashells, and more. It is commonly noted

by the Greek letter  (pronounced "fee").  , which has a decimal value approximately equal to 1.618.

Consider Figure 13.3: Note how the building is balanced in dimension and has a natural shape. The overall structure
does not appear as if it is too wide or too tall in comparison to the other dimensions.

Figure 13.4 Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci (credit: "Vitruvian Man" by Leonardo da Vinci/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain)

The golden ratio has been used by artists through the years and can be found in art dating back to 3000 BC. Leonardo da
Vinci is considered one of the artists who mastered the mathematics of the golden ratio, which is prevalent in his artwork
such as Virtuvian Man (Figure 13.4). This famous masterpiece highlights the golden ratio in the proportions of an ideal
body shape.

The golden ratio is approximated in several physical measurements of the human body and parts exhibiting the golden
ratio are simply called golden. The ratio of a person's height to the length from their belly button to the floor is  or
approximately 1.618. The bones in our fingers (excluding the thumb), are golden as they form a ratio that approximates
. The human face also includes several ratios and those faces that are considered attractive commonly exhibit golden
ratios.
1420 13 · Math and...

          EXAMPLE 13.1
        Using Golden Ratio and a Person's Height
        If a person's height is 5 ft 6 in, what is the approximate length from their belly button to the floor rounded to the nearest
        inch, assuming the ratio is golden?

             Solution
        Step 1: Convert the height to inches
        Step 2: Calculate the length from the belly button to the floor, .

        The length from the person's belly button to the floor would be approximately 41 in.

                 YOUR TURN 13.1
          1. If a person's height is 6 ft 2 in, what is the approximate length from their belly button to the floor rounded to the

               nearest inch if the ratio is golden?

     Fibonacci Sequence and Application to Nature

          Figure 13.5 Rose petals appear in a Fibonacci spiral. (credit: "rilke4" by monchoohcnom/Flickr, Public Domain Mark 1.0)
        The Fibonacci sequence can be found occurring naturally in a wide array of elements in our environment from the
        number of petals on a rose flower to the spirals on a pine cone to the spines on a head of lettuce and more. The
        Fibonacci sequence can be found in artistic renderings of nature to develop aesthetically pleasing and realistic artistic
        creations such as in sculptures, paintings, landscape, building design, and more. It is the sequence of numbers
        beginning with 1, 1, and each subsequent term is the sum of the previous two terms in the sequence (1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13,
        ...).
        The petal counts on some flowers are represented in the Fibonacci sequence. A daisy is sometimes associated with
        plucking petals to answer the question "They love me, they love me not." Interestingly, a daisy found growing wild
        typically contains 13, 21, or 34 petals and it is noted that these numbers are part of the Fibonacci sequence. The number

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             13.1 · Math and Art 1421

of petals aligns with the spirals in the flower family.

EXAMPLE 13.2

Applying the Fibonacci Sequence to Rose Petals
Suppose you were creating a rose out of icing, assuming a Fibonacci sequence in the petals, how many petals would be
in the row following a row containing 13 petals?

Solution

The number of petals on a rose is often modeled with the numbers in the Fibonacci sequence, which is 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,

13,..., where the next number in the sequence is the sum of  . There would be 21 petals on the next row of the

icing rose.

        YOUR TURN 13.2

  1. If a circular row on a pinecone contains 21 scales and models the Fibonacci sequence, approximately how many
      scales would be found on the next circular row?

Golden Ratio and the Fibonacci Sequence Relationship

Mathematicians for years have explored patterns and applications to the world around us and continue to do so today.
One such pattern can be found in ratios of two adjacent terms of the Fibonacci sequence.
Recall that the Fibonacci sequence = 1, 1, 3, 5, 8, 13,... with 5 and 8 being one example of adjacent terms. When
computing the ratio of the larger number to the preceding number such as 8/5 or 13/8, it is fascinating to find the
golden ratio emerge. As larger numbers from the Fibonacci sequence are utilized in the ratio, the value more closely
approaches , the golden ratio.

  EXAMPLE 13.3

Finding Golden Ratio in Adjacent Fibonacci Terms
The 24th Fibonacci number is 46,368 and the 25th is 75,025. Show that the ratio of the 25th and 24th Fibonacci numbers
is approximately . Round your answer to the nearest thousandth.

     Solution
                               ; The ratio of the 25th and 24th term is approximately equal to the value of  rounded to the

nearest thousandth, 1.618.

      YOUR TURN 13.3

1. The 23rd Fibonacci number is 28,657 and the 24th is 46,368. Show that the ratio of the 24th and 23rd Fibonacci
    numbers is approximately . Round your answer to the nearest thousandth.
1422 13 · Math and...

                       Figure 13.6 The pyramids of Giza in Egypt (credit: "Giza Pyramids" by Vincent Brown/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Golden Rectangles

        Turning our attention to man-made elements, the golden ratio can be found in architecture and artwork dating back to
        the ancient pyramids in Egypt (Figure 13.6) to modern-day buildings such as the UN headquarters. The ancient Greeks
        used golden rectangles--any rectangles where the ratio of the length to the width is the golden ratio--to create
        aesthetically pleasing as well as solid structures, with examples of the golden rectangle often being used multiple times
        in the same building such as the Parthenon, which is shown in Figure 13.3. Golden rectangles can be found in twentieth-
        century buildings as well, such as the Washington Monument.
        Looking at another man-made element, artists paintings often contain golden rectangles. Well-known paintings such as
        Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper and the Vitruvian Man contain multiple golden rectangles as do many of da Vinci's
        masterpieces.
        Whether framing a painting or designing a building, the golden rectangle has been widely utilized by artists and are
        considered to be the most visually pleasing rectangles.

          EXAMPLE 13.4
        Finding Golden Rectangle in Frames
        A frame has dimensions of 8 in by 6 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest thousandth and determine
        if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

             Solution
        8/6 = 1.333; A golden rectangle's ratio is approximately 1.618. The frame dimensions are close to a golden rectangle.

                 YOUR TURN 13.4
          1. A frame has dimensions of 10 in by 8 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest thousandth and

               determine if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                     13.1 · Math and Art 1423

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
M.C. Escher

  Figure 13.7 M.C. Escher (credit: "M.C. Escher" by Hans Peters (ANEFO)/Dutch National Archives, CC0 1.0 Public
  Domain)

  Mauritis Cornelis Escher was a Dutch-born world-famous graphic artist and his work can be found in murals, stamps,
  wallpaper designs, illustrations in books, and even carpets. Over his lifetime, M.C. Escher created hundreds of
  lithographs and wood engravings as well as more than 2,000 sketches.

  Escher's work is characterized with the infusion of geometric designs that obey most of the mathematical rules. If you
  study his work closely, you can see where he breaks a mathematical relationship to create famous illusions such as
  soldiers marching around the top of a square turret where the soldiers appear to be always going uphill but are
  contained on a single set of stairs in a square. Look closely and the golden ratio as well as golden rectangles abound
  in Escher's work.

  Like many famous people, M.C. Escher did not find success in his early school years. Before finding success, Escher
  failed his final school exam and quit a short stint in architecture. Finding a graphic arts teacher who recognized
  Escher's talent, Escher completed art school and enjoyed traveling through Italy, where he found much of his
  inspiration for his work.

Check Your Understanding

 1. What is the value of the golden ratio to the nearest thousandth?
 2. What are the first 10 terms of the Fibonacci sequence?
 3. What is a golden rectangle?

        SECTION 13.1 EXERCISES

 1. A person's height is 5 ft 2 in. What is the approximate length from their belly button to the floor rounded to the
      nearest inch?

 2. A person's height is 6 ft 3 in. What is the approximate length from their belly button to the floor rounded to the
      nearest inch?

 3. A person's length from their belly button to the floor is 3 ft 11 in. What is the person's approximate height rounded
1424 13 · Math and...

to the nearest inch?

4. A person's length from their belly button to the floor is 58 in. What is the person's approximate height rounded to
    the nearest inch?

5. The spikes on a pineapple mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a row on a pineapple contains five spikes,
    approximately how many spikes would be found on the next larger row of spikes?

6. The leaves on a plant mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a set of leaves on the plant contains 5 leaves, how many
    leaves would be found on the previous smaller set of leaves?

7. The spines on a head of lettuce mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a head of lettuce contains 13 spines,
    approximately how many spines would be found on the next inside layer?

8. The seeds on a sunflower mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a circular layer on the sunflower contains 55 seeds,
    approximately how many seeds would be found on the next larger circular layer?

9. The segments on a palm frond mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a palm frond contains 89 segments,
    approximately how many segments would be found on the next larger palm frond?

10. The 19th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 4,181 and the 20th term is 6,765. What is the 21st term of the
      sequence?

11. The 23rd term of the Fibonacci sequence is 28,657 and the 24th term is 46,368. What is the 22nd term of the
      sequence?

12. The 18th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 2,584 and the 20th term is 6,765. What is the 19th term of the
      sequence?

13. The 25th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 75,025 and the 20th term is 6,765. What is the 24th term of the
      sequence?

14. The 10th Fibonacci number is 55 and the 11th is 89. Show that the ratio of the 11th and 10th Fibonacci numbers is
      approximately . Round your answer to the nearest thousandth.

15. The 23rd Fibonacci number is 28,657 and the 24th is 46,368. Show that the ratio of the 24th and 23rd Fibonacci
      numbers is approximately . Round your answer to the nearest ten-thousandth.

16. The 22nd Fibonacci number is 17,711 and the 21st is 10,946. Show that the ratio of the 22nd and 21st Fibonacci
      numbers is approximately . Round your answer to the nearest ten-thousandth.

17. The 16th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 987. Use the approximate value of  of 1.618 to estimate the 15th
      term. Round your answer to the nearest whole number.

18. The 26th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 121,393. Use the approximate value of  of 1.618 to estimate the 25th
      term. Round your answer to the nearest whole number.

19. A frame has dimensions of 20 in by 24 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest tenth and
      determine if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

20. A fence has dimensions of 75 in by 45 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest tenth and
      determine if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

21. A frame has a length of 50 in. Calculate the width rounded to the nearest inch if the frame is to be a golden
      rectangle.

Access for free at openstax.org
                               13.2 · Math and the Environment 1425

13.2 Math and the Environment

Figure 13.8 Solar panels harness the sun's energy to power homes, businesses, and various methods of transportation.
(credit: modification of work "Craters of the Moon solar array" by NPS Climate Change Response/Flickr, Public Domain
Mark 1.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Compute how conserving water can positively impact climate change.
 2. Discuss the history of solar energy.
 3. Compute power needs for common devices in a home.
 4. Explore advantages of solar power as it applies to home use.

Climate change and emissions management have been debated topics in recent years. However, more and more people
are recognizing the impacts that have resulted in temperature changes and are seeking timely and effective action. The
World Meteorological Organization shared in a June 2021 publication that "2021 is a make-or-break year for climate
action, with the window to prevent the worst impacts of climate change--which include ever more frequent more
intense droughts, floods and storms--closing rapidly." The problem no longer belongs to a few countries or regions but
rather is a worldwide concern measured with increasing temperatures leading to decreased glacier coverage and
resulting rise in sea levels.

The good news is, there are small steps that each of us can do that collectively can positively impact climate change.

Making a Positive Impact on Climate Change--Water Usage

Our use of water is one element that impacts climate change. Having access to clean, potable water is critical for not
only our health but also for the health of our ecosystem. About 1 out of 10 people on our planet do not have easy access
to clean water to drink. As each of us conserves water, we prolong the life span of fresh water from our lakes and rivers
and also reduce the impact on sewer systems and drainage in our communities. Additionally, as we conserve water, we
also conserve electricity that is used to bring water to and in our homes. So, what can we do to help conserve water?

  EXAMPLE 13.5

Brushing Your Teeth (One Person's Contribution)
Brushing your teeth with the water running continually uses about 4 gal of water. Turning the faucet off when you are
not rinsing uses less than one-fourth of a gallon of water. Considering the recommendation to brush your teeth twice a
day, how much water would be saved in a week if the faucet was off when not rinsing?

     Solution
Leaving the water running continually:

Step 1: Calculate gallons used not with water running continually:

Brushing twice a day for 7 days using 4 gal of water for each brushing

Step 2: Calculate gallons used turning the faucet off when you are not rinsing:

Brushing twice a day for 7 days using 0.25 gal of water for each brushing
1426 13 · Math and...

        Step 3: Calculate savings:

        During one week, 52.5 gal of water would be saved if one person turned the faucet off except when rinsing when
        brushing your teeth.

                 YOUR TURN 13.5
          1. Brushing your teeth with the water running continually uses about 4 gal of water. Turning the faucet off when

               you are not rinsing uses less than one-fourth of a gallon of water. Consider the recommendation to brush your
               teeth twice a day, how much water would be saved in a month (4 weeks) if the faucet was off when not rinsing?

          EXAMPLE 13.6
        Brushing Your Teeth (Multiple People's Contribution - Town)
        Using the data in Example 13.5, how much water would be saved in a month if one-fifth of a town's population of 15,000
        turned the faucet off when brushing their teeth except when rinsing?

             Solution
        Step 1: From Example 13.5, we found that 1 person saves 52.5 gal per week.
        Step 2: Calculate the population to save water:

        Step 3: One-fifth of a town's population turning off the faucet when brushing their teeth for a month:

        During one month, 630,000 gallons of water would be saved if one-fifth of a town of 15,000 people turned the faucet off
        except when rinsing when brushing their teeth.

                 YOUR TURN 13.6
          1. Using the data in Your Turn 13.5, how much water would be saved in a month if one-third of a town's population

               of 15,000 turned the faucet off when brushing their teeth except when rinsing?

          EXAMPLE 13.7
        Brushing Your Teeth (Multiple People's Contribution - State)
        Using the data in Example 13.5, how much water would be saved in a year if one-fourth of the population of the state of
        Minnesota, which is approximately 5.6 million people, turned the faucet off when brushing their teeth except when
        rinsing for a year (52 weeks)?

             Solution
        Step 1: From Example 13.5, we found that 1 person saves 52.5 gal per week.
        Step 2: Calculate the population to save water:

        Step 3: One-fourth of a town's population turning off the faucet when brushing their teeth for a month:

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               13.2 · Math and the Environment 1427

During one year, 3,822 million gal of water would be saved if one-fourth of the state of Minnesota turned the faucet off
except when rinsing when brushing their teeth.

        YOUR TURN 13.7

  1. Using the data in Example 13.5, how much water would be saved in a year if one-sixth of the population of the
      state of Florida, which is approximately 21.6 million people, turned the faucet off when brushing their teeth
      except when rinsing for a year (52 weeks)?

History of Solar Energy

In the mid-1800s, Willoughby Smith discovered photoconductive responsiveness in selenium. Shortly thereafter, William
Grylls Adams and Richard Evans Day discovery that selenium can produce electricity if exposed to the sun was a major
breakthrough. Less than 10 years later, Charles Fritts invented the first solar cells using selenium. Jumping a mere 100
years later, Bell Labs in the United States produced the first practical photovoltaic cells in the mid-1950s and developed
versions used to power satellites in the same decade.
Solar panel use has exploded in recent decades and is now used by residences, organizations, businesses, and
government buildings such as the White House, space to power satellites, and various methods of transportation. One
reason for the expansion is a continuing drop in cost combined with an increase in performance and durability. In the
mid-1950s, the cost of a solar panel was around $300 per watt capability. Twenty years later, the cost was a third of the
1950s' cost. Currently, solar panel cost has dropped to less than $1 per watt while decreasing in size as well as increasing
in longevity. The dropping price and improved performance has moved solar to a modest investment that can pay for
itself in less than half the time of systems from 15 years ago.

        WHO KNEW?

  Solar Power's Age
  The sun has been harnessed by humans for centuries. The earliest recorded use of tapping the sun's energy for
  power dates back to the seventh century BC when man focused the sun's rays through a magnifying glass to create
  fire. Four thousand years later, we find historical record of using mirrors to focus the sun and light torches, often for
  ceremonial proceedings. Use of the sun to light torches continued through the centuries and has been recorded by
  various cultures including the Chinese civilization in 20 AD and beyond.
  In more recent years, the sun was harnessed to power ovens on ships traversing to oceans in the 1700s. At the same
  time, the power of the sun was utilized to power steamboats through the 1800s. Mária Telkes, a Hungarian-born
  American scientist, invented a widely deployed solar seawater distiller used on World War II life rafts. Soon after, she
  partnered with architect Eleanor Raymond to design the first modern home to be completely heated by solar power.
  Air warmed on rooftop collectors transferred heat to salts, which stored the heat for later use.
  Although solar panels as we know them today are relatively new in history, use of the sun to harness power is much
  older.

Compute Power Needs for Common Home Devices

A kilowatt (kW) is 1,000 watts (W). A kilowatt-hour (kWh) is a measurement of energy use, which is the amount of
energy used by a 1,000-watt device to run for an hour. Using the definition of a kilowatt-hour, to calculate how long it
would take to consume 1 kWh of power, we divide 1,000 by the watts use of a device.

  FORMULA

For example, a 75 W bulb would take  to use 1 kW of power.
1428 13 · Math and...

          FORMULA

EXAMPLE 13.8

Calculating the Kilowatt-Hours Needed to Run a Television
A 48 in plasma television uses about 200 W. How many kilowatt-hours are needed to run the television in a month if the
television is one for an average of 2.5 hours a day?

     Solution                    to use 1 kW
Step 1:

Step 2:                          of use

Step 3:

The television will consume about 15 kW in a month.

        YOUR TURN 13.8
  1. A 40 in plasma television uses about 175 W. How many kilowatt-hours are needed to run the television in a

      month if the television is on for an average of 3 hours a day?

  EXAMPLE 13.9
Calculating the Cost to Run a Refrigerator
A medium-sized Energy Star-rated refrigerator uses about 575 W and runs for about 8 hours per day. What is the
monthly (30 days) cost of running the refrigerator if the electric rate is 12 cents per kilowatt-hour?

     Solution
Step 1: Calculate the watts per day:

Step 2: Calculate the kilowatt-hours.

Step 3: Calculate the daily cost.

Step 4: Calculate the monthly cost.

It would cost about $16.50 to run the refrigerator for a month.

      YOUR TURN 13.9

1. A dorm-sized Energy Star-rated refrigerator uses about 375 W and runs for about 9 hours per day. What is the
    monthly cost of running the refrigerator if the electric rate is 14 cents per kilowatt-hour?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               13.2 · Math and the Environment 1429

  EXAMPLE 13.10

Calculating the Kilowatt-Hours to Run an Oven
An electric oven is labeled as 4,000 W. How much would it cost to bake a cake for 30 minutes if the electric rate is 14
cents per kilowatt-hour?

     Solution
Step 1: Determine the time it takes to use 1 kW of power:

For every 15 minutes, the oven uses 1 kW of power.
Step 2: Determine how many kilowatt-hours are needed to bake the cake for 30 minutes:

Step 3: Calculate the cost of the oven usage:

It would cost about 28 cents to bake the cake.

        YOUR TURN 13.10

  1. A toaster oven is labeled as 2,000 W. How much would it cost to warm leftovers from a meal for 15 minutes if the
      electric rate is 12 cents per kilowatt-hour?

Solar Advantages

There are multiple advantages that solar power can offer us today including reducing greenhouse gas and CO2
emissions, powering vehicles, reducing water pollution, reducing strain on limited supply of other power options such as
fossil fuels. We will look further at reducing greenhouse gas and CO2 emissions.
Any gas that prevents infrared radiation from escaping Earth's atmosphere is a greenhouse gas. There are 24 currently
identified greenhouse gases of which carbon dioxide is one. When measuring the impact of any of the greenhouse
gases, the measurements are given in units of carbon dioxide emissions. For this reason, greenhouse gas and carbon
dioxide have become interchangeable in discussions.

                 PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

  Charles Fritts and Mohammad M. Atalla
  Charles Fritts, a New York inventor, is credited with creating the first solar cell, which he installed on a rooftop in New
  York City in 1884. While the solar cell was not very efficient, having a rate of conversion between 1 to 2%, this was a
  major step early in solar power energy. Today's solar cells have an efficiency on average of 15 to 20%, which yields a
  notably higher impact. Nonetheless, the work that Fritts successfully completed marked the start of solar energy
  through the use of photovoltaic solar panels in the United States.
  Mohamed M. Atalla was an Egyptian-born scientist who moved to the United States to complete his studies, and
  undertook research and development at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey. Many of the early efficiency gains in solar
  cells were due to his development of processes for using silicon within electronic devices. Atalla's work led to the
  invention of silicon transistors and microchips (including his own invention of the MOSFET, the most widely used
  transistor in the world), and quickly increased the efficiency of solar cells.
1430 13 · Math and...

          EXAMPLE 13.11

        Calculating the Solar Power for Average Home Use in Kilowatts
        If a home uses approximately 30 kW of electricity per day, what size solar system would be needed to fuel 80% of a
        home's needs for a month (30 days)?

             Solution

        A solar system capable of producing 720 kW a month would be needed.

                 YOUR TURN 13.11

          1. A tiny home uses approximately 12 kW of electricity per day. What size solar system would be needed to fuel 80%
               of a home's needs for a month (30 days)?

     Check Your Understanding

          4. What is the relationship between 1 kW and watts?
          5. An average bath uses about 35 gal of water. A water-saving showerhead uses approximately 2 gal of water per

              minute. If a person typically takes one bath a week, how much water is saved by replacing the baths with showers
              lasting 5 minutes over the course of a month?
          6. How long does it take for a 30 W Google Nest audio to use 1 kW of power?
          7. How long would it take for a 60 W bulb to consume 1 kW of power? Round your answer to the nearest hour.

             SECTION 13.2 EXERCISES

          1. A typical showerhead uses 5 gal of water per minute. A water-saving showerhead uses approximately 2 gal of
              water per minute. How much water would one person save in a month if they take a 6-minute shower 4 times a
              week?

          2. An average toilet uses 5 gal of water per flush. A high-efficiency toilet uses about 1.25 gal per flush. How much
              water would a household save in a week if the toilet was flushed 8 times a day?

          3. When washing dishes, leaving the faucet running utilizes about 15 gal every 5 minutes, where filling the sink and
              turning the faucet off except to rinse the dishes uses about 5 gal for washing a dishpan-sized load of dishes. How
              much water is saved by not leaving the faucet running if it takes 10 minutes to wash a dishpan-sized load of dishes
              each day for a month containing 30 days?

          4. Leaving the water running when washing your hands consumes about 4 gal of water, whereas turning the water
              off when lathering reduces the water used to 1 gal. How much water is saved in an apartment of 6 people in an
              academic term of 16 weeks if each person averages washing their hands 3 times a day?

          5. How long would it take for an energy-saving light bulb to consume 1 kW of power if the bulb is rated at 7.5 W?
              Round your answer to the nearest hour.

          6. How long would it take for a 120 W light bulb to consume 1 kW of power? Round your answer to the nearest hour.
          7. A portable television uses about 80 W per hour. How many kilowatt-hours are needed to run the television during a

              3-day trip if the television is run for an average of 5.5 hours a day?
          8. A flat iron to straighten hair is rated at 331 W. If it is used for 15 minutes a day, 5 times a week, how much would it

              cost a user over the course of a month if the electric rate is 13 cents per kilowatt-hour? Round your answer to the
              nearest cent.
          9. You purchase a window air conditioner for your apartment living room rated at 1,000 W. If you run the air
              conditioner for an average of 3 hours a day for a week, how much would it cost if the electric rate is 12 cents per
              kilowatt-hour?
        10. A cabin uses approximately 25 kW of electricity per day. What size solar system would be needed to fuel 90% of the

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     13.3 · Math and Medicine 1431

      cabin's needs for a month if the cabin is used 2 days a week?

13.3 Math and Medicine

Figure 13.9 Shoppers wear masks during the Covid-19 pandemic. (credit: "True Covid Scene - Mask Buying" by Joey
Zanotti/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Compute the mathematical factors utilized in concentrations/dosages of drugs.
 2. Describe the history of validating effectiveness of a new drug.
 3. Describe how mathematical modeling is used to track the spread of a virus.

The pandemic that rocked the world starting in 2020 turned attention to finding a cure for the Covid-19 strain into a
world race and dominated conversations from major news channels to households around the globe. News reports
decreeing the number of new cases and deaths locally as well as around the world were part of the daily news for over a
year and progress on vaccines soon followed. How was a vaccine able to be found so quickly? Is the vaccine safe? Is the
vaccine effective? These and other questions have been raised through communities near and far and some remain
debatable. However, we can educate ourselves on the foundations of these discussions and be more equipped to analyze
new information related to these questions as it becomes available.

Concentrations and Dosages of Drugs

Consider any drug and the recommended dosage varies based on several factors such as age, weight, and degree of
illness of a person. Hospitals and medical dispensaries do not stock every possible needed concentration of medicines.
Drugs that are delivered in liquid form for intravenous (IV) methods in particular can be easily adjusted to meet the
needs of a patient. Whether administering anesthesia prior to an operation or administering a vaccine, calculation of the
concentration of a drug is needed to ensure the desired amount of medicine is delivered.

The formula to determine the volume needed of a drug in liquid form is a relatively simple formula. The volume needed
is calculated based on the required dosage of the drug with respect to the concentration of the drug. For drugs in liquid
form, the concentration is noted as the amount of the drug per the volume of the solution that the drug is suspended in
which is commonly measured in g/mL or mg/mL.

Suppose a doctor writes a prescription for 6 mg of a drug, which a nurse calculates when retrieving the needed
prescription from their secure pharmaceutical storage space. On the shelves, the drug is available in liquid form as 2 mg
per mL. This means that 1 mg of the drug is found in 0.5 mL of the solution. Multiplying 6 mg by 0.5 mL yields 3 mL,
which is the volume of the prescription per single dose.

  FORMULA

                                                                                                           .

A common calculation for the weight of a liquid drug is measured in grams of a drug per 100 mL of solution and is also
called the percentage weight by volume measurement and labeled as % w/v or simply w/v.

      Note that the units for a desired dose of a drug and the units for a solution containing the drug or pill form of the
      drug must be the same. If they are not the same, the units must first be converted to be measured in the same
1432 13 · Math and...

              units.

        Suppose you visit your doctor with symptoms of an upset stomach and unrelenting heartburn. One possible recourse is
        sodium bicarbonate, which aids in reducing stomach acid.

          EXAMPLE 13.12
        Calculating the Quantity in a Mixture
        How much sodium bicarbonate is there in a 250 mL solution of 1.58% w/v sodium bicarbonate?

             Solution
                                     sodium bicarbonate in 100 mL. If there is 250 mL of the solution, we have 2.5 times as much sodium

        bicarbonate as in 100 mL. Thus, we multiply 1.58 by 2.5 to yield 3.95 g sodium bicarbonate in 250 mL solution.

      YOUR TURN 13.12
1. How many milligrams of sodium chloride are there in 200 mL of a 0.9% w/v normal saline solution?

EXAMPLE 13.13

Calculating the Quantity of Pills Needed
A doctor prescribes 25.5 mg of a drug to take orally per day and pills are available in 8.5 mg. How many pills will be
needed each day?

Solution

The prescription and the pills are in the same units which means no conversions are needed. We can divide the units of

the drug prescribed by the units in each pill:  . So, 3 pills will be needed each day.

        YOUR TURN 13.13
  1. How many pills would be needed for a patient who has been prescribed 25.5 mg of a drug if each pill contains

      4.25 mg.

  EXAMPLE 13.14
Calculating the Drug Dose in Milligrams, Based on Patient Weight
A patient is prescribed 2 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 3 doses per day. If the patient
weighs 45 kg, how many milligrams of the drug should be given per dose?

     Solution
Step 1: Calculate the total daily dose of the drug based on the patient's weight (measured in kilograms):

Step 2: Divide the total daily dose by the number of doses per day:

The patient should receive 30 mg of the drug in each dose.

      YOUR TURN 13.14
1. A patient is prescribed 1.4 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 2 doses per day. If the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          13.3 · Math and Medicine 1433

      patient weighs 60 kg, how many milliliters of the drug should be given per dose?

      Note that the units for a patient's weight must be compatible with the units used in the medicine measurement. If
      they are not the same, the units must first be converted to be measured in the same units.

  EXAMPLE 13.15
Calculating the Drug Dose in Milliliters, Based on Patient Weight
A patient is prescribed 2 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 3 doses per day. If the drug is
available in 20 mg/mL and the patient weighs 60 kg, how many milliliters of the drug should be given per dose?

     Solution
Step 1: Calculate the total daily dose of the drug (measured in milligrams) based on the patient's weight (measured in
kilograms):

Step 2: Calculate the volume in each dose:

Step 3: Calculate the volume based on the strength of the stock:

The patient should receive 2 mL of the stock drug in each dose.

        YOUR TURN 13.15

  1. A patient is prescribed 2.5 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 2 doses per day. If the
      drug is available in 5 mg/mL and the patient weighs 52 kg, how many milligrams of the drug should be given per
      dose?

        WHO KNEW?

  Math Statistics from the CDC
  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) states that about half the U.S. population in 2019 used at least
  one prescription drug each month, and about 25% of people used three or more prescription drugs in a month. The
  resulting overall collective impact of the pharmaceutical industry in the United States exceeded $1.3 trillion a year
  prior to the 2020 pandemic.

Validating Effectiveness of a New Vaccine

The process to develop a new vaccine and be able to offer it to the public typically takes 10 to 15 years. In the United
States, the system typically involves both public and private participation in a process. During the 1900s, several vaccines
were successfully developed, including the following: polio vaccine in the 1950s and chickenpox vaccine in the 1990s.
Both of these vaccines took years to be developed, tested, and available to the public. Knowing the typical timeline for a
vaccine to move from development to administration, it is not surprising that some people wondered how a vaccine for
Covid-19 was released in less than a year's time.
Lesser known is that research on coronavirus vaccines has been in process for approximately 10 years. Back in 2012,
concern over the Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS) broke out and scientists from all over the world began
working on researching coronaviruses and how to combat them. It was discovered that the foundation for the virus is a
spike protein, which, when delivered as part of a vaccine, causes the human body to generate antibodies and is the
1434 13 · Math and...

        platform for coronavirus vaccines.
        When the Covid-19 pandemic broke out, Operation Warp Speed, fueled by the U.S. federal government and private
        sector, poured unprecedented human resources into applying the previous 10 years of research and development into
        targeting a specific vaccine for the Covid-19 strain.

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
          Shibo Jiang
          Dr. Shibo Jiang, MD, PhD, is co-director the Center for Vaccine Development at the Texas Children's Hospital and head
          of a virology group at the New York Blood Center. Together with his colleagues, Jiang has been working on vaccines
          and treatments for a range of viruses and infections including influenzas, HIV, Sars, HPV and more recently Covid-19.
          His work has been recognized around the world and is marked with receiving grants amounting to over $20 million
          from U.S. sources as well as the same from foundations in China, producing patents in the United States and China
          for his antiviral products to combat world concerns.
          Jiang has been a voice for caution in the search for a vaccine for Covid-19, emphasizing the need for caution to ensure
          safety in the development and deployment of a vaccine. His work and that of his colleagues for over 10 years on other
          coronaviruses paved the way for the vaccines that have been shared to combat the Covid-19 pandemic.

     Mathematical Modeling to Track the Spread of a Vaccine

        With a large number of people receiving a Covid-19 vaccine, the concern at this time is how to create an affordable
        vaccine to reach people all over the world. If a world solution is not found, those without access to a vaccine will serve as
        incubators to variants that might be resistant to the existing vaccines.
        As we work to vaccinate the world, attention continues with tracking the spread of the Covid-19 and its multiple variants.
        Mathematical modeling is the process of creating a representation of the behavior of a system using mathematical
        language. Digital mathematical modeling plays a key role in analyzing the vast amounts of data reported from a variety
        of sources such as hospitals and apps on cell phones.
        When attempting to represent an observed quantitative data set, mathematical models can aid in finding patterns and
        concentrations as well as aid in predicting growth or decline of the system. Mathematical models can also be useful to
        determine strengths and vulnerabilities of a system, which can be helpful in arresting the spread of a virus.
        The chapter on Graph Theory explores one such method of mathematical modeling using paths and circuits. Cell phones
        have been helpful in tracking the spread of the Covid-19 virus using apps regulated by regional government public
        health authorities to collect data on the network of people exposed to an individual who tests positive for the Covid-19
        virus.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                     13.3 · Math and Medicine 1435

              PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS
Gladys West

     Figure 13.10 Gladys West (credit: "Dr. Gladys West Hall" by The US Air Force/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
  Dr. Gladys West is a mathematician and hidden figure with a rich résumé of accomplishments spanning Air Force
  applications and work at NASA. Born in 1930, West rose and excelled both academically and in her professional life at
  a time when Black women were not embraced in STEM positions. One of her many accomplishments is the Global
  Positioning System (GPS) used on cell phones for driving directions.
  West began work as a human computer, someone who computes mathematical computations by hand. Considering
  the time and complexity of some calculations, she became involved in programming computers to crunch
  computations. Eventually, West created a mathematical model of Earth with detail and precision that made GPS
  possible, which is utilized in an array of devices from satellites to cell phones. The next time you tag a photo or obtain
  driving directions, you are tapping into the mathematical modeling of Earth that West developed.

Consider the following graph (Figure 13.11):

                                                Figure 13.11 Contact Tracing for Math 111 Section 1
At the center of the graph, we find Alyssa, whom we will consider positive for a virus. Utilizing the technology of phone
apps voluntarily installed on each phone of the individuals in the graph, tracking of the spread of the virus among the 6
individuals that Alyssa had direct contact with can be implemented, namely Suad, Rocio, Braeden, Soren, and Sandra.
Let's look at José's exposure risk as it relates to Alyssa. There are multiple paths connecting José with Alyssa. One path
includes the following individuals: José to Mikaela to Nate to Sandra to Alyssa. This path contains a length of 4 units, or
people, in the contact tracing line. There are 2 more paths connecting José to Alyssa. A second path of the same length
consists of José to Lucia to Rocio to Braeden to Alyssa. Path 3 is the shortest and consists of José to Lucia to Rocio to
1436 13 · Math and...

        Alyssa. Tracking the spread of positive cases in the line between Alyssa and José aids in monitoring the spread of the
        infection.
        Now consider the complexity of tracking a pandemic across the nation. Graphs such as the one above are not practical to
        be drawn on paper but can be managed by computer programs capable of computing large volumes of data. In fact, a
        computer-generated mathematical model of contact tracing would look more like a sphere with paths on the exterior as
        well as on the interior. Mathematical modeling of contact tracing is complex and feasible through the use of technology.

          EXAMPLE 13.16
        Using Mathematical Modeling
        For the following exercises, use the sample contact tracing graph to identify paths (Figure 13.12).

                                                        Figure 13.12 Contact Tracing for ECON 250 Section 1
         1. How many people have a path of length 2 from Jeffrey?
         2. Find 2 paths between Kayla and Rohan.
         3. Find the shortest path between Yara and Kalani. State the length and people in the path.

             Solution
         1. 5 (Lura, Naomi, Kalani, Vega, Yara)
         2. Answers will vary. Two possible answers are as follows:

                a. Kayla, Jeffrey, Rohan
                b. Kayla, Lura, Yara, Lev, Vega, Uma, Kalani, Rohan
         3. Length is 4. People in path = Yara, Lev, Vega, Uma, Kalani

                YOUR TURN 13.16
          For the following exercises, use Figure 13.12.

              1. List all the names of those who have a path length of three from Uma.
              2. What is the length of the shortest path from Naomi to Vega?

     Check Your Understanding

          8. What two pieces of information are needed to calculate the volume of a prescription drug to be dispensed?
          9. Research on coronavirus vaccines began in 2020.

               a. True
               b. False
        10. What is mathematical modeling, and how is it used in the world of medicine with pandemics?

             SECTION 13.3 EXERCISES

          1. How many grams of sodium bicarbonate are contained in a 300 mL solution of 1.35% w/v sodium bicarbonate?

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          13.3 · Math and Medicine 1437

 2. How many grams of sodium bicarbonate are contained in a 175 mL solution of 1.85% w/v sodium bicarbonate?
 3. Using a saline solution that is 0.75% w/v, how many milligrams of sodium chloride are in 150 mL?
 4. Using a saline solution that is 1.25% w/v, how many milligrams of sodium chloride are in 200 mL?
 5. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 23 mg daily of a drug to be taken in pill form for 5 days. If the pills are

      available in 5.75 mg, how many pills will the patient need for the full prescription run?
 6. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 21 mg daily of a drug to be taken in pill form daily. If the pills are

      available in 3.5 mg, how many pills will the patient need each day?
 7. A patient is prescribed 4mg/kg of a drug to be delivered daily intramuscularly, divided into 2 doses. If the patient

      weighs 30 kg, how many milligrams of the drug would be needed for each dose?
 8. A patient is prescribed 1.5 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 3 doses per day. If the

      drug is available in 12.5 mg/mL and the patient weighs 50 kg, how many milliliters of the drug would be given per
      dose?
 9. A patient is prescribed 0.5 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 2 doses per day. If the
      drug is available in 2.5 mg/mL and the patient weighs 45 kg, how many milliliters of the drug would be given per
      dose?
10. A patient is prescribed 1.5 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly, divided into 3 doses per day. If the
      drug is available in 30 mg/mL and the patient weighs 54 kg, how many milliliters of the drug would be given per
      dose?
For the following exercises, use the mathematical modeling graph showing contact tracing for students in a particular
class.

Contract Tracing for Students in a Class
    11. List the people who have a length of 2 from Justin.
    12. Find 2 paths of with a length of 3 from Emmet.
    13. Find the shortest path from Aili to Kalina.
    14. Which people does the model show as directly in contact with Nara?
    15. Find the shortest path from Tai to Hani.
    16. Of the 12 people in the model, how many have a path of 2 or less from Justin?
1438 13 · Math and...

    13.4 Math and Music

        Figure 13.13 Friends sing music together around a campfire. (credit: modification of work "Fire is hot! (2)" by Chetan
        Sarva/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

     Learning Objectives

        After completing this section, you should be able to:
         1. Describe the basics of frequency related to sound.
         2. Describe the basics of pitch as it relates to music.
         3. Describe and evaluate musical notes, half-steps, whole steps, and octaves.
         4. Describe and find frequencies of octaves.
        "The world's most famous and popular language is music."
        Psy, South Korean singer, rapper, songwriter, and record producer
        Imagine a world without music and many of us would struggle to fill the void. Music uplifts, inspires, heals, and generally
        adds dimension to virtually every aspect of our lives. But what is music? For some it is a song; for others it may be the
        sounds of birds or the rhythmic sound of drumming or a myriad of other sounds. Whatever you consider music, it is all
        around us and is an integral part of our lives. "Music can raise someone's mood, get them excited, or make them calm
        and relaxed. Music also--and this is important--allows us to feel nearly or possibly all emotions that we experience in
        our lives. The possibilities are endless" (Galindo, 2009).
        What music you listen to can impact your mood and emotions. In similar fashion, the music we choose can often tell
        those around us something about our current moods and emotions. Consider the music you may have been listening to
        as you today or even as you are reading this text. What cues to your mood do your music selections share? Albert
        Einstein is quoted as saying, "If I were not a physicist, I would probably be a musician. I often think in music. I live my
        daydreams in music. I see my life in terms of music." What clues do your recent music choices say about your mood or
        how your day is going?

     Basics of Frequency as It Relates to Sound

        Every sound is created by an object vibrating and these vibrations travel in waves that are captured by our ears. Some
        vibrations we may be able to see, such as a plucked guitar string moving, whereas other vibrations we may not be able
        to see, such as the sound created when we hold our breath when accidentally dropping our cell phone on a hard floor.
        We don't see the vibrations of our cell phone hitting the floor; however, any audible sound created in the fall is the result
        of vibrations in the form of sound waves, which can be pictured similarly to waves moving through the ocean.
        The waves of sounds each have a frequency, or rate of vibration of sound waves, that measures the number of waves
        completed in a single second and are measured in hertz (Hz; one Hz is one cycle per second). Louder sounds have
        stronger vibrations or are created closer to our ear. The further an ear is from the source of the sound, the quieter the
        sound will appear.
        Sounds range in frequency from 16 Hz to ultrasonic values, with humans able to hear sounds in a frequency range of
        about 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz. Adults lose the ability to hear the upper end of the range and typically top out in the ability to
        hear in a frequency of 15,000-17,000 Hz. Sounds with a frequency above 17,000 Hz are less likely to be heard by adults
        while still being audible to children.
        While frequency plays a key role in audible sounds, so too does the sound level, which can be measured in decibels (dB),
        which are the units of measure for the intensity of a sound or the degree of loudness. As a sound level increases, the
        decibel level increases.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     13.4 · Math and Music 1439

A person with average hearing can hear sounds down to 0 dB. Those with exceptionally good hearing can hear even
quieter sounds, down to approximately -5 dB. The following table includes sample sounds with their related decibel
values.

Sound                                           Decibels (dB)

Firecrackers                                                                    140

Take-off of military jet from aircraft carrier                                  130

Clap of thunder                                                                 120

Auto horn standing next to the vehicle                                          110

Outboard motor                                                                  100

Motorcycle                                                                      90

Noise inside a car in city traffic                                              80

Typical washing machine                                                         70

Public conversation, such as at a restaurant                                    60

Private conversation                                                            50

Hum of a computer with fan blowing                                              40

Quiet whisper                                                                   30

Swishing leaves                                                                 20

Regular breathing                                                               10

Lowest typical sound audible by teenagers                                       0

  EXAMPLE 13.17

Selecting Decibel Value of Sounds
Select the most representative decibel value for each of the following sounds:

 1. car wash: 25 dB, 55 dB, 85 dB
 2. vacuum cleaner: 15 dB, 70 dB, 90 dB
 3. ship's engine room: 30 dB, 65 dB, 95 dB
 4. approaching subway car: 70 dB, 100 dB, 120 dB

     Solution
 1. 85 dB
 2. 70 dB
 3. 95 dB
 4. 100 dB
1440 13 · Math and...

                 YOUR TURN 13.17
          Match each of the following sounds with a corresponding decibel level: live outdoor concert, birds chirping, window
          air conditioner, garbage disposal.

               1. 40 dB
               2. 60 dB
               3. 80 dB
               4. 100 dB

     Basics of Pitch

        When considering the various sound levels the human ear can hear, the ear perceives sound both from the frequency
        level and the pitch of a sound. The quality of the sound is referred to as pitch, the tonal quality of a sound and how high
        or low the tone. Sounds with a high frequency have a high pitch, such as 900 Hz, and sounds with a low pitch have a low
        frequency, such as 50 Hz.
        Let's take a look at frequency and pitch using a string instrument such as a guitar or piano. When a string is plucked on a
        guitar or a key is played on a piano, the related string vibrates at a frequency that is related to the length and thickness
        of the string. The frequency is measurable and has a singular value. The pitch of the note played is open for
        interpretation, as the pitch is a function of personal opinion.

                 WHO KNEW?
          Graphing Calculators and Music
          It may be interesting to note that a TI-84 and TI-Nspire graphing calculators can be utilized to tune a musical
          instrument by measuring the frequency of a note using a small plug-in accessory that captures the sound waves from
          a note and displays the corresponding frequency. Using the displayed frequency, an instrumentalist can then make
          the needed adjustment to perfectly tune an instrument. This method of tuning an instrument can be helpful whether
          a novice player or a seasoned instrumentalist because the instrument can be tuned precisely to the correct frequency.

     Note Values, Half-Steps, Whole Steps, and Octaves

        "There are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise to more melodies than can ever
        be heard."
        Sun Tzu, Chinese strategist

           Figure 13.14 Piano Keys and Notes (credit: modification of work "Contemplate" by Walt Stoneburner/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
        Moving our exploration to note values, the frequency of all notes is well defined by a specific and unique frequency for

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              13.4 · Math and Music 1441

each note that is measurable. We will explore keys on a keyboard to discuss notes that have the same relationships with
any instrument or musical piece.
Let's look at Figure 13.14. The white keys are labeled with the letters A-G and the photo begins with middle C, which can
be found in the middle of a keyboard. This labeling of the keys repeats across an entire keyboard and keys to the right
have a higher pitch and frequency than keys to the left. Each of the keys correlates to a musical note.
Movement up or down between any two consecutive keys (black and white) or notes constitutes a half-step. Movement
of one half-step sometimes involves a sharp (#) or a flat () symbol. For example, D# is one half-step above D and D is
one half-step below D. Note that this is not always true as one half-step above B is C, and one half-step below F is E. In
similar fashion, a whole step is movement up or down between any two half-steps on a keyboard.

  EXAMPLE 13.18

Identifying Half-Steps
Name which keys are one half-step up and one half-step down from the following:
 1. D
 2. E
 3. G#

     Solution
 1. up D#, down D
 2. up F, down E
 3. up A, down G

        YOUR TURN 13.18

  Name which keys are one half-step up and one half-step down from the following:
      1. F#
      2. B
      3. G

  EXAMPLE 13.19

Identifying Whole Steps
Name which keys are one whole step up and one whole step down from the following:
 1. F#
 2. E
 3. A

     Solution
 1. Up G#, down E
 2. Up F#, down D
 3. Up B, down G

        YOUR TURN 13.19

  Name which keys are one whole step up and one whole step down from the following:
      1. D
      2. C#
      3. E

You may have noticed that there are eight letters of the alphabet used to label notes. Selecting any one note and
counting up 12 half-steps you will find that the numbering for notes begins at the same value as you started from. This
1442 13 · Math and...

        collection of 12 consecutive half-notes is called an octave and is a basic foundational component in music theory.

          EXAMPLE 13.20

        Listing All Notes in an Octave
        List the 12 notes forming an octave, beginning with the note C.

             Solution
        C, C#, D, D#, E, F, F#, G, G#, A, A#, B

                 YOUR TURN 13.20

          1. List the 12 notes forming an octave, beginning with the note G.

     Frequencies of Octaves

        Notes that are one octave apart have the same name and are related in frequency values. Given the frequency of any
        note, the frequency of same note one octave higher is doubled and this pattern continues as you move up and down the
        notes on a keyboard or any other musical instrument. Song writers and singers use this knowledge to change the pitch
        of a note up or down to align with a person's vocal range. Regardless of which C is played or sung, the pitch is the same
        and the frequency is related by a power or two.
        Labeled keys on a keyboard are numbered for ease in identification. For example, middle C is labeled as C4 on a full
        keyboard as it is the fourth C from the left in a set of eight notes. The frequency of C4 is 262 Hz, rounded to the nearest
        whole number.

          EXAMPLE 13.21

        Calculating the Frequency Values of Octaves
        Given that the frequency of C4 is 262 Hz, find the approximate frequency of C6.

             Solution
        The frequency of each consecutive higher octave doubles. Given that the frequency of C4 is 262 Hz, the frequency of C5 is
        found by doubling the frequency of C4, which is 524 Hz. In similar fashion, the frequency of C6 is found by doubling the
        frequency of C5, which yields 1,048 Hz.

                 YOUR TURN 13.21

          1. Given that the frequency of E4 is 330 Hz, find the approximate frequency of E2 rounded to the nearest whole
               number.

                         PEOPLE IN MATHEMATICS

          David Cope
          David Cope has a somewhat eclectic list of job titles ranging from author and music professor to scientist and artificial
          intelligence researcher. Cope combined his interests when he developed software that can analyze a piece of music
          and create a new and unique musical piece in the same style as the original. Some of his well-known products have
          been based off of the classical music of Mozart, creating what has been called Mozart's "42nd Symphony," as well as
          other genres including opera and a range of current music styles. Cope has also composed original musical pieces in
          collaboration with a computer.

        We have explored some basics components of frequency, pitch, note relationships, and octaves, which are building
        blocks of music. It may be exciting to learn that the mathematical relationships found in music are vast and grow in

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             13.4 · Math and Music 1443

complexity beyond the math commonly studied in high school.

        WHO KNEW?

  Spotify Royalty Payments

  Streaming services have grown exponentially in popularity thanks in large part to customized music listening through
  cell phone use and devices such as Google as well as Amazon Echo and Alexa devices for home and vehicles, adding
  to ways that artists are paid royalties. Spotify, which was launched in 2008, typically plays artists $0.06 per time a song
  is streamed, with some artists receiving up to $0.84 per play amounting to over $9 billion in revenue for Spotify in
  2020. Since 2014, Spotify's revenue has grown over a billion dollars a year, with roughly half of their revenue being
  paid out in royalties, which was good news for artists during the Covid-19 pandemic when in-person concerts and
  shopping were hindered.

Check Your Understanding

11. What is the difference between frequency and pitch of a note?
12. Are higher frequencies associated with higher or lower pitch notes?
13. What frequency range can humans hear?
14. As a sound appears louder, does the decibel value increase or decrease?
15. What is the lowest decibel value that most people can hear?
16. What is the typical audible frequency range that adults can hear?
17. How does the frequency of a note change when increased by one octave?

        SECTION 13.4 EXERCISES

For the following exercises, select the most representative decibel level for each sound.
     1. Gas lawn mower: 70 dB, 100 dB, 120 dB
     2. Radio playing loud enough to sing along to at home: 20 dB, 50 dB, 70 dB
     3. Office noise on a floor of people working at desks: 40 dB, 60, dB, 80 dB
     4. Conversation in a quiet room: 60 dB, 80 dB, 100 dB
     5. Fast-moving train passing by when sitting in a car about 20 ft from the tracks with windows down: 40 dB, 60 dB,
          80 dB

For the following exercises, state the requested note.
     6. What is one half-step above G#?
     7. What is one whole step down from G?

     8. What is three half-steps above D?
     9. What is two whole steps down from A#?

    10. What is two half-steps down from E?

    11. What is an octave above B4?
    12. What is two octaves below F5?
    13. What is three octaves above G2?
    14. What is an octave below G2?

15. Given that the frequency of              , what is the frequency of A1?

16. Given that the approximate frequency of             , what is the approximate frequency of F5, rounded to the
      nearest whole number?                               , what is the approximate frequency of A6#, rounded to the

17. Given that the approximate frequency of
      nearest whole number?

18. Given that the approximate frequency of             , what is the approximate frequency of D2, rounded to the
      nearest whole number?                              , what is the approximate frequency of G3#, rounded to the

19. Given that the approximate frequency of
1444 13 · Math and...                    , what is the frequency of A5?

              nearest whole number?
        20. Given that the frequency of

    13.5 Math and Sports

Figure 13.15 Fans support their team by attending games and wearing team gear. (credit: "Cheering Touchdowns" by
Steven Miller/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Learning Objectives

After completing this section, you should be able to:
 1. Describe why data analytics (statistics) is crucial to advance a team's success.
 2. Describe single round-robin method of tournaments.
 3. Describe single-elimination method of tournaments.
 4. Explore math in baseball, fantasy football, hockey, and soccer (projects at the end of the section).

Sports are big business and entertainment around the world. In the United States alone, the revenue from professional
sports is projected to bring in over $77 billion, which includes admission ticket costs, merchandise, media coverage
access rights, and advertising. So, whether or not you enjoy watching professional sports, you probably know someone
who does. Some celebrities compete to be part of half-time shows and large companies vie for commercial spots that are
costly but reach a staggering number of viewers, some who only watch the half-time shows and advertisements.

Data Analytics (Statistics) Is Crucial to Advance a Team's Success

Analyzing the vast data that today's world has amassed to find patterns and to make predictions for future results has
created a degree field for data analytics at many colleges, which is in high demand in places that might surprise you.
One such place is in sports, where being able to analyze the available data on your team's players, potential recruits,
opposing team strategies, and opposing players can be paramount to your team's success.

Hollywood turned the notion of using data analytics into a major motion picture back in 2011 with the release of
Moneyball, starring Brad Pitt, which grossed over $110 million. The critically acclaimed movie, based on a true story as
shared in a book by Michael Lewis, follows the story of a general manager for the Oakland Athletics who used data
analytics to take a team comprised of relatively unheard of players to ultimately win the American League West title in a
year's time. The win caught the eye of other team managers and owners, which started an avalanche of other teams
digging into the data of players and teams.

In today's world of sports, a team has multiple positions utilizing data analytics from road scouts who evaluate a
potential recruit's skills and potential to the ultimate position of general manager who is typically the highest-paid (non-
player) employee with the exception of the coaches. Being able to understand and evaluate the available data is big
business and is a highly sought after skill set. In college and professional sports, it is no longer sufficient to have a strong
playbook and great players. The science to winning is in understanding the math of the data and using it to propel your
team to excelling.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         13.5 · Math and Sports 1445

Single Round-Robin Tournaments

                                                     Figure 13.16 Single-Round Robin Tournament

A common tournament style is single round-robin tournaments (Figure 13.16), where each team or opponent plays every
other team or opponent, and the champion is determined by the team that wins the most games. Ties are possible and
are resolved based on league rules.

An advantage of the round-robin tournament style is that no one team has the advantage of seeding, which eliminates
some teams from playing against each other based on rank of their prior performance. Rather, each team plays every
other team, providing equal opportunity to triumph over each team. In this sense, round-robin tournaments are deemed
the fairest tournament style.

One hindrance to employing a round-robin-style tournament is the potential for the number of games involved in
tournament play to determine a winner. Determining the number of games can be found easily using a formula which,
as we will see, can quickly grow in the number of games required for a single round-robin tournament.

FORMULA

The number of games in a single round-robin tournament with teams is  .

EXAMPLE 13.22

Calculating the Number of Games in Single Round-Robin Tournaments
Find the number of games in a single round-robin tournament for each of the following numbers of teams:

1. 4 teams
2. 8 teams
3. 20 teams

    Solution                               tournament games.
1. Using the formula with 4 teams yields    tournament games.
2. Using the formula with 8 teams yields           tournament games.
3. Using the formula with 20 teams yields

      YOUR TURN 13.22
Find the number of games in a single round-robin tournament for each of the following numbers of teams:
1446 13 · Math and...

               1. 5 teams
               2. 12 teams
               3. 25 teams

        As the examples show, single round-robin tournament play can quickly grow in the number of games required to
        determine a champion. As such, some tournaments elect to employ variations of single round-robin tournament play as
        well as other tournament styles such as elimination tournaments.

                                           Figure 13.17 Single-Elimination Tournament (credit: final TK)

Single-Elimination Tournaments

When desiring a more efficient tournament style to determine a champion, one option is single-elimination tournaments
(Figure 13.17), where teams are paired up and the winner advances to the next round of play. The losing team is
defeated from tournament play and does not advance in the tournament, although some leagues offer consolation
matches.

FORMULA

The number of games in a single-elimination tournament with teams is  .

EXAMPLE 13.23

Calculating the Number of Games in Single-Elimination Tournaments
Find the number of games in a single-elimination tournament for each of the following numbers of teams:

1. 4 teams
2. 8 teams
3. 20 teams

    Solution                               tournament games.
1. Using the formula with 4 teams yields   tournament games.
2. Using the formula with 8 teams yields
3. Using the formula with 20 teams yields       tournament games.

      YOUR TURN 13.23
Find the number of games in a single-elimination tournament for each of the following numbers of teams:

Access for free at openstax.org
13.5 · Math and Sports 1447

      1. 5 teams
      2. 12 teams
      3. 25 teams

A single-elimination tournament offers an advantage over single round-robin tournament style of play in the number of
games needed to complete the tournament. As you can see, in comparing the number of games in a single round-robin
tournament in Example 13.22 with the number of games in single-elimination tournament as shown in Example 13.23,
the number of games required for single round-robin can quickly become unmanageable to schedule.

There are modifications to both the round-robin and elimination tournament styles such as double round-robin and
double-elimination tournaments. Next time you observe a college or professional sporting event, see if you can
determine the tournament style of play.

        WHO KNEW?

  Sports Popularity Shifts

  Sport has been a popular entertainment venue for hundreds of years and the popularity of various sports shifts over
  time as well as in different regions of the world today. In today's world, the most popular sport is, overwhelmingly,
  soccer, with over 4 billion fans followed by cricket with 2.5 billion fans. It may surprise you to learn that American
  football doesn't rank in the top 10 most popular sports in the world today, yet table tennis ranks in sixth place and
  golf fills the last spot in the top 10 world sports.

  In the early 1930s, baseball ranked a close second, with basketball virtually tying for third place. By the mid-1940s,
  hockey slightly led in first place over basketball. Ten years later, hockey remained in the number one sport, but cricket
  pushed basketball to third place. In the 1960s, soccer dominated in popularity. Over the next 30 years, basketball
  dropped in popularity and there was much movement in the popularity of sports. By the late 1990s, soccer swept to
  first place, where it has since continued to grow in popularity.

Check Your Understanding                                                                               teams

18. How is data analytics used in sports today?
19. What is the most popular sport in today's world?
20. What is the formula to compute the number of games played in a single round-robin tournament with

      assuming single round?
21. What is the formula to compute the number of games played in a single-elimination tournament?

        SECTION 13.5 EXERCISES

 1. Briefly describe data analytics.

 2. Name a sport's career title that relies on analysis of data.

For the following exercises, compute how many games would be played in the style of tournament and number of
teams given in each question. Assume all tournaments are single round-robin or single-elimination.

     3. How many games would be played with 4 teams using a round-robin tournament?
     4. How many games would be played with 8 teams using a round-robin tournament?
     5. How many games would be played with 10 teams using a round-robin tournament?
     6. How many games would be played with 25 teams using a round-robin tournament?
     7. How many games would be played with 12 teams using a round-robin tournament?
     8. How many games would be played with 4 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
     9. How many games would be played with 9 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
    10. How many games would be played with 15 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
    11. How many games would be played with 50 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
    12. How many games would be played with 24 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
1448 13 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Summary

Key Terms

13.1 Math and Art

  · golden ratio
  ·
  · Fibonacci sequence
  · golden rectangle

13.2 Math and the Environment

  · greenhouse gas
  · CO2 emissions
  · watt
  · kilowatt (kW)

13.3 Math and Medicine

  · concentrations/dosages of drugs
  · mathematical modeling

13.4 Math and Music

  · frequency
  · pitch
  · Hertz
  · decibel
  · half-step
  · whole step
  · flat
  · sharp
  · octave

13.5 Math and Sports

  · data analytics
  · seeding

Key Concepts

13.1 Math and Art

  · The golden ratio, , can be found in nature, and the relationship is often associated with beauty and balance.
  · The Fibonacci sequence reflects a pattern of numbers that can be found in various places in nature. The sequence

      can be used to predict other values that follow the Fibonacci pattern.
  · State some naturally occurring applications of the Fibonacci sequence.
  · State some naturally occurring applications of the golden ratio.
  · Determine if a rectangle is golden.
  · State some artistic applications of the golden rectangle.

13.2 Math and the Environment

  · Recognize how water conservation by one person, family, community, or nation can positively impact the world's
      freshwater supply.

  · Recall components from the history of solar use by mankind.
  · Calculate electrical demand given watts.
  · Recognize advantages of residential solar power.

13.3 Math and Medicine

  · Compute volumes of prescription drugs in liquid and pill form.
  · Validate the effectiveness of a new drug.
  · Mathematical modeling can be used to describe and track the spread of a virus.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    13 · Chapter Summary 1449

13.4 Math and Music

  · As frequency of a sound increases, the pitch of the sound increases.
  · Hertz is a unit of measurement for frequency.
  · Decibel is a unit of measurement for the intensity of sound.
  · Half-steps and whole-steps describe one type of movement between two notes on a keyboard.
  · Octaves are a collection of any 12 consecutive notes, which is a foundation in music theory.

13.5 Math and Sports

  · Describe how a round-robin tournament is organized.
  · Compute the number of games played in a round-robin tournament.
  · Describe how a single-elimination tournament is organized.
  · Compute the number of games played in a single-elimination tournament.

Formula Review

13.2 Math and the Environment

13.3 Math and Medicine

                                                                  .

13.5 Math and Sports

Number of games in a single round-robin tournament with teams is        .

Number of games in a single-elimination tournament with teams is     .

Projects

Lucas Sequence and Fibonacci Sequence

The Lucas numbers bear some similarity to the Fibonacci numbers and exhibit a stronger link to the golden ratio.
Edouard Lucas is credited with naming the Fibonacci numbers and the Lucas numbers were so named in his honor. The
Lucas numbers play a role in finding prime numbers that are utilized in encrypting data for actions such as using your
debit card to obtain money at a cash machine or when making a credit card purchase for point of sale as well as when
shopping online.

Complete the following questions to explore numbers in the Lucas sequence as well as their relationships to the
numbers in the Fibonacci sequence.

1. Conduct an Internet search to find out what a Lucas number is and how the Lucas numbers are related to the
     Fibonacci numbers.

2. What are the first two numbers in the Lucas sequence?
3. Describe how the next number in the Lucas sequence is determined and compare this to how the next number is

     determined in the Fibonacci sequence.
4. Complete the following table listing the first 10 terms in the Fibonacci and Lucas sequence:

                        Term

                      Fibonacci Numbers

                        Lucas Numbers

5. Interestingly, many patterns can be found in looking at the relationships in the Fibonacci and Lucas numbers. Look
     closely at the chart in question 3 to discover one such pattern. Observe the Fibonacci numbers in the third and fifth
     terms and compare with the Lucas number in the fourth term of the sequence. Describe the pattern found. Does
     this pattern continue in the table?

6. Research the Fibonacci or the Lucas numbers to find an application in our world distinct from what has been shared
     in this project and section. Write a paragraph sharing the findings of your research.
1450 13 · Chapter Summary

Solar Array for a Residence

One of the first steps in adding solar to a residence is determining the size of a system to achieve the desired output. In
this project, we will explore the solar needs of a residence and estimate needs of a solar array to supply electrical output
to meet various percentages of electrical need.

Step 1: Obtain an electric bill from your apartment/home. Find the average monthly or yearly usage if listed or call the
electric company to inquire. If an electric bill is not available, use the Internet to find an average monthly or yearly
electric usage for your area.

Step 2: Determine a daily and hourly usage. Divide the average monthly usage by 30 or the yearly average by 365. Divide
again by 24 to calculate an average hourly electric usage, which will yield the average kilowatt-hours for how much
electrical power your is being utilized in an hour.

Step 3: Multiply your average hourly use (kilowatts) by 1,000 to convert to watts.

Step 4: Use the Internet to determine the average daily peak hours of sunlight where you live.

Step 5: Divide your average hourly watts (Step 3) by the average daily peak hours (Step 4) to calculate the average
energy needed for a solar array to produce every hour.

Step 6: Determine the average energy needed in a solar array per hour to meet each of the following:

a.  coverage of average energy (Step 5)

b.  coverage of average energy

c.  coverage of average energy

Step 7: Using the values computed in Step 6, compute the residential savings based on an average cost of 12 cents per
watt.

Vaccine Validation

Validation of vaccines is a topic that exploded in the news when the Covid-19 pandemic spread across the world. As
governments and organizations looked for a vaccine to curb the spread and minimize the severity of infection, concern
was expressed by some for what appeared to be a quick discovery for a Covid-19 vaccine.

Conduct an Internet search to explore the following questions. Pay special attention to the sources you select to ensure
that they are credible sources.

1. Research the term efficacy rates. Express what efficacy means in your own words.
2. Using a minimum of two sources, compose a well-developed paragraph describing what validation of a vaccine

     means.
3. Using a minimum of two sources, compose a well-developed paragraph sharing the steps in validating a vaccine.
4. Using a minimum of two sources, compose a well-developed paragraph describing how a vaccine is determined to

     be validated.
5. Using your research for Questions 1-3, write a summary paragraph sharing your reflections on the validation of the

     Covid-19 vaccine or on validating a vaccine in general. What key components did you learn? What would you like to
     learn more about related to validating a vaccine?

Frequency and Ultrasonic Sounds

Ultrasonic sounds have been utilized for a variety of reasons, from purportedly repelling rodents and other animals as
well as a variety of other applications. Using an Internet search, complete the following questions to explore some of
these applications and examine the validity of various claims.

Repelling Insects, Rodents, and Small Animals
Some radio stations purport to play a high pitch sound dually with their music to aid in deterring insects and other
annoying bugs to aid in providing a bug-reduced listening environment. To deter small rodents, some products claim to
emit ultrasonic sounds that drive away mice and other similar pests.

1. Research the science behind ultrasonic pest controls, paying attention to the source of the information that you
     find. Compare the information found on advertisements, reviews, and scientific articles.
      a. What frequency ranges do ultrasonic pest deterrent devices utilize and how do these frequencies compare to
            the audible range that humans can hear?
      b. Write a short paragraph comparing the claims in the advertisements with independent reviews and scientific
            articles.
      c. What do you conclude about ultrasonic pest controls and why?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    13 · Chapter Summary 1451

Disbursing Teenagers
Some business owners and communities have turned to products such as the "mosquito" sonic deterrent device to
discourage groups of teenagers from loitering around storefronts and community landmarks, citing a public nuisance
issue and public safety concerns.

 2. Research the science behind ultrasonic deterrent devices as they apply to dispensing teenagers. Compare the
      information found on advertisements, reviews, and scientific articles.
       a. What frequency ranges do ultrasonic teenager deterrent devices utilize and how do these frequencies compare
             to the audible range that adults can hear?
       b. Write a short paragraph comparing the claims in advertisements with independent reviews and scientific
             articles.
        c. What are some of the ethical debates surrounding the use of ultrasonic teenager deterrent devices?
       d. What do you conclude about business owners or communities using ultrasonic teenager deterrent devices and
             why?

Jewelry Cleaner
Use of pastes and liquid chemicals to clean jewelry can be harsh on stones as well as metals. So how can we safely obtain
the sparkling clean look at home that jewelry stores provide? Some would say the answer is to use an ultrasonic jewelry
cleaner, but do these really work?

 3. Research the science behind ultrasonic jewelry cleaners, including the phrase "cavitation process" in your search.
      Compare the information found on advertisements, reviews, and scientific articles.
       a. Write a short paragraph detailing how ultrasonic jewelry cleaners work and what role the cavitation process
             plays in the claims for ultrasonic cleaning.
       b. Do ultrasonic jewelry cleaners utilize low or high frequencies? How do these frequencies compare to the
             audible range that humans can hear?
        c. Write a short paragraph comparing the claims in the advertisements with independent reviews and scientific
             articles.
       d. What do you conclude about ultrasonic jewelry cleaners and why?

Specialized Ringtones
As the use of cell phones has become commonplace and families grow towards each member having their own cell
phone, specialized ringtones have become popular and can aid in identifying who is calling just by the ringtone.

Ever hear of ringtones that can be heard by teens but often not their teachers? The banning of cell phone use by K-12
students during class time as been implemented across a wide array of schools and some students have purportedly
found ways to get around teachers hearing a cell phone ring through the use of ultrasonic ringtones.

 4. Research the science behind ultrasonic ringtones. Compare the information found on advertisements, reviews, and
      scientific articles.
       a. Do ultrasonic ringtones utilize low or high frequencies?
       b. Write a short paragraph detailing how ultrasonic ringtones work. How do these frequencies compare to the
             audible range that adults can hear? Include ages that are purported to hear and not hear the ringtones as well
             as the frequency ranges utilized.
        c. Write a short paragraph comparing the claims in the advertisements with independent reviews and scientific
             articles.
       d. What do you conclude about ultrasonic ringtones and why?

Streaming Services and Math

With the ability to stream music virtually anywhere you are, it is not surprising that Google Play Music, Apple Music, and
a slew of other companies such as Spotify, Amazon Music, YouTube Music, Sound Cloud, Pandora, Deezer Music, Tidal,
Napster, and Bandcamp have invested heavily to bring streaming service to users worldwide. Streaming services have
expanded to offer virtually every genre of music with vast libraries to meet diverse user requests.

Considering all of the choices available for streaming music, there is a wide array of options for subscribing. Conduct an
Internet research to review your current streaming choices, if any, and evaluate competitors' products.

 1. In this project, you will explore options for music streaming service subscriptions. Select a minimum of five
      streaming services listed above that you are not currently utilizing and determine the below components. Format
      your findings in an easy-to-read format such as a table similar to the one shown below.
       a. Monthly subscription cost
       b. Available features
1452 13 · Chapter Summary

        Available Features         Service    Service    Service    Service    Service
                                  Choice 1:  Choice 2:  Choice 3:  Choice 4:  Choice 5:
   Able to stream unlimited
                  music

 Able to purchase individual
                  songs

 Able to purchase individual
            whole albums

Ability to create personalized
               play lists

Ability to select specific songs
                 to play

           Ability to listen

                Other =

 2. Premium cost per month, if available = ______
       a. Feature(s) offered with premium monthly subscription = ______

 3. What is (are) your current music streaming services, if any?
       a. What is your current monthly service charge(s)?
       b. What features does your current streaming service offer?

 4. Write a paragraph summarizing your findings and include if your current streaming service(s) meets your needs or
      if research for this project has you considering changing streaming services. Support your rationale.

Math and Baseball

Baseball is known to have one of the largest pools of statistics related to the game and its players. Managers, coaches,
and pitchers study the statistics of the players on opposing teams to give their team an edge by knowing what pitches to
throw for the best probability to be missed by a batter. In similar fashion, batters study pitchers' statistics to learn a
pitcher's strength and how to predict what a pitcher will throw and how to best hit against a pitcher.

The three primary baseball statistics are batting average, home runs, and runs batted in (RBIs), which are the
components of the title of Triple Crown winner that is awarded to players who dominate in these three areas. However,
there is a wealth of other statistics to evaluate when studying the performance of a player.

Conduct an Internet search to research statistics and how they are calculated in the following categories:

Batting Statistics
 1. There are about 30 batting statistics. Select a minimum of 10 batting statistics. Compose an organized list including

      the name of the statistic, abbreviation, explanation of what it represents, as well as how it is calculated.
      As an example: AB/HR represents at bats per home run and is calculated by the number of times a player is at bat
      divided by home runs.

Pitching Statistics
 2. There are about 40 pitching statistics. Select a minimum of 10 pitching statistics. Compose an organized list

      including the name of the statistic, abbreviation, explanation of what it represents, as well as how it is calculated.
      As an example: K/9 represents strikeouts per nine innings and is calculated by the number of strikeouts times nine
      divided by the number of innings pitched.

Fielding Statistics
 3. There are around 10 fielding statistics. Select a minimum of five fielding statistics. Compose an organized list

      including the name of the statistic, abbreviation, explanation of what it represents, as well as how it is calculated.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       13 · Chapter Summary 1453

      As an example: FP represents fielding percentage is calculated by the number of total plays divided by the number
      of total chances.

Overall
 4. Select a player from recent years to evaluate. The player can be one that you have followed, one from a favorite

      team, or any current player. Find the statistics shared in Questions 1-3 to use in evaluating the potential strengths
      and weaknesses of the player. Write a short paragraph analyzing your selected player, supported by the statistics
      from the answers to Questions 1-3.

Math and Fantasy Football

Fantasy football offers spectators an added dimension to football season with a competitive math-based game where
the active components are real-life players in the current season. For clarity in this exercise, the actual fantasy football
players will be denoted as FFP and actual professional team members will be denoted as players.

While some fantasy football leagues have slightly different setups or scoring systems, most share some common
elements.

Often using a lottery system to determine who picks first, second, and so on, FFPs select 15 current players to comprise
their personal fantasy football team. The players selected can be from any professional teams and a FFP can utilize any
team recognized by their league. FFPs can elect to keep the same players on their team for the whole league play or
trade for any player not selected by another FFP in their league.

At the start of each week during football season, each fantasy football player selects their roster of actual players to
comprise their roster of starting players. Typically, a starting roster consists of the following players:

Number to Select Position Abbreviation Position Title

QB        Quarterback

K         Kicker

TE        Tight End

RB        Running Back

D/ST      Defense

WR        Wide receiver

RB or WR  Flex

As actual professional games are played, points are tallied based on your league's scoring system. The points the team
members on your starting roster make during the week are computed and whichever FFP has the highest score for the
week wins that week.

The FFPs with the best records of wins versus losses enters fantasy football playoffs to determine the ultimate league
champion and collects the pot.

The above overview of fantasy football describes the basic game play. The fun comes in understanding and analyzing the
math behind the scoring.

 1. Talk to people you know who have played fantasy football in the past and interview them. Inquire about how they
      select players and how league(s) they have played in have computed the weekly scoring.
       a. Was a league manager recruited to manage the record keeping of scores?
       b. Was an online scoring system utilized or did the fantasy football use a streamlined or specialized scoring
             system?
        c. What strategies were used to select the team of 15 players and who would be on the weekly starting roster?
       d. Were any online resources utilized to aid in choosing which players to select?
       e. How was math utilized to select team members or who to place as a starter each week? Be as specific as
             possible, citing examples when available.
1454 13 · Chapter Summary

 2. Conduct an Internet research to find two different resources that a FFP could utilize when selecting players for their
      team or for their starting roster. Describe the math involved in the resources.

 3. Conduct an Internet research to learn more about the scoring utilized by fantasy football leagues. Write a short
      paragraph sharing how the use of math and knowledge of football statistics is used and how they are calculated to
      aid a FFP in selecting their team and starting roster.

Math and Hockey

Hockey is full of math from obvious components such as scoring and statistics to the shape of the rink and the angles
involved in puck movement.

Collegiate and professional hockey games are 60 minutes long and are divided into three periods of 20 (60/3) minutes
each. At any one time, there are five players and one goalie on the ice for each team. If a player is called on a penalty and
is placed in the penalty box, that team now has four players, which is 20% less players on the ice competing against five
opponents. In some instances, a team may have two players in the penalty box at one time, resulting in three players, or
40% less players on the ice compared to a full team. Being one player down for a 2-minute penalty or potentially 5
minutes for a major penalty leads to an imbalance on the ice and calls for a quick change of offense and defense
strategy.

Rink Composition--North American
An ice rink is comprised of various geometrical shapes, each with precise dimensions.

 1. Research the dimensions of a hockey rink and draw an accurate scale model on graph paper. Be sure to include the
      scale for your model and indicate all units.

 2. List the shapes and the numbers of each kind of hockey rink. You should find four different shapes, some with
      multiple dimensions.

 3. Describe the shape and dimensions of a hockey puck using geometric vocabulary.

Statistics
Using an Internet search, select two top hockey players from the same league to answer the following questions:

 4. Write a paragraph sharing a minimum of five statistics for each player you have selected. Describe how each of the
      statistics are calculated and what each statistic means.

 5. Write a paragraph comparing the two players and determine who you believe is the better player. Support your
      choice.

Scoring
The basics of scoring in ice hockey is simple, the team with the most goals is the winner. But, how to score the most
goals involves much math!

 6. Research one of the following components involved in hockey puck movement on the ice and write a paragraph
      summarizing your findings. Be specific and detailed in your summary.
       a. Angles
       b. Velocity vectors
        c. Angle of incident and angle of return
       d. Speed and acceleration (player as well as puck movement)

Math and Soccer

As the world's most popular sport, you'll be excited to confirm that soccer is full of mathematics ranging from scoring
and statistics to footwork, angles, and field shape.

Soccer requires understanding of mathematical concepts and equations as well as skill, fitness, and game knowledge.
One such example is angles, which you all will remember from your geometry class. While players are not carrying
protractors and measuring angles during play, mental calculation of angles is a constant in any successful player's
thinking. A goalie is not physically able to cover the entire open net region and a player must calculate an angle to kick
the ball consistent with the net opening while predicting the ability of the goalie to stop the ball from entering the net.

 1. Research angles as they apply to soccer play. Provide two examples of different plays indicating angle of a player's
      body, angle of foot striking the ball, and angle to the net. Include relevant dimensions. Adding a diagram that may
      aid in clarity is an option.

 2. Draw a scale model of a soccer field including dimensions with labels.

Using an Internet search, select two top soccer players from the same league to answer the following questions:

 3. Write a paragraph sharing a minimum of five statistics for each player you have selected. Describe how each of the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                  13 · Chapter Summary 1455

     statistics are calculated and what each statistic means.
4. Write a paragraph comparing the two players and determine who you believe is the better player. Support your

     choice.
1456 13 · Chapter Summary

Chapter Review

Section 13.1 Math and Art
 1. A person's length from their belly button to the floor is 25 in. What is the person's approximate height rounded to
      the nearest inch?

2. The spiral seeds on a fruit mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a row of the spiral contains 34 leaves, how many leaves
    would be found on the next larger spiral of seeds?

3. The seeds on a sunflower mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a circular layer on the sunflower contains 89 seeds,
    approximately how many seeds would be found on the next larger circular layer?

4. A term of the Fibonacci sequence is 17,711 and the previous term is 10,946. What is the following term of the
    sequence?

5. The 35th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 9,227,465. Use the approximate value of  of 1.618 to estimate the
    34th term. Round your answer to the nearest whole number.

6. A frame has dimensions of 16 in by 24 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest tenth and
    determine if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

Section 13.2 Math and the Environment
 7. An average toilet uses 5 gal of water per flush. A high-efficiency toilet uses about 1.25 gal per flush. How much
      water would a household save in a month (30 days) if the toilet was flushed 6 times a day?

8. When washing dishes, leaving the faucet running utilizes about 15 gal every 5 minutes, whereas filling the sink and
    turning the faucet off except to rinse the dishes uses about 6 gal for washing a dishpan-sized load of dishes. How
    much water is saved by not leaving the faucet running if it takes 10 minutes to wash a dishpan-sized load of dishes
    each day for a year containing 30 days in each month?

9. Leaving the water running when washing your hands consumes about 4 gal of water, whereas turning the water
    off when lathering reduces the water used to 1 gal. How much water is saved in an apartment of 4 people in 6
    months (180 days) if each person averages washing their hands twice a day?

10. How long would it take for an energy-saving light bulb to consume 1 kW of power if the bulb is rated at 2.5 W?
      Round your answer to the nearest hour.

11. How long would it take for a 60 W light bulb to consume 1 kW of power? Round your answer to the nearest hour.

12. A portable fan uses about 40 W. How many kilowatt-hours are needed to run the fan during a 10-day trip if the fan
      is run for an average of 3.5 hours a day?

Section 13.3 Math and Medicine
13. In a 2% solution of lidocaine, how many milligrams are there per milliliter?

14. You are prescribed a nebulizer solution to aid with asthma. If the solution is 0.7% w/v, what volume is needed to
      deliver a 7 mg dose?

15. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 17 mg of a drug to be taken in oral form. If the pills are available in 3.4
      mg, how many pills will the patient need daily?

16. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 9 mg daily of a drug to be taken daily for 10 days. If the pills are
      available in 2.25 mg, how many pills are needed to fill the prescription?

17. A patient is prescribed 2 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered daily intramuscularly, divided into three doses. If the
      patient weighs 30 kg, how many milligrams of the drug is needed for each dose?

18. A patient is prescribed 0.75 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered intramuscularly once per day. If the drug is available in
      2.5 mg/mL and the patient weighs 63 kg, how many milliliters of the drug should be given per day?

Section 13.4 Math and Music
19. Select the most representative sound registering 50 dB: airport gate noise, light rain on a car, dirt bike racing.

20. Select the most representative sound registering 100 dB: city traffic when in a car with windows rolled up, children
      playing on a school playground, professional sporting event such as football.

21. What frequency range can teenagers typically hear but adults over 20 are often not able to hear?
22. What is three whole steps up from G#?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             13 · Chapter Summary 1457

23. What is one half-step down from F?

24. What is an octave above D3?

25. Given that the frequency of              , what is the frequency of A6?

Section 13.5 Math and Sports
For the following exercises, compute how many games would be played in the style of tournament and number of
teams given in each question. Assume all tournaments are single round-round or single-elimination.

    26. How many games would be played with 10 teams using a round-robin tournament?
    27. How many games would be played with 25 teams using a round-robin tournament?
    28. How many games would be played with 12 teams using a round-robin tournament?
    29. How many games would be played with 4 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
    30. How many games would be played with 9 teams using a single-elimination tournament?

Chapter Test

 1. A person's length from their belly button to the floor is 3 ft 8 in, assuming the ratio is golden. What is the person's
      approximate height rounded to the nearest inch?

2. The leaves on an invasive weed mirror the Fibonacci sequence. If a set of leaves on the plant contains 13 leaves,
    how many leaves would be found on the previous smaller set of leaves?

3. The 14th term of the Fibonacci sequence is 377 and the 15th term is 610. What is the 13th term of the sequence?

4. A fence has dimensions of 40 in by 25 in. Calculate the ratio of the sides rounded to the nearest tenth and
    determine if the size approximates a golden rectangle.

5. An average toilet uses 5 gal of water per flush. A high-efficiency toilet uses about 1.25 gal per flush. How much
    water would a dorm save in an academic year (32 weeks) if the toilet was flushed 22 times a day?

6. When washing dishes, leaving the faucet running utilizes about 15 gal every 5 minutes, whereas filling the sink and
    turning the faucet off except to rinse the dishes uses about 5 gal for washing a dishpan-sized load of dishes. How
    much water is saved by not leaving the faucet running if it takes 10 minutes to wash a dishpan-sized load of dishes
    each day for a week?

7. How long would it take for a 75 W light bulb to consume 1 kW of power? Round your answer to the nearest hour.

8. A phone charger uses about 20 W. How many kilowatt-hours are needed to use the charger during a month if the
    charger is used for an average of 1.5 hours a day?

9. A pharmacy has a 1 L bottle of 0.9% solution of sodium chloride. How many grams of sodium chloride are
    contained in the bottle?

10. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 5.1 mg of a drug to be taken in oral form. If the pills are available in 1.7
      mg, how many pills will the patient need daily?

11. A prescription calls for a patient to receive 7 mg daily of a drug to be taken daily for 7 days. If the pills are available
      in 1.75 mg, how many pills are needed to fill the prescription?

12. A patient is prescribed 3.8 mg/kg of a drug to be delivered daily intramuscularly, divided into two doses. If the
      patient weighs 20 kg, how many milligrams of the drug are needed for each dose?

13. Select the most representative decibel value for a college classroom with students working in groups: 10 dB, 30 dB,
      50 dB.

14. What is typically the top frequency that adults over 20 can hear: 17 Hz, 170 Hz, 1,700 Hz, 17,000 Hz?

15. What note is three whole steps down from F#?

16. Given that the approximate frequency of       , what is the approximate frequency of C2# rounded to the
      nearest whole number?

For the following exercises, compute how many games would be played in the style of tournament and number of
teams given in each question. Assume all tournaments are single round-robin or single-elimination.

    17. How many games would be played with 22 teams using a round-robin tournament?
    18. How many games would be played with 7 teams using a round-robin tournament?
    19. How many games would be played with 8 teams using a single-elimination tournament?
1458 13 · Chapter Summary

    20. How many games would be played with 17 teams using a single-elimination tournament?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       A · Co-Req Appendix: Integer Powers of 10 1459

A CO-REQ APPENDIX: INTEGER POWERS OF 10

Nonnegative Integer Powers of 10

The phrase nonnegative integers refers to the set containing 0, 1, 2, 3, ... and so on. In the expression , 10 is called

the base, and 5 is called the exponent, or power. The exponent 5 is telling us to multiply the base 10 by itself 5 times.

So,                    . By definition, any number raised to the 0 power is 1. So,                 .

In the following table, there are several nonnegative integer powers of 10 that have been written as a product. Notice
that higher exponents result in larger products. What do you notice about the number of zeros in the resulting product?

     Exponential Form                             Product              Number of Zeros in Product

That's right! The number of zeros is the same as the power each time!

Negative Integer Powers of 10

The reciprocal of a number is 1 divided by that number. For example, the reciprocal of 10 is . We use negative

exponents to indicate a reciprocal. For example,           . Similarly, any expression with a negative exponent

can be written with a positive exponent by taking the reciprocal. Several negative powers of 10 have been simplified in
the table that follows. What do you notice about the number of zeros in the denominator (bottom) of each fraction?

     Exponential Form Equivalent Simplified Expression Number of Zeros in Denominator

That's right! The number of zeros is the same as the positive version of the power each time.

In the following table, we will write the same powers of 10 as decimals. Count the number of decimal places to the right
of the decimal point. What do you notice?
1460 A · Co-Req Appendix: Integer Powers of 10

         Exponential Form Equivalent Simplified Expression Number of Decimal Places to Right of Decimal

That's right! The number of decimal places to the right of the decimal point is the same as the positive version of the
power each time.

Multiplying Integers by Positive Powers of 10

Did you know that the distance from the sun to Earth is over 90 million miles? This value can be represented as

90,000,000, or we can write it as a product:           , which is actually a more compact way of writing 90

million. Notice that the power of 7 reflects the number of zeros in 90 million. Several products of positive integers and

powers of 10 are given in the table that follows. Notice that the number of zeros is the same as the exponent except in

one case.

           Exponential Form                   Product  Number of Zeros in Product

The only case in which the number of zeros didn't equal the exponent was the last case. Why do you think that
happened? That's right! We multiplied by 70 which also had a zero. So, the product had a zero from the 70 and 5 zeros
from for a total of 6 zeros in 7,000,000.

Multiplying by Negative Powers of 10

As we have seen, negative powers of 10 are decimals. Several products of positive integers and powers of 10 are given in
the table below. Notice that multiplying an integer by 10 raised to a negative integer power results in a smaller number
than you started with. Also, the number of decimal places to the right of the decimal point is the same as the exponent
except in one case.

Exponential Form                 Product               Number of Decimal Places to Right of Decimal

Access for free at openstax.org
Exponential Form  Product                          A · Co-Req Appendix: Integer Powers of 10 1461

                           Number of Decimal Places to Right of Decimal

The only case in which the number of decimal places to the right of the decimal point didn't equal the positive version of
the exponent was the last case. Why do you think that happened? That's right! We multiplied by 70, which ended in zero.

Moving the Decimal Place

A helpful shortcut when multiplying a number by a power of 10 is to "move the decimal point." The following table shows
several powers of 10, both positive and negative. Compare the location of the decimal point in the original number to
the location of the decimal point in the product. How has it changed?

Exponential       Product  How the Position of the Decimal Point
     Form                                       Changed

Notice that multiplying by a positive power of 10 moves the decimal point to the right, making the value larger, while
multiplying by a negative power of 10 moves the decimal point to the left, making the value smaller. Also, the number of
decimal places that the decimal point moves is exactly the positive version of the exponent.
1462 A · Co-Req Appendix: Integer Powers of 10
Access for free at openstax.org
Answer Key                                                                        Answer Key 1463

Chapter 1                                                             .

Your Turn

1.1

1. One possible solution:                                          .

1.2
 1. This is not a well-defined set.
 2. This is a well-defined set.

1.3
 1.

1.4
 1.

1.5
 1.

1.6
 1.

1.7
 1.

1.8
 1.
 2.

1.9
 1. finite
 2. infinite

1.10
 1. Set is equal to set ,
 2. neither
 3. Set is equivalent to set ,

1.11

1.                                      and

1.12

1. A set with one member could contain any one of the following:

                                             .

2. Any of the following combinations of three members would work:

                                     ,          , or

3. The empty set is represented as or .

1.13
 1.

1.14
 1. 512

1.15
 1.
1464 Answer Key

1.16
 1. Serena also ordered a fish sandwich and chicken nuggets, because for the two sets to be equal they must contain
      the exact same items: {fish sandwich, chicken nuggets} = {fish sandwich, chicken nuggets}.

1.17
 1. There are multiple possible solutions. Each set must contain two players, but both players cannot be the same,
      otherwise the two sets would be equal, not equivalent. For example, {Maria, Shantelle} and {Angie, Maria}.

1.18

1. The set of lions is a subset of the universal set of cats. In other words, the Venn diagram depicts the relationship

      that all lions are cats. This is expressed symbolically as  .

1.19
 1. The set of eagles and the set of canaries are two disjoint subsets of the universal set of all birds. No eagle is a
      canary, and no canary is an eagle.

1.20                                                                                . Next, draw a circle in the
 1. The universal set is the set of integers. Draw a rectangle and label it with
      rectangle and label with Natural numbers.

                 Venn diagram with universal set,                    , and subset   .

 2.                                  Venn Diagram with universal set, and subset .
1.21

 1.   Venn Diagram with universal set,  Things that can fly with disjoint subsets Airplanes and Birds.

1.22                             or
 1.
 2.

1.23
 1.

1.24
 1.

1.25

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    Answer Key 1465

1.

1.26
 1.

1.27
 1.

1.28                             .
 1.                         .

1.29
 1. 33

1.30
 1. 113

1.31   or   ) and
 1.    and
 2.    or
 3.    and
 4. (

1.32
 1. 127
 2. 50

1.33

1.                       .

2.

3.                    .

4.                 .

1.34
 1. 40
 2. 0
 3. 27

1.35
 1.
 2.
 3.

1.36
1466 Answer Key

 1.
                    Venn diagram - Attendees at a conference with sets: Soup, Sandwich, Salad - Complete Solution

1.37
 1.
 2.
 3.

1.38
 1. The left side of the equation is:

                                       Venn diagram of intersection of two sets and its complement.
The right side of the equation is given by:

                                 Venn diagram of union of the complement of two sets.

Check Your Understanding

1. set

2. cardinality

3. not a well-defined set

4. 12

5. equivalent, but not equal

6. finite

7. Roster method:                and set builder notation:

8. subset

9. To be a subset of a set, every member of the subset must also be a member of the set. To be a proper subset,

there must be at least one member of the set that is not also in the subset.

10. empty

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1467

11. true
12.
13. equivalent
14. equal
15. relationship
16. universal
17. disjoint or non-overlapping
18. complement
19. disjoint
20. intersection
21. union
22.
23.
24.
25.
26. empty
27.
28. overlap
29. central
30. intersection of all three sets,
31. parentheses, complement
32. equation, true

Chapter 2

Your Turn

2.1
 1. Logical statement, false.
 2. Logical statement, true.
 3. Not a logical statement, questions cannot be determined to be either true or false.

2.2
 1. The movie Gandhi won the Academy Award for Best Picture in 1982.
 2. Soccer is the most popular sport in the world.
 3. All oranges are citrus fruits.

2.3
 1. Ted Cruz was born in Texas.
 2. Adele does not have a beautiful voice.
 3. Leaves do not convert carbon dioxide to oxygen during the process of photosynthesis.

2.4
 1.
 2.
 3.

2.5
 1.
 2. Woody and Buzz Lightyear are not best friends.

2.6
 1. The sum of some consecutive integers results in a prime number.
 2. No birds give live birth to their young.
 3. All squares are parallelograms and have four sides.

2.7
 1. All apples are sweet.
 2. Some triangles are squares.
1468 Answer Key

3. No vegetables are green.

2.8
 1. Negation; .
 2. Conjunction; .
 3. Biconditional; .

2.9
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

2.10
 1. If our friends did not come over to watch the game, then my roommates ordered pizza or I ordered wings.
 2. If my roommates ordered pizza and I ordered wings, then our friends came over to watch the game.
 3. It is not the case that my roommates ordered pizza or our friends came over to watch the game.

2.11                                ; this is another example of De Morgan's Laws and it is always true.
 1.
 2.
 3.

2.12                  , true
 1.   : No houses are built with bricks; false
 2.
 3.    : Abuja is not the capital of Nigeria; false

2.13
 1. True
 2. False
 3. True

2.14
 1. True
 2. False
 3. True

2.15

1.

      TTF F F                       F

      false

2.

      TTF T T                       T

      true

3.

      TTF F                      T     T

      true
2.16

Access for free at openstax.org
                    Answer Key 1469

1.
      TT F F
      TF T T
      FT F F
      FF T F

2.

    TT T      F

    TF T      F

    FT T      F

    FF F      T

3.

    TTT F F      T

    TTF F F      F

    TFT T T      T

    TFF T T      T

    FTT F F      T

    FTF F F      F

    FFT T F      T

    FFF T F      F

2.17
 1. Valid

       TF T
       FT T

 2. Not valid

       TT F F F
       TF F T T
       FT T F T
       FF T T T
1470 Answer Key

2.18
 1. False

TF F

2. True

TF T             T

3. True

TF F             T

2.19
 1. Valid

TT F T                              T

TF F F                              T

FT T T                              T

FF T T                              T

2. Not valid

TT F T                           T

TF F F                           T

FT T F                           F

FF T F                           F

2.20
 1. False

       TF F

 2. True
      TFT T

 3. True

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       Answer Key 1471

      TFF T

2.21
 1. Valid

      TT T    F  FF     F     T

      TF F    T  FT     T     T

      FT F    T  TF     T     T

      FF F    T  TT     T     T

2. Not Valid

      TT F T     F

      TF F F     T

      FT T F     F

      FF T F     F

3. Valid

      TT T F T          T

      TF F F F          T

      FT T T T          T

      FF T T T          T

4. Valid

      TTT F F T      T     F     T  T

      TTF F F T      F     F     F  T

      TFT F T F      T     T     T  T

      TFF F T F      T     T     T  T

      FTT T F F      T     T     T  T

      FTF T F F      T     T     T  T

      FFT T T F      T     T     T  T

      FFF T T F      T     T     T  T

2.22
1472 Answer Key

1.  is logically equivalent to

    TT T F F                        T     T

    TF F T F                        F     T

    FT T F T                        T     T

    FF T T T                        T     T

2.  is not logically equivalent to

    TT T         F               T     T

    TF F         T               T     F

    FT T         F               F     F

    FF T         T               T     T

2.23
 1. If Elvis Presley wore capes, then some superheroes wear capes.
 2. If some superheroes wear capes, then Elvis Presley wore capes.
 3. If Elvis Presley did not wear capes, then no superheroes wear capes.
 4. If no superheroes wear capes, then Elvis Presley did not wear capes.

2.24
 1. : Dora is an explorer.
 2. : Boots is a monkey.
 3. Inverse
 4. Converse
 5. Converse

2.25
 1. If my friend does not live in California, then my friend lives in San Francisco. True.
 2. If my friend does not live in San Francisco, then my friend lives in California. True.
 3. If my friend lives in California, then my friend does not live in San Francisco. False.

2.26
 1. Jackie did not play softball and she did not run track.
 2. Brandon did not study for his certification exam, or he did not pass his exam.

2.27
 1. Edna Mode made a new superhero costume, and it includes a cape.
 2. I had pancakes for breakfast, and I did not use maple syrup.

2.28
 1. Some people like ice cream, but ice cream makers will not make a profit.
 2. Raquel cannot play video games, but somebody will play video games.

2.29
 1. Eric needs to replace the light bulb, and Marcos did not leave the light bulb on all night, and Dan did not break the
      light bulb.
 2. Trenton went to school, and Regina went to work, and Merika did not clean the house.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        Answer Key 1473

2.30

1.

      TT T  F  FF  F  T

      TF T  F  FT  F  T

      FT T  F  TF  F  T

      FF F  T  TT  T  T

2.31
 1. Some people like history.
 2. Some people do not like reading.
 3. The polygon is not an octagon.

2.32
 1. My classmate does not like history.
 2. Homer likes to read.
 3. The polygon does not have five sides.

2.33
 1. If my roommate does not go to work, then they will not be able to pay their bills.
 2. If penguins cannot fly, then we will watch the news.
 3. If Marcy goes to the movies, then she will buy water.

Check Your Understanding

 1. logical statement
 2. negation
 3.
 4.
 5. premises
 6. Inductive
 7. quantifiers
 8. Some giraffes are not tall.
 9. compound statement
10. connective
11. biconditional,
12. Parentheses,
13. Conjunction, ; disjunction, (in any order)
14. valid
15. true
16. truth table
17. four
18. two
19. one-way contract
20. conclusion
21. hypothesis
22. biconditional
23. biconditional
24. true
25. always true, valid, or a tautology.
26. conditional
27. logically equivalent
28. inverse
29. converse, inverse
30.
1474 Answer Key

31.
32.
33. De Morgan's Laws
34. premise
35. valid
36. inductive
37. deductive
38. fallacy
39. sound

Chapter 3

Your Turn

3.1
 1. Yes. When 54 is divided by 9, the result is 6 with no remainder. Also, 54 can be written as the product of 9 and 6.

3.2
 1. The last digit is 0, so 45,730 is divisible by 5, since the rule states that if the last digit is 0 or 5, the original number is
      divisible by 5.

3.3
 1. The sum of the digits is 32. Since 32 is not divisible by 9, neither is 342,887.

3.4
 1. The last digit is even, so 2 divides 43,568. The sum of the digits is 26. Since 26 is not divisible by 3, neither is 43,568.
      The rule for divisibility by 6 is that the number be divisible by both 2 and 3. Since 43,568 is not divisible by 3, it is not
      divisible by 6.

3.5
 1. Since the last digit of 87,762 is not 0, it is not divisible by 10.

3.6
 1. The number formed by the last two digits of 43,568 is 68 and 68 is divisible by 4. Since the number formed by the
      last two digits of 43,568 is divisible by 4, so is 43,568.

3.7
 1. Yes, 1,429 is prime.

3.8
 1. Yes, 859 is a prime number.

3.9
 1. 5,067,322 is a composite number.

3.10
 1. No, 1,477 is composite.

3.11
 1.

3.12
 1.

3.13
 1.

3.14
 1. The number 180 has three prime factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1475

3.15
 1. The GCD is 9.

3.16
 1. The GCD of 36 and 128 is 4.

3.17
 1. 40

3.18
 1. The largest square bricks that can be used are 20 cm by 20 cm.

3.19
 1. The largest team size that can be formed is 7 students.

3.20
 1. 60

3.21
 1. 140

3.22
 1. 92,400

3.23
 1. 360

3.24
 1. The sun, Venus, and Jupiter will line up again in 220,830 days.

3.25
 1. The first person to receive both giveaways would be the person who submits the 11,700th submission.

3.26
 1. integer
 2. not an integer
 3. not an integer
 4. integer
 5. integer

3.27
 1.

 2.

 3.

3.28
 1.
1476 Answer Key

                    and

3.29
1.

                 and

3.30                             and     .
 1. 101 is larger.

3.31
 1. 38

3.32
 1. 81

3.33
 1. -7. Since |-18| > |11|, the answer matches the sign of -18.

3.34
 1. -62. Since a larger positive number was subtracted from a smaller positive number, a negative result was expected.

3.35
 1. 71. Subtracting a negative number is the same as adding a positive number.

3.36
 1. -17. Since |19| < |-36|, the sign of the answer matches the sign of -36, which is negative.

3.37
 1. $89

3.38
 1. 2,106. Since both numbers are positive, the product is positive.

3.39
 1. -234. Since the numbers have opposite signs, the product is negative.

3.40
 1. -29. The numbers have opposite signs, so the division will result in a negative number.

3.41
 1. 7. Since the signs of the numbers match, the division results in a positive number.

3.42
 1. The average daily balance was $529.

3.43
 1. 313

3.44
 1. 72

3.45

Access for free at openstax.org
1. 630                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1477

3.46                             . The fractions are not equivalent.
 1. 2,701

3.47
 1. -15

3.48
 1. 1,516

3.49
 1. 5

3.50
 1. 403

3.51
 1. 94 is not a perfect square.
 2. 441 is a perfect square.

3.52
 1. not a rational number
 2. rational number
 3. rational number
 4. rational number
 5. rational number

3.53

1.         and

3.54
 1.

3.55
 1.

3.56
 1.

3.57
 1.

3.58
 1.

3.59
 1.

3.60
 1.

3.61
 1.

3.62
1478 Answer Key

 1. 5.108

3.63
 1. 18.63

3.64
 1. 1.6

3.65
 1.

3.66
 1.

3.67
 1. 2.664

3.68
 1.
 2.

3.69
 1.

3.70      , or in decimal form,
 1.

3.71
 1. The process used above yields .

3.72
 1.
      Studying math: 5 hours
      Studying history: 2.5 hours
      Studying writing: 1.25 hours
      Studying physics: 1.25 hours

3.73
 1. 720 calories of protein

3.74
 1. 321.868 km

3.75
 1. 23.656 liters

3.76
 1.
 2.

3.77
 1. 0.14
 2. 0.07

3.78
 1. 300

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        Answer Key 1479

2. 841.64

3.79
 1. 120
 2. 800

3.80
 1. 7%
 2. 85%

3.81
 1. 440 calories of protein

3.82
 1. 12% of registered voters in the small town voted in the primaries.

3.83
 1. We want the original price of the item, which is the total. We know the percent, 40, and the percentage of the total,

      $30. To find the original cost, use    , with            and      . Calculating with those values yields

                . So, the original was $75.

3.84
 1. perfect square
 2. not a perfect square
 3. perfect square
 4. not a perfect square

3.85
 1. rational
 2. irrational
 3. irrational
 4. irrational

3.86     . The rational part is 5, and the irrational part is .
 1.

3.87

1.       . The rational part is 1, and the irrational part is       .

3.88       . The rational part is 11, and the irrational part is .
 1.

3.89
 1.

3.90
 1.

3.91
 1. The two numbers being subtracted do not have the same irrational part, so the operation cannot be performed
      without a calculator.

3.92
 1.
 2.
1480 Answer Key

3.93                                          , and
 1.
 2. 19

3.94
 1.

 2.

3.95
 1.

3.96
 1. real
 2. not real
 3. real

3.97
 1. irrational number
 2. integer, rational number
 3. rational number

3.98
 1. Venn diagram showing 4, 13.863, 15, 871,

3.99
 1. dstributive property
 2. additive inverse property

3.100            . Using that, the problem can be changed to  . Change to  . Using the distributive
 1.                                                                    .
      property,

3.101
 1. 93 = 9 (mod 12)
 2. 387 = 3 (mod 12)

3.102
 1. 4:00

3.103
 1. 9:00

3.104
 1. 4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1481

3.105
 1. 5:00

3.106
 1. Thursday

3.107
 1.
 2. Since the bases are not the same (one is 3, the other 4), this cannot be simplified using the product rule for
      exponents.

3.108
 1.

3.109
 1.

3.110
 1.

3.111
 1.

3.112
 1.
 2.

3.113
 1.
 2.

3.114
 1.
 2.

3.115
 1.
 2.

3.116
 1.
 2.

3.117
 1. Is not written in scientific notation; 42.67 is not at least 1 and less than 10.
 2. Is written in scientific notation
 3. Is not written in scientific notation; The absolute value of -80.91 is not at least 1 and less than 10.

3.118
 1.
 2.
 3.

3.119
1482 Answer Key

1.

3.120
 1.

3.121
 1. 1,020,000
 2. 0.0000409

3.122
 1.
 2.

3.123
 1.
 2.

3.124
 1.

3.125
 1.

3.126
 1.
 2.

3.127
 1.
 2.

3.128                            m larger than the diameter of an atom.
 1. The transistor is

3.129                            , or 89.3, times further from the sun that Mercury.
 1. Neptune is

3.130            cubic meters
 1.

3.131                              , or 840 pounds of carbon dioxide per year.
 1. A person exhales, on average,

3.132
 1. This is an arithmetic sequence. Every term is the previous term minus 2.2.
 2. This is not an arithmetic sequence. The difference between terms 1 and 2 is 2, but between terms 3 and 4 the
      difference is 4. The differences are not the same.
 3. This is an (infinite) arithmetic sequence. Every term is the previous term plus 6. The ellipsis indicates the pattern
      continues.

3.133

1.            ,        ,

3.134

1.     ,               , and

3.135
 1. 12,675.5

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               Answer Key 1483

3.136
 1. Christina will save $265 in week 52.

3.137
 1. There are 2,520 seats in the theater.

3.138
 1. It is a geometric sequence; common ratio is 5.
 2. It is not a common ratio; term 2 is the first term multiplied by -2, but the sixth term is the fifth term multiplied by 3.
 3. It is a geometric sequence; common ratio is .

3.139
 1.
 2. 2,048

3.140
 1. 84,652,645
 2. 40.444444

3.141
 1. The amount in the account was $11,671.03 (rounded to two decimal places).

3.142                   organisms after 20 hours.
 1. There are

3.143
 1. 0. 99996948242188

Check Your Understanding

 1. 31 and 701 are prime. 56, 213 and 48 are composite.
 2.
 3. 2
 4. 630
 5. The maximum number of bags that can be filled in this way is 10.
 6. -4, 430

 7.
 8. -13, -7, -2, 4, 10
 9. 7
10. 13
11. 36
12. parentheses
13. exponents
14. -22
15. parentheses
16. 49

17.                     are rational;    is not.
                                          , and there are other answers.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24. Using the process from the chapter,
1484 Answer Key

25.
26. $110.25
27. 228
28. 7 new employees will be hired.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.

34.

35. distributive property

36. 2

37. 1

38. 5

39. Friday

40.

41.      or

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51. A pile of dollar bills that reaches the moon would contain      bills.

52. No. The difference from term 1 to term 2 is different than the difference from term 4 to term 5.

53. 8

54. 613

55.      ,

56. 35050

57. There will be 426 people in their survey group after 100 days.

58. Yes, each term is the previous term multiplied by 2.

59. The common ratio is -10.

60. 2,919.293 (rounded off to three decimal places)

61. 5.714 (rounded to three decimal places)

62. $30,188.57 (rounded off to two decimal places)

Chapter 4

Your Turn

4.1
 1. 416
 2. 1,851
 3. 17,488

4.2
 1.
 2.
 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        Answer Key 1485

4.3
 1. 621
 2. 3,203
 3. 40,630,891

4.4
 1. 1269

4.5
 1. 42,136

4.6
 1. 6,105,643

4.7
 1. 257

4.8
 1. 6,054

4.9
 1. 1,248,073

4.10
 1. 77
 2. 240
 3. 3,447

4.11
 1. XXVII
 2. XLIX
 3. DCCXXXIX
 4. MMMDCXLVII

4.12
 1. 0, 1, 2, 3

4.13
 1. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B

4.14
 1. 157

4.15
 1. 2,014

4.16
 1. 851

4.17
 1. 27

4.18
 1. 0, 1, 2, 3
      10, 11, 12, 13
      20, 21, 22, 23
      30, 31, 32, 33
      100
1486 Answer Key

4.19
 1. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B
      10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 1A, 1B
      20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 2A, 2B
      30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 3A, 3B
      40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 4A, 4B
      50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 5A, 5B
      60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 6A, 6B
      70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 7A, 7B
      80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 8A, 8B
      90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 9A, 9B
      A0, A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, A8, A9, AA, AB
      B0, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, B7, B8, B9, BA, BB
      100

4.20
 1. 0, 1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22, 100

4.21
 1. 20107

4.22
 1. 554B12

4.23
 1. 100010012

4.24

 1.

 2.

4.25
 1. The result has the digit 7 in it. In base 4, the 7 is an illegal symbol.

4.26
 1. The remainders include 10, which in base 6 is an illegal symbol.

4.27
 1. Since 12 is larger than 10, the base 10 number cannot have less digits than the base 12 number. Since it did, we
      know an error has been made.

4.28
 1. 12426

4.29
 1. + 0 1 2 3
       00 1 2 3

      Base 4 Addition
      Table

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1487

       1 1 2 3 10
       2 2 3 10 11
       3 3 10 11 12
      Base 4 Addition
      Table

4.30
 1. 6337

4.31
 1. + 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D
        00 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D
        1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10
        2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11
        3 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12
        4 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13
        5 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13 14
        6 6 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15
        7 7 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
        8 8 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
        9 9 A B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
       A A B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
       B B C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1A
       C C D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1A 1B
       D D 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1A 1B 1C
      Base 14 Addition Table

4.32
 1. 13B912

4.33
 1. 100100102

4.34
 1. 326

4.35
 1. 22712

4.36
 1. The symbols 4 and 5 are not legal symbols in base 4. Careful use of the base 4 addition table would correct this
      error.
1488 Answer Key

          133
      +112

          311

      The correct answer is 3114.

4.37

1. This is correct if the numbers are base 10 numbers, but these numbers are base 14 numbers. In base 14, 9 + 9 is not

      18, but instead is 13. Careful use of the base 14 addition table generates the correct answer,  .

4.38
 1. * 0 1 2 3
       000 0 0

       101 2 3

       2 0 2 10 12

       3 0 3 12 21

      Base 4
      Multiplication
      Table

4.39
 1. * 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D
        000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
        101 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D
        2 0 2 4 6 8 A C 10 12 14 16 18 1A 1C
        3 0 3 6 9 C 11 14 17 1A 1D 22 25 28 2B
        4 0 4 8 C 12 16 1A 20 24 28 2C 32 36 3A
        5 0 5 A 11 16 1B 22 27 2C 33 38 3D 44 49
        6 0 6 C 14 1A 22 28 30 36 3C 44 4A 52 58
        7 0 7 10 17 20 27 30 37 40 47 50 57 60 67
        8 0 8 12 1A 24 2C 36 40 48 52 5A 64 6C 76
        9 0 9 14 1D 28 33 3C 47 52 5B 66 71 7A 85
       A 0 A 16 22 2C 38 44 50 5A 66 72 7C 88 94
       B 0 B 18 25 32 3D 4A 57 64 71 7C 89 96 A3
       C 0 C 1A 28 36 44 52 60 6C 7A 88 96 A4 B2
       D 0 D 1C 2B 3A 49 58 67 76 85 94 A3 B2 C1

4.40

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    Answer Key 1489

1. 40006
2. 10101112

4.41
 1. 436912

4.42
 1.
 2.

4.43
 1. The symbols 4 and 5 are not legal symbols in base 4. Careful use of the base 4 multiplication table would correct this
      error. The correct answer is 3334.

4.44

1. This is correct if the numbers are base 10 numbers, but these numbers are base 14 numbers. In base 14,

                       is not 81, but instead is 5B. Careful use of the base 14 addition table (Table 4.9) generates the

      correct answer,  .

Check Your Understanding

 1. A system in which the position of a numeral determines the value associated with that numeral.
 2. 279
 3.
 4. 10
 5. A numeral is a symbol representing a number. A number is a quantity or amount.
 6. 601,947
 7. 60
 8. 20
 9. Roman numerals do not use place value.
10. 341
11. 209
12. 247
13. CDLXXIX
14. A base 25 system would require 25 symbols.
15. Since the 4 is the second digit, its place value is 181 times 4, or 72.
16. 329
17. 409
18. 5118
19. 2,126
20. In base 4, 5 is not a valid symbol. So, a mistake has been made.

21. + 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
       00 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

       1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 10

       2 2 3 4 5 6 7 10 11

       3 3 4 5 6 7 10 11 12

       4 4 5 6 7 10 11 12 13

       5 5 6 7 10 11 12 13 14

       6 6 7 10 11 12 13 14 15

       7 7 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

22. 1216
1490 Answer Key

23. 78
24. 8214
25. 512
26. In base 8, 8 is not a valid symbol. So, a mistake has been made.
27. A common base 14 error is performing the operation in base 10.
28. the addition table
29. The process is the same, except the multiplication table for the base is used instead of the familiar base 10 rules.
30. the multiplication table for the base
31. 22406
32. B14
33. The 8 is not a symbol used in base 5.
34. A symbol that is not used in that base is present, or a base 10 rule is used.

Chapter 5

Your Turn

5.1
 1. 18 plus 11 OR the sum of 18 and 11
 2. 27 times 9 OR the product of 27 and 9
 3. 84 divided by 7 OR the quotient of 84 and 7
 4. minus OR the difference of and

5.2
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

5.3

1.

2.   OR

3.

4.

5.4
 1.
 2.

 3.
 4.

5.5
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.

5.6
 1.
 2.

5.7
 1.

5.8
 1.

5.9
 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              Answer Key 1491

2.
3.
4.
5.

5.10
 1.

5.11
 1.

5.12
 1.

5.13
 1.

5.14
 1. Henry has 42 books.

5.15
 1. Total cost is $48.85

5.16
 1. Answers will vary. For example: You can rent a paddleboard for $25 per hour with a water shoe purchase of $75. If
      you spent $200, how many hours did you rent the paddle board for?
      You rented the paddle board for 5 hours.

5.17          , which is false; therefore, this is a false statement, and the equation has no solution.
 1.

5.18          , which is true; therefore, this is a true statement, and there are infinitely many solutions.
 1.

5.19
 1.

5.20
 1.

5.21

 1.

5.22
 1.
      Graph:

5.23
1492 Answer Key

 1.

5.24
 1.

5.25
 1. Taleisha can send/receive 106 or fewer text messages and keep her monthly bill no more than $50.

5.26
 1. You could take up to 17 credit hours and stay under $2,000.

5.27
 1. Malik must tutor at least 23 hours.

5.28

1. = 1 U.S. dollar, and = 1.21 Canadian dollars, the ratio is 1 to 1.21; or 1:1.21; or  .

5.29
 1. With = 170 pounds on Earth, and = 64 pounds on Mars, the ratio is 170 to 64; or 170:64; or .

5.30
 1. $219.51

5.31
 1. 501.6 pounds

5.32
 1. 720 cookies

5.33
 1. The constant of proportionality (centimeters divided by inches) is 2.54. This tells you that there are 2.54 centimeters
      in one inch.

5.34
 1. 30.5 hours (or 30½ hours, or 30 hours and 30 minutes)

5.35
 1. $207.50

5.36
 1. 125.9 miles

5.37

1. The scale is                        . The other borders would calculate as: eastern and western borders are 273.75

      miles, and northern border is 365 miles.

5.38
 1. 184 inches, or 15 feet, 4 inches.

5.39

Access for free at openstax.org
                Answer Key 1493

 1.
5.40

 1.
        I. Yes
       II. Yes

 2.
        I. No
       II. No

 3.
        I. Yes
       II. Yes

 4.
        I. Yes
       II. Yes

5.41

 1.
5.42
1494 Answer Key

 1.
      Your friend will pay $1.65.

5.43
 1. Yes
 2. Yes
 3. No
 4. No
 5. No

5.44
 1.

5.45

 1.
5.46

 1.

 2.
 3. Answers will vary.
5.47
 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                         Answer Key 1495

5.48
 1.

5.49
 1.

5.50
 1.

5.51

1.

5.52
 1.

5.53

1.       or

5.54

1.       or

5.55

1.    ,

5.56

1.       ,

5.57

1.    ,

5.58

1.    ,

5.59
 1. 16, 15 and -16, -15

5.60
1496 Answer Key

1.                  ,

5.61
 1. 22
 2. 6
 3.

5.62
 1. There 205 unread emails after 7 days.

5.63
 1. This relation is a function.
 2. This relation is not a function.

5.64                                                         -value is not matched with only one          -value. This relation is
 1. Both George and Mike have two phone numbers. Each
      not a function.

5.65
 1. function
 2. not a function
 3. function

5.66
 1. This graph represents a function.

5.67
 1. This graph does not represent a function.

5.68

1. The domain is the set of all -values of the relation:     .

2. The range is the set of all -values of the relation:         .

5.69

1. The ordered pairs of the relation are:                                .

2. The domain is the set of all -values of the relation:              .

3. The range is the set of all -values of the relation:            .

5.70                                                         -intercept is (2, 0). The graph crosses the  -axis at the point (0,
 1. The graph crosses the -axis at the point (2, 0). The
      -2). The -intercept is (0, -2).

5.71
 1. The -intercept is (4, 0) and the -intercept is (0, 12).

Access for free at openstax.org
                   Answer Key 1497

5.72       and
 1.           and

5.73
 1.

5.74
 1. slope
 2. slope

5.75
1498 Answer Key

 1.
5.76

 1.
5.77

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    Answer Key 1499

1.

5.78

1. (0, 20) is the  and represents that there were 20 teachers at Jones High School in 1990. There is no

         .

2. In the first 5 years the slope is 2; this means that on average, the school gained 2 teachers every year between 1990

      and 1995. Between 1995 and 2000, the slope is 4; on average the school gained 4 teachers every year. Then the

      slope is 0 between 2000 and 2005 meaning the number of teachers remained the same. There was a decrease in

      teachers between 2005 and 2010, represented by a slope of -2. Finally, the slope is 4 between 2010 and 2020, which

      indicates that on average the school gained 4 teachers every year.

3. Answers will vary. Jones High School was founded in 1990 and hired 2 teachers per year until 1995, when they had

      an increase in students and they hired 4 teachers per year for the next 5 years. Then there was a hiring freeze, and

      no teachers were hired between 2000 and 2005. After the hiring freeze, the student population decreased, and they

      lost 2 teachers per year until 2010. Another surge in student population meant Jones High School hired 4 new

      teachers per year until 2020 when they had 80 teachers at the school.

5.79
 1. 50 inches
 2. 66 inches
 3. The slope, 2, means that the height increases 2 inches when the shoe size(s) increases 1 size.
 4. The -intercept means that when the shoe size is 0, the woman's height is 50 inches.

5.80
 1. $25
1500 Answer Key

 2. $85
 3. The slope, 4, means that the weekly cost, , increases by $4 when the number of pizzas sold, , increases by 1. The

        -intercept means that when the number of pizzas sold is 0, the weekly cost is $25.

 4. Graph:
5.81

 1. No
 2. Yes
5.82
 1. No
 2. No
5.83

 1.
5.84

 1. (3, 2)
5.85

 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1501

5.86
 1. There is no solution to this system.

5.87
 1. There are infinitely many solutions to this system.

5.88
 1. Jenna burns 8.3 calories per minute circuit training and 11.2 calories per minute while on the elliptical trainer.

5.89
 1. not a solution
 2. a solution

5.90
 1. The region containing (0, 0) is the solution to the system of linear inequalities.

5.91
 1. The solution is the darkest shaded region.

5.92
 1. The solution is the lighter shaded region.
1502 Answer Key

5.93
 1. No solution.

5.94
 1. The solution is the lighter shaded region.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               Answer Key 1503

5.95
 1.

2.            is not in the solution region. Omar would not choose to eat 3 hamburgers and 2 cookies.
3. The point  is in the solution region. Omar might choose to eat 2 hamburgers and 4 cookies.
4. The point

5.96      the number of bags of apples sold, and  the number of bunches of bananas sold, the objective function
 1. With         .
      is

5.97
 1.

5.98

1. The constraints are  and                       . The summary is:  ,  , and                          .

5.99
1504 Answer Key

 1. The constraints are:
      So the system is:

5.100

1. The maximum value for the profit occurs when               and      . This means that to maximize their profit, the

     Robotics Club should sell 15 bags of apples and 5 bunches of bananas every day.

Check Your Understanding

1.           ,

2.        ,

3.

4.

5.

6.

7. multiplication

8. division

9. It is a correct solution strategy.

     Let

10. It is a correct solution strategy.
      Let

11. This is not a correct solution strategy. The negative sign is not distributed correctly in the second line of the solution

     strategy. The second line should read                             .

12.

13. $40.40

14.

15. $40.20

16. The Enjoyable Cab Company, because the cab fare will be $ 0.20 less than what it would cost to take a taxi from the

     Nice Cab Company.

17. Luis is; there are infinitely many solutions. If this is solved using the general strategy, it simplifies to  . This is a

     true statement, so there are infinitely many solutions.

18. d

19. b              , although d             is an equivalent formula.
20. a

21. b

22. d
23. b
24. c

25. a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      Answer Key 1505

26. e                                                                 miles. While in theory he can make it, he
27. b
28. c
29. c
30. b
31. d
32. a True
33. a True
34. a True
35. b False
36. a True
37.
38.
39. 324.00 British pounds (None of these.)
40. 10 inches
41. Yes he can, but barely. At 37 miles per gallon, Albert can drive

      probably should fill up with gasoline somewhere along the way!
42.
43. d

44.
45. b

46.
47. b
48. d
49. b
50. c
51. d
52. b False
53. b False
54. a True
55. b False
1506 Answer Key

56.
57. a True
58. b False
59. b False
60. a True
61. b False
62. a True
63. b False
64. b False
65. a True
66. b False
67. Elimination
68. Substitution
69. Substitution
70. Elimination
71. Substitution
72. Elimination
73. Elimination
74. Substitution
75. c
76. e
77. d
78. b
79. a
80. c
81. a
82. b
83. d
84. a
85. c
86. d

87.
88. b
89.

Chapter 6

Your Turn

6.1
 1.
 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      Answer Key 1507

 3.
 4.

6.2
 1. 0.09
 2. 0.24
 3. 0.0218

6.3
 1. 41%
 2. 2%
 3. 924.81%

6.4
 1. 338
 2. 2058.75

6.5
 1. 250
 2. 6,000

6.6
 1. 62.5%
 2. 40%

6.7
 1. $529.50

6.8
 1. 66.31%

6.9
 1. 80 bulbs.

6.10
 1. Discount is $496; sale price is $1,054.00
 2. Discount is $2.75; sale price is $24.75

6.11
 1. 35%
 2. 12%

6.12
 1. $13.00
 2. $220.00

6.13
 1. Discount is $330; sale price of the bed is $220.

6.14
 1. 15%

6.15
 1. $59.00

6.16
 1. Markup is $396; retail price is $2,196.00.
 2. Markup is $1.05; retail price is $11.55.
1508 Answer Key

6.17
 1. 58.33%
 2. 200%

6.18
 1. $35.00
 2. $8.99

6.19
 1. The retail price of the bed is $1,260.00.

6.20
 1. 24%

6.21
 1. $38.00

6.22
 1. Sales tax is $104.93; total price is $1,603.93.
 2. Sales tax is $1.88; total price is $28.77.

6.23
 1. Sales tax rate = 5.25%
 2. Sales tax rate = 6.75%

6.24
 1. $145.78
 2. $489.00

6.25
 1. Sales tax is $111.22. The total price Daryl pays is $1,260.22.

6.26
 1. The sales tax is $9.

6.27
 1. Interest = $2,409.99, the loan payoff is $9,109.99
 2. Interest = $8,901, the loan payoff is $34,701.00

6.28
 1. She will pay $878.75 in interest, total repayment is $10,378.75.

6.29
 1. He will pay $727.86 in interest, payoff is $9,127.86.

6.30
 1. The cost to borrow is $115.51 and their payoff is $3,815.51.

6.31                             = $4,753.80
 1. Interest = $253.8,            = $2,406.00
 2. Interest = $406.00,            = $121,019.18
 3. Interest= $1019.18,           = $4,933.89
 4. Interest = $253.89,

6.32
 1. Mia will receive $6,254.85.

6.33

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1509

 1. $846.58
 2. $172.91

6.34
 1. $709.59
 2. $13,182.74

6.35
 1. $2,313.74

6.36
 1. $443.90

6.37
 1. $14,285.72. $14,285.72 needs to be invested so that, after 10 years at 7.5% interest, the investment will be worth
      $25,000.
 2. $97,709.93. $97,709.93 needs to be invested so that, after 35 years at 6.5% interest, the investment will be worth
      $320,000.
 3. $48,813.56. $48,813.56 needs to be invested so that, after 270 months at 3.75% interest, the investment will be
      worth $90,000.

6.38
 1. $10,549.46

6.39
 1. The CD is worth $5,627.54 after 4 years.

6.40
 1. CD would have been worth $5,600. Oksana earned $27.54 more with compound interest.

6.41
 1. $11,443.81
 2. $26,551.23

6.42
 1. $5,813.64

6.43
 1. $3,555.88

6.44
 1. $100,811.07
 2. $82,135.75

6.45
 1. $96,271.23

6.46
 1. A rate of 7% compounded quarterly is equivalent to a simple interest rate of 7.19%.

6.47
 1. The effective annual yield is 2.53%.

6.48
 1. The effective annual yields for the banks are 3.1158% for Smith Bank, 3.11% for Park Bank, 3.1381% for Town Bank,
      and 3.144% for Community Bank. Community Bank has the best yield.

6.49
1510 Answer Key

1. Mateo's budget is below.      Expense      Amount
     Income Source Amount

Electrician $3,375.00 Mortgage                $987

Side jobs        $300.00 Truck payment $589

                                 Truck insurance $312

                                 Utilities    $167

                                 Clothing     $150

                                 Entertainment $400

                                 Credit Card  $325

                                 Food         $470

                                 Gasoline     $375

His total monthly income is $3,675.00, and his monthly expenses are $3,775. Mateo falls $100.00 short each month.

6.50                             Expense      Amount
 1. Maddy's budget is below.

       Income Source Amount

Engineer         $6,093.75       Mortgage     $1,452.89

                                 Car payment $627.38

                                 Car insurance $179.00

                                 Health Insurance $265.00

                                 Utilities    $320.00

                                 Clothing     $150.00

                                 Entertainment $400.00

                                 Credit Card  $450.00

                                 Food         $370.00

                                 Gasoline     $175.00

Her total monthly income is $6,093.75, and her monthly expenses are $4,389.27. Maddy has $1,704.48 in extra
income per month. This is her cushion in the budget.

6.51                             Expense Amount
 1. Heather's budget is now

       Income Source Amount

Nursing          $3,765.40 Mortgage $1,240

Part-time        $672.00 Car Payment $489

                                 Student Loan $728

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          Answer Key 1511

Income Source Amount  Expense Amount

                      Car Insurance $139

                      Utilities    $295

                      Clothing     $150

                      Entertainment $300

                      Credit Card  $200

                      Food         $400

                      Gasoline     $250

      The changes have added $355.00 to her budget. As her extra income is $601.40, she can afford the changes.

6.52
 1. Heather's total income is $4,437.40.
      For the necessities, Heather should budget $2,218.70.
      For her wants, she should budget $1,331.22.
      For savings and extra debt service, she should budget $887.48.
      Her necessities total $3,536.00, which exceeds the suggested budget amount of $2,218.70.
      Her wants total $300.00, which is below the suggested budget amount of $1,331.22.
      Her excess income is $601.40, which is below the suggested budget amount of $887.48.
      Heather should make some changes.

6.53
 1. Elijah should budget $1,631.72 for needs, $979.03 for wants, and $652.69 for savings and debt service. When
      choosing where to live, what to eat, and what to drive, he should make choices that keep those costs, combined with
      debt service costs, gasoline, and utilities, below $1,631.72. This means he will have to make decisions about what his
      priorities are. Elijah should then figure out his wants, and stay within the limits here, that is, keep those costs below
      $979.03. Finally, he can begin to build his savings with the remaining $652.69.

6.54
 1. Her monthly income is $3,641.66.
      Needs (50%): $1,820.83, Wants (30%): $1,092.50, Savings (20%): $728.33
 2. $1,061.83
 3. $1,092.50, $728.33
 4. She only has budgeted $1,061.83 for other necessities. It is difficult to imagine Fran being able to afford to change
      jobs and move, unless she reallocates money that she would want to save or use for entertainment or takes on
      another job. If Fran uses all the money that the 50-30-20 budget sets aside for savings, she then would have
      $1,790.16 to spend on those other necessities. If she moves away from the 50-30-20 philosophy, she may be able to
      afford the move. However, that means changing her priorities.

6.55
 1. $5,952.97

6.56
 1. $3,741.46

6.57
 1. $8,978.57

6.58
 1. 17.31%
 2. 13.2%
1512 Answer Key

6.59
 1. $42,499.63

6.60
 1. $93,037.59

6.61
 1. $1,227.30

6.62
 1. $237.50 per year, $5,237.50 on maturity date.

6.63
 1. $108,501.30

6.64
 1. 4.28%
 2. 3.29%

6.65
 1. Looking at the table, the current price of a share is $30.68.
 2. The high was $56.28, and the low was $30.05.
 3. August 4, 2022
 4. 4.77%
 5. $4.66

6.66
 1. $336.00

6.67
 1. $52
 2. 2.6%

6.68
 1. $108,352.43

6.69
 1. $1,815.83

6.70
 1. 23.75%

6.71
 1. 4.35%

6.72
 1. 371.74%
 2. 13.8%

6.73
 1. $3,336.13

6.74
 1. Traditional

6.75
 1. $5,460
 2. $10,920

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1513

 3. 100% return on the $5,460 deposit

6.76
 1. $813,128.60
 2. $457,384.83

6.77
 1. $355.91
 2. $62.48

6.78
 1. $213.07
 2. $209.96

6.79
 1. $34,700, 3.79%, 6 years
 2. $539.57
 3. $25,837.42
 4. $104.14
 5. $2,246.62
 6. The amount paid to principal increases each month

6.80
 1. $6,437.18

6.81
 1. $9,745

6.82
 1. Tiana can take out $12,500, the maximum in year 6.

6.83
 1. Gap = $10,850, Federal loans = $7,500, Remaining $3,350

6.84
 1. $2,987.63

6.85
 1. $82.70
 2. $137.42

6.86
 1. $259.69

6.87
 1. There is no impact on Ryann's interest rate. The total Ryann pays back increases since the interest is extended to
      more periods.

6.88
 1. $188.03

6.89
 1. $5,310

6.90
 1. $11,735
 2. $97.80
1514 Answer Key

6.91
 1. Store-issued credit cards
 2. Fees (both annual and penalty fees), reward programs, credit limits
 3. Travel and entertainment cards

6.92
 1. April 01 2015 to April 30 2015
 2. $9,000.00
 3. $5.99

6.93
 1. $567.32

6.94
 1. $22.64
 2. $13.49
 3. $77.77

6.95
 1. $566.44
 2. $3,267.17

6.96
 1. $1,152.35

6.97
 1. $47.47
 2. $84.00
 3. $19.90

6.98
 1. $33,838.48

6.99
 1. $32,777.75

6.100
 1. $436.70
 2. $649.47

6.101
 1. $1,516.05

6.102
 1. $10,567.00

6.103
 1. $401.05

6.104
 1. 6.25%
 2.

6.105
 1. $74.49
 2. $1,015.25

6.106

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     Answer Key 1515

 1. Purchase
 2. Purchase

6.107
 1. Personal injury protection
 2. Liability insurance

6.108
 1. $593.36

6.109
 1. $42.02

6.110
 1. $949.72

6.111
 1. $319,620.60

6.112
 1. $93,741.60

6.113
 1. 6.1%
 2. $1,383.61
 3. $730.38
 4. $723.66
 5. $133,513.05
 6. Payment 225

6.114
 1. $1,521.20

6.115
 1. $47,280

6.116
 1. $80,300

6.117
 1. $39,700

6.118
 1. $25

6.119
 1. Refund of $1,920

6.120
 1. FICA is $244.80, SSI is $198.40

6.121
 1. $9,114

6.122
 1. $11,787

6.123
1516 Answer Key

1. His credits exceed his taxes owed, so he receives a refund, which is for $1,673.94.

Check Your Understanding

 1. 100
 2. 0.387
 3. 190.4
 4. 834.15 (rounded to two decimal places)
 5. 24.07%
 6. 16 new drivers will be hired.
 7. a reduction in price
 8. the amount a retailer adds to the cost of goods to cover overhead and profit
 9. $30.60
10. $497.60
11. Yes
12. $42.67
13. Interest is money paid by a borrower to a lender for the privilege of borrowing money.
14. The amount borrowed is the principal.
15. $1,169.10
16. $11,374.87
17. $266.82
18. $21,818.19
19. interest that is earned on both the principal and the interest from previous periods
20. compound
21. $15,698.69
22. $405.62
23. $30,266.48
24. Compare their effective annual yield.
25. 4.98%
26. A budget is an estimation of income and expenses over some period of time.
27. Expenses that represent basic living requirement and debt service.

28. Income Amount                Expenses  Amount
           Job $3,450.00            Rent   $925.00

                                 Car payment $178.54

                                 Car insurance $129.49

                                 Credit card $117.00

                                 Gas       $195.00

                                 Food      $290.00

                                 Amazon Prime $21.99

                                 Internet  $49.99

                                 Going out $400.00

                                 Total     $2,307.01

29. $1,142.99
30. David should allocate $1,735 to necessary expenses, $1,035 to expenses that are wants, and $690 to savings and

      extra debt service.
31. David spends $1,835.03 on necessary expenses, which is fairly close to the 50-30-20 budget philosophy guidelines.

      He spends $471.98 on expenses that are wants, which is well below the guideline of $1,035. He has $1,149.99 in
      extra income, which is well above the savings and debt service guidelines.
32. A deposit account, held at a bank or other financial institution, which bears some interest on the deposited money.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1517

33. Once money is deposited in a CD, the money cannot be withdrawn until the end of the CD period.
34. A money market account is more flexible. Transactions can be made after creating the money market account.
35. $8,549.93
36. 25.6%
37. $21,441.03
38. $2,030.65
39. Stocks
40. Income must be below a threshold for a person to use a Roth IRA.
41. They invest in different investment vehicles so that no single investment can have a large impact on the value of the

      mutual fund.
42. Each year, the holder of the bond receives $200. For 10 years, that's $2,000 total earned with the bond.
43. Yes
44. $3,500, which is 4% of her income
45. $114.00
46. 9.93%
47. $5,207.59
48. Varies
49. Loan with a fixed period, and the borrower pays a fixed amount per period until the loan is paid off
50. More is applied to the principal.
51. $59.11
52. $2,233.12
53. $42,962.51
54. $39,544.50
55. Spring (March) before the start of the fall term
56. 9 years
57. The difference between the cost of college (including books, fees, room and board, etc.) and all non-loan financial

      aid they receive
58. In subsidized loans, the interest does not accrue while the student is still in school. In unsubsidized student loans,

      the interest begins accruing as soon as the money is disbursed.
59. $31,000
60. $13,028.61
61. 10 years
62. 10%
63. Bank issued, store issued, charge (Travel/entertainment) cards
64. Store issued
65. Due date, minimum payment due, and balance due
66. $19.30
67. $4,104.27
68. $696.21
69. Cost of delivering the vehicle to the dealer
70. Registers your car with the state, gets the license plate, and assigns the title of the car to the lender
71. $628.89
72. Interest rate higher loan term shorter
73. Title and registration, documentation fee, sales tax
74. $333.34
75. 3.75%
76. Purchasing
77. Cover the damage caused to your car if involved in an accident with another vehicle
78. Buying
79. Renting
80. Buying
81. Mortgage
82. $663.32
83. $129,802.20
84. $554.06
85. Escrow
86. Any and all income, including wages, salary, interest earned, gifts, and winnings
87. After deductions are subtracted
1518 Answer Key

88. $37,000
89. After taxes are calculated, credits are subtracted from taxes owed.
90. No, only for up to $147,000
91. $4,813
92. $1,600

Chapter 7

Your Turn

7.1
 1.

7.2
 1.

7.3
 1.

7.4
 1. 120

7.5
 1. 720
 2. 132
 3. 70

7.6
 1. 30
 2. 24,024
 3. 5,814

7.7
 1.

7.8
 1. combination
 2. combination

7.9
 1. 15
 2. 45
 3. 2,002

7.10
 1. 30,856
 2. 111,930

7.11
 1. 290,004

7.12
 1.
 2. {A, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, J, Q, K}
 3. {1, 2, 3, 4}
 4. {3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12}

7.13
 1. Independent

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      Answer Key 1519

 2. Dependent

7.14
 1. {H1, H2, H3, H4, H5, H6, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, T6}

7.15
 1. {J Q , J K , Q J , Q K , K J , K Q }

7.16
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.17
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.18
 1.

7.19
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.20
 1.

7.21
 1. theoretical
 2. subjective
 3. empirical

7.22
 1.

7.23
 1.

7.24
 1.

 2.

7.25                  and the odds against are .
 1.
 2.

7.26
 1. The odds for are

7.27
 1.
 2.
1520 Answer Key

7.28
 1. Mutually exclusive
 2. Not mutually exclusive
 3. Mutually exclusive

7.29
 1.
 2. Not appropriate; the events are not mutually exclusive.
 3.

7.30
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.31
 1.

 2.
 3.

7.32
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.33        Probability
 1. Roll
         1

      2

      3

      4

      5

      6

7.34
 1. Not binomial (more than two outcomes)
 2. Not binomial (not independent)
 3. Binomial
 4. Not binomial (number of trials isn't fixed)

7.35
 1. 0.146
 2. 0.190
 3. 0.060

7.36
 1. 0.2972
 2. 0.6615

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              Answer Key 1521

3. 0.0919
4. 0.5207
5. 0.3643

7.37  = $6.25
 1.
 2.
 3.

7.38
 1. If you roll the special die many times, the mean of the numbers showing will be around 3.33.
 2. If you repeat the coin-flipping experiment many times, the mean of the number of heads you get will be around 1.5.
 3. If you play this game many times, the mean of your winnings will be around $10.

7.39

1. If the player bets on 7, the expected value is   .

2. If the player bets on 12, the expected value is         .

3. If the player bets on any craps, the expected value is     .

      The best bet for the player is any craps; the best bet for the casino is the bet on 7.

Check Your Understanding                                     Curly Fries                 Onion Rings
                                                    8 nuggets with curly fries  8 nuggets with onion rings
 1. 540
 2. 14
 3. 1,024
 4. 800
 5. 25,920
 6. 120
 7. 120
 8. 1,320
 9. 1,680
10.
11. permutations
12. combinations
13. 66
14. 560
15. 20
16. 560
17. {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

18. Crinkle Fries

        8 Nuggets 8 nuggets with crinkle fries

      12 Nuggets 12 nuggets with crinkle fries 12 nuggets with curly fries 12 nuggets with onion rings
1522 Answer Key

19.
20. {8 nuggets with crinkle fries, 8 nuggets with curly fries, 8 nuggets with onion rings, 12 nuggets with crinkle fries, 12

      nuggets with curly fries, 12 nuggets with onion rings}
21. {history with Anderson, history with Burr, English with Carter, sociology with Johnson, sociology with Kirk, sociology

      with Lambert}
22.
23.
24.
25. 0
26. theoretically
27. subjectively
28. empirically
29.
30. 89.9%
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  Answer Key 1523

54.

55.

56. No (more than two outcomes)
57. Yes
58. No (number of trials is not fixed)
59. 0.9453
60. 0.1366
61. 0.8230
62. 4.1
63. If you roll this die many times, the mean of the numbers rolled will be around 4.1.
64. $0.417
65. If you play this game many times, the mean of the amount won/lost each time will be about 42 cents.
66. Yes; the expected value is positive.

Chapter 8

Your Turn

8.1
 1. None of the above (there's no sample being selected here; the entire population is being surveyed)
 2. Stratified random sample (the strata are the different majors)
 3. Simple random sample

8.2
 1.

     Major              Frequency

     Biology               6

     Education             1

     Political Science     3

     Sociology             2

     Undecided             4

8.3
 1.

     Number of people in the residence Frequency

                        1          12

                        2          13

                        3          8

                        4          6

                        5          1

8.4
 1.
1524 Answer Key

     Age range Frequency

     25-29              2

     30-34              6

     35-39              2

     40-44              4

     45-49              1

     50-54              2

     55-59              2

     60-64              0

     65-70              1

     (Answers may vary depending on bin boundary decisions)

8.5

1. Major Frequency Proportion

     Biology                     6  37.5%

     Education                   1  6.3%

     Political Science           3  18.8%

     Sociology                   2  12.5%

     Undecided                   4  25%

      Note that these percentages add up to 100.1%, due to the rounding.
8.6

 1.
8.7

 1. Southeast
 2. Just over 10%

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 Answer Key 1525

 3. Outlying Areas and Rocky Mtns.
8.8

 1.
8.9

 1. Twenty-four
 2. The longest commutes are 60, 50, and 36 miles; the shortest are 4, 6, and 7 miles.
 3. 4, 6, 7, 10, 10, 10, 12, 12, 12, 14, 15, 18, 18, 20, 25, 25, 25, 30, 30, 35, 35, 36, 50, 60
8.10
 1.

       47
       5 974
       6 987
       7 8752210
       8 965441
       9 776331
       10 7 6 3 1

8.11

 1.
8.12

 1. Answers may vary based on bin choices. Here's the result for bins of width 2,500:
1526 Answer Key

      The data are strongly right-skewed.
8.13

 1.
8.14

 1. Top ten teams by wins:

Access for free at openstax.org
Answer Key 1527
1528 Answer Key

8.15
 1. There are two modes: 89 and 104, each of which appears three times.

8.16
 1. 2

8.17
 1. 136

8.18
 1. 82.5

8.19
 1. 2

8.20
 1. 12.556

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1529

8.21
 1.

8.22
 1. Modes: 72, 84, 93, 97
      Median: 82.5
      Mean: 80.967 (rounded to three decimal places)

8.23
 1. Mode or median
 2. Median or mean
 3. Median or mean

8.24
 1. 67

8.25
 1.

8.26
 1.

8.27
 1. $13,333.77.

8.28
 1. 15
 2. 70th percentile

8.29
 1. 1026
 2. 1318
 3. 82.7th
 4. 99.2nd

8.30
 1. $3,120
 2. $26,465.20
 3. 32.3rd
 4. 98.5th

8.31
 1. The red (leftmost) distribution has mean 11, the blue (middle) has mean 13, and the yellow (rightmost) has mean
      14.

8.32
 1. 6

8.33
 1. Mean: 150; standard deviation: 20

8.34
 1. 99.7%
 2. 95%
 3. 68%

8.35
 1. 65 and 75
1530 Answer Key

 2. 26 and 54
 3. 110 and 290

8.36
 1. 47.5%
 2. 15.85%
 3. 81.5%

8.37
 1.

8.38
 1. -44
      30
      6

8.39
 1. 80th
      9th
      97th

8.40
 1. 3.9
      6.3
      2.9

8.41
 1. 1.29
 2. 94.5th
 3. An LSAT score of 161 is better

8.42
 1. 72
 2. 6
 3. 93rd

8.43
 1. Using NORM.INV: 1092.8
      Using PERCENTILE: 1085

8.44
 1. Income
 2. Either; neither one seems to directly influence the other (they're both influenced by the student's academic ability)
 3. GPA

8.45

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          Answer Key 1531

 1.
8.46

1.

8.47       No curved pattern
 1.        Strong negative relationship,
       a.
       b.

2.
     a. Curved pattern

3.
     a. No curved pattern
     b. No apparent relationship,

4.
     a. No curved pattern
     b. Weak positive relationship,

8.48       Not appropriate
 1.
       1.
       2.
       3.
       4.

8.49
1532 Answer Key

1.

8.50
 1.

8.51
 1.
 2. 26.68
 3. Predicted: 28; actual: 18. The Phillies were caught around 10 fewer times than expected.
 4. Every 10 additional steal attempts will result in getting caught about 1.7 times on average.

8.52

1.                               , where x is the proportion of made field goals and y is the proportion of made three-point

      field goals

2. 0.347

3. Predicted: 0.340; actual: 0.368. The Aces made about 2.8% more of their three-point shots than expected.

4. An increase of 1% in made field goal attempts will result in an expected increase of 0.55% in made three-point field

      goal attempts.

Check Your Understanding

1. Randomization is being used; cluster random sample.
2. No randomization is being used.
3. Randomization is being used; stratified random sample.

4. Genre Frequency

      Cooking         1

      Non-fiction     3

      Romance         4

      Thriller        3

      True Crime      3

      Young Adult     6

5. Number of classes Frequency

          1                      1

          2                      3

          3                      16

          4                      8

          5                      4

6. Range of Cell Phone Subscriptions Per Hundred People Frequency

                                 0.0 - 24.9                1

                                 25.0 - 49.9               3

                                 50.0 - 74.9               1

                                 75.0 - 99.9               6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                Answer Key 1533

Range of Cell Phone Subscriptions Per Hundred People Frequency

                              100.0 - 124.9                 7

                              125.0 - 149.9                 3

                              150.0 - 174.9                 3

                              175.0 - 199.9                 1

(Note: Answers may vary based on choices made about bins.)

7.

8.
9. 12 7

      13 0 2 3 6 6 7 8 9 9
      14 1 2 3 3 6 8 8
      15 3 3 5 6 6 6 7 7 8 8
      16 4 7 8
1534 Answer Key

10.

11.
                                                                 (data source:https://data.ed.gov/)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     Answer Key 1535

12.
                                                                (data source: https://data.ed.gov/)

                    (data source: https://data.ed.gov/)

13. Mode: 112
      Median: 113
      Mean: 112.64

14. 3
15. 3
16.

17. 156
18. 147
19. 147.2
1536 Answer Key

20. Mode: not useful; every value appears only once
      Median: 0.322
      Mean: 0.3612

21. Mode: not useful; every value appears only once
      Median: $42,952
      Mean: $42924.78

22. Mode: $13,380
      Median: $11,207
      Mean: $15,476.79

23. Since the data are right skewed, the mean will be bigger than the mean. Thus, the workers would rather use the
      median, while the management will prefer the mean.

24. 9

25.

26.
27. 11.306
28. Range:
29. Standard deviation: 0.170
30. Range:
31. Standard deviation: $398.37
32. 18
33. 14
34. 80th
35. 60th
36. 71.7
37. 101.2
38. 70.25
39. 51.7th
40. 79.3rd
41. 13.8th
42. 95%
43. 34%
44. 84th
45. 0.583
46. 71.2
47. 72nd
48. 115.38
49. 27th
50. 23.2
51. 1300 on the SAT

52.  ;

53. 96.6th
54. 57
55. PERCENTILE gives 20.86; NORM.INV gives 21.11.
56. PERCENTILE gives 11.82; NORM.INV gives 11.68.
57. PERCENTRANK gives 92.6th; NORM.DIST gives 91.9th.
58. PERCENTRANK gives 77th; NORM.DIST gives 79.2nd.

59.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1537

60.
       a. Yes

61.
       a. No
       b. Weak positive relationship;

62. 0.96
63.
64. $7,475
65. Less than expected by $1,495.68
66. For every $1,000 increase in out-of-state tuition, we expect average monthly salary to increase by $161.

Chapter 9

Your Turn

9.1
 1. gram (g)
 2. meter (m)
 3. liter (L)

9.2
 1. kilogram, hectogram, decagram

9.3
 1. 2.5 m

9.4
 1. 245 cm

9.5
 1. 0.76 daL

9.6
 1. 145.7 cg

9.7
 1. 1.25 L

9.8
 1. Yes, 352 mg of caffeine is equal to 0.352 g, which is less than 0.5 g.

9.9
 1. Since 3,810 m is 3.81 km, Kyrie's skydive was at a greater altitude.

9.10
 1. km2

9.11
 1. 1,800 cm2

9.12
 1. Yes. The unit of value, cm2, is appropriate given the size of a sheet of paper. Because the total area of 2,412.89 cm2
      represents four sheets of paper, each sheet is approximately 600 cm2, which seems reasonable for a sheet of letter-
      size paper.

9.13
 1. 153.29 m2
1538 Answer Key

9.14
 1. 1,365,000 cm2

9.15
 1. 1.06 m2

9.16
 1. 34 m2

9.17
 1. 1,250 m2

9.18
 1. 70 m2

9.19
 1. 8 m3

9.20
 1. 40,000 cm2

9.21

1. Yes. The unit of value, mm3, may be appropriate given the size of the paperweight. The volume of 125,000 mm3 is

      equivalent to a volume of 125 cm3, which would represent a cubic box with dimensions of  .

9.22
 1. 8,000 mm3

9.23
 1. 37,854,000 cm3

9.24
 1. 465 m3

9.25
 1. 19 L

9.26
 1. 37,854 L

9.27
 1. 800 mL

9.28
 1. 100,000 boxes

9.29
 1. 6,000 boxes

9.30
 1. 18.75 L

9.31
 1. 2.5 g

9.32
 1. 1,300 kg

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1539

9.33
 1. A reasonable value for the weight of an Etruscan shrew is 2 g. A 2 L bottle of water weighs 2 kg, and since it is one of
      the smallest mammals, the shrew must weigh less than that, so 2 g seems reasonable.

9.34
 1. 0.175 kg

9.35
 1. 4,869 g

9.36
 1. 1,230,000 mg

9.37
 1. 7.5 mL

9.38
 1. 5 kg

9.39
 1. 111,111 potatoes

9.40
 1. 250 °C

9.41
 1. 167 °F

9.42
 1. Since Toronto has a temperature of 14.1 °C, Madrid has the higher temperature by 2.6 °C.

9.43
 1. Recall that water boils at 100 °C. The more reasonable value for the temperature of the mixture is 148 °C. So, 48 °C is
      not sufficient to bring the mixture to a boil.

9.44
 1. 37 °C

9.45
 1. 60 °C

9.46
 1. -2 °C

9.47
 1. 63 °C

9.48
 1. 180 minutes, or 1 hour and 30 minutes

Check Your Understanding

 1. meter
 2. grams
 3. 12 hectoliters
 4. 15.20 m or 15.2 m
 5. 134 dam
 6. 1.27 hg
 7. 750,000,000 mm
1540 Answer Key

 8. They are equal in size.
 9. 12 m2
10. 1,200 m2
11. 2.5 m2
12. 2
13. 57,000
14. 21,700
16. 50,000 cm3
17. 236 mL
18. 1,500 cm3
19. 42.5
20. 1,500
21. 6,750
22. 800
23. 10.2
24. 163.52
25. 50 g
26. 180 kg
27. 624 g
28. 8.9
29. 17,000
30. 70
31. 0.144
32. 196,000
33. 0.09
34. 28.5 °F
35. 20 °C
36. 71.1 °C
37. 210
38. 100
39. 35
40. 107
41. 81
42. 399

Chapter 10

Your Turn

10.1  is the ray that starts at point and extends infinitely in the direction of point .
 1.   represents the line segment that starts at point and ends at point .
 2.   represents the ray that starts at point and extends infinitely in the direction of point .
 3.

4.    represents a line that contains the points and . Notice the arrowheads on both ends of the line above ,

      which means that the line continues infinitely in both directions.

10.2

1. Answers will vary. One way    ; Second way                                                     .

10.3
 1.

10.4
 1.
 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 Answer Key 1541

3.

10.5

1. Point is located at     ; Point is located at       ; Point is located at  ; Point is located at             ;

      Point is located at  ; Point is located at  .

2. Points and are on the straight line .

3. The line that begins at point in the direction of point is a ray, .

4. The line from point to point is a line segment .

5. Yes, this represents a plane. One reason is that the figure contains four points that are not on the line .

10.6       intersects with plane          , and plane  intersects with plane  .
 1. Plane

10.7
 1. Acute Angles Obtuse Angles Right Angles Straight Angles

10.8       ,               ,
 1.
           ,               ,
10.9
           ,               ,
 1.        ,

10.10

 1. 

10.11
 1.

10.12

 1. 

10.13

 1. 

10.14

 1. 
      
      
      
      

10.15
1542 Answer Key

1.            ,                  ,

10.16         ;                  ;

 1. 

10.17

1. Triangle        is congruent to triangle  .

10.18
 1. SAS

10.19
 1. ASA

10.20
 1. The triangles are similar.

10.21

1.         ,

10.22
 1. The tree is 86 feet high.

10.23
 1. 60 ft

10.24
 1. rectangle
 2. pentagon
 3. heptagon
 4. parallelogram

10.25
 1. Shapes 1, 2, 4, and 6 are triangles; shape 3 is a pentagon; shape 5 is a parallelogram; and shape 7 is a rectangle.

10.26
 1. 120 in

10.27
 1. 22.4 in

10.28
 1.
      The sum of the interior angles is .

10.29                                        . Then,  The other angles measure , , .
 1. We have the sum of interior angles is

10.30
 1.

10.31
 1.

10.32
 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 Answer Key 1543

10.33
 1. You need to buy 15.74 feet of trim.

10.34
 1. The translated hexagon has labels , , , , , .

10.35                                             to the right three times.
 1. Rotate the triangle about the rotation point

10.36

1. This tessellation could be produced with a reflection of the triangle vertically, then each triangle is rotated        and

translated to the right.

10.37

1. From the first square on the left, rotate the square to the right, or         . Then, reflect the square over the

horizontal, or            . Next, reflect all three squares over the vertical line. The lavender triangles comprise

another pattern that tessellates, fits in with the squares, and fills the gaps.

10.38
 1. No

10.39
 1. Not by themselves, but by adding an equilateral triangle, the two regular polygons do tessellate the plane without
      gaps.

10.40
 1. We made a tessellation with a regular decagon (10 sides) and an irregular hexagon. We see that the regular
      decagon will not fill the plane by itself. The gap is filled, however, with an irregular hexagon. These two shapes
      together will fill the plane.

10.41
 1.
1544 Answer Key

10.42
 1. 108 ft2

10.43
 1. 45 boxes at a cost of $2,025.00

10.44
 1.

10.45
 1. 13,671 square feet; cost is $19,872.95.

10.46
 1.

10.47
 1.

10.48
 1. 40 in

10.49
 1.

10.50
 1.

10.51
 1.

10.52
 1. the 15-inch pizza

10.53
 1.

10.54
 1.

10.55
 1. $300

10.56
 1.

10.57
 1.

10.58
 1.

10.59
 1.

10.60

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Answer Key 1545

1.

10.61
 1. approximately 8 1/3 cans of soup

10.62
 1. 6.25 ft by 6.25 ft

10.63                                           $95.26
 1.

10.64
 1.

10.65
 1. 1,140 ft

10.66
 1. The slanted distance will be 120.4 inches.

10.67
 1. The side lengths are

10.68                                                    from the wall.
 1. The ladder reaches 12 feet up the wall and sits

10.69          equals
 1. Each side

10.70
 1.

10.71

1.                        ,

10.72
 1. 2,241 ft

10.73         , one angle is , and the other angle is .
 1.

10.74
 1.

10.75
 1. 46 ft

Check Your Understanding

1. The line containing point and point is a line segment from point to point , , or from point to point ,

       .

2. The line containing points and is a straight line that extends infinitely in both directions and contains points

    and .

3. This is a ray that begins at point , although it does not contain point , and extends in the direction of point .

4.                      . The union of line segment and the line segment contains all points in each line segment
1546 Answer Key

    combined.      . The intersection of the ray and the line segment contains only the points common to each
5.

    set, .

6.                      . The union of the ray starting at point and extending infinitely in the direction of and the ray

     starting at point and extending infinitely in the direction of is the straight line extending infinitely in both

     directions containing points , , , and .

7. Two lines are parallel if the distance between the lines is constant implying that the lines cannot intersect.

8. Perpendicular lines intersect forming a angle between them.

9. Yes, because it contains a line and a point not on the line.

10. straight

11. obtuse

12. right

13. acute

14.                by supplementary angles with 

15.              by vertical angles with the angle measuring

16.                by corresponding angles with 

17.

18.

19.           and

20. These are similar triangles, so we can solve using proportions.

     Then,         and           .

21. Set up the proportions.

     Thus,         and

22. pentagon

23. octagon

24. heptagon

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30. The patterns are repeated shapes that can be transformed in such a way as to fill the plane with no gaps or

      overlaps.
31. Starting with the triangle with the point labeled , the triangle is translated point by point 3 units to the right and 3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       Answer Key 1547

     units up to point . Then, the triangle labeled is translated 3 units to the right and 3 units up to point .

32. The triangle is rotated about the rotation point  to vertex .

33. The dark triangle is reflected about the vertical line showing the light back, and then reflected about the horizontal

     line. The pattern is repeated leaving a white diamond between the shapes.

34. 3.3.3.3.3.3
35. 7.5 cm2

36. 25 ft

37.

38.
39. 201.1 in2

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.
51. 24.2 ft
52.
53.

Chapter 11

Your Turn

11.1
 1. Yes, Joe Biden won the majority.

11.2
 1. Tony Cambell won a plurality of votes in the Republican primary.

11.3
 1. Hearn and Lim tied. Yes, there must be a third election.
 2. Kelly must be removed in the runoff.

11.4
 1. Option B.

11.5
 1.
 2. None
 3. 4

11.6
 1. Using ranked-choice voting, Yoda is determined to be the winner.

11.7
 1. Blue received 78 points.

11.8
 1. Candidate B would be considered the winner using the ranked-choice voting method.
 2. Candidate C would be considered the winner using the Borda count method.
1548 Answer Key

 3. Different candidates won. It appears that the vote counts were so close that a small shift in either direction could
      change the results of either method.

11.9
1.

 2. Bong Joon-ho won according to the pairwise comparison method.
 3. Yes, the winner is a Condorcet candidate.
11.10
 1. Candidate P wins. Candidate P is not a Condorcet candidate because P lost to Candidate Q.
11.11
 1. Candidate C won 25 points.
 2. The greatest number of points another candidate could win is 24 points.
 3. No, Candidate C cannot lose or tie.
11.12
 1. Dough Boys Pizza is the winner for dinner.
11.13
 1. There is a tie between Rainbow China and Dough Boys Pizza.
11.14
 1. Al Gore is the winner.
11.15
 1. Animal Kingdom
 2. Animal Kingdom
 3. Magic Kingdom
11.16
 1. Using the plurality voting method, there would be a tie between Option B and Option C.
 2. Using the ranked-choice voting method, Option B would be the winner.
 3. No, there was not a majority candidate in Round 1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1549

11.17
 1. Using the pairwise comparison voting method, Option B wins.
 2. Using the Borda count method, Option A and Option B tie.
 3. Yes. The majority criterion fails for Borda count.

11.18
 1. Yes, because Option A is a Condorcet candidate.

11.19
 1. Option A. Yes, the Condorcet criterion is satisfied.
 2. Option A. Yes, the Condorcet criterion is satisfied.
 3. Option B. No, the Condorcet criterion is not satisfied.

11.20
 1. Standard Poodle.
 2. Standard Poodle.
 3. This election does not violate the monotonicity criterion.
 4. Increasing the ranking for a winner of a Borda count election on a ballot will increase that candidate's Borda score
      while decreasing another candidate's Borda score, but leaving the remaining candidates' Borda score unchanged.
      So, a Borda count election will never violate the monotonicity criterion.

11.21
 1. Labrador retriever wins the election.
 2. Golden retriever wins the election.
 3. This election violates the monotonicity criterion.
 4. It is possible that the monotonicity criterion would be met in other ranked-choice election scenarios, but overall, the
      ranked-choice voting method is said to fail the monotonicity criterion even if it failed in only one scenario.

11.22
 1. Chihuahua.
 2. Yorkshire Terrier.
 3. Yes, this election violates IIA.

11.23
 1. Jim wins.
 2. Pam wins.
 3. Yes, this is a violation of IIA.

11.24
 1. B ; 0.67, C ; 0.67, D ; 0.67, and E ; 0.67
 2. B ; 1.5, C ; 1.5, D ; 1.5, and E ; 1.5
 3. Yes, the constant ratio is pencils per desk.

11.25
 1. 42 pencils would be allocated.
 2. 42 pencils would be allocated.
 3. 34 desks

11.26
 1. IL 700,000; OH 700,000; MI 700,000; GA 800,000; NC 700,000
 2. IL 0.0000014; OH 0.0000014; MI 0.0000014; GA 0.0000013; NC 0.0000014
 3. IL 0.000001; OH 0.000001; MI 0.000001; GA 0.000001; NC 0.000001
 4. The ratio of State Population to Representative Seats seems to be either 700,000 or 800,000 to 1. There does appear
      to be a constant ratio of about 0.000001 to 1 of Representative Seats to State Population when rounding to six
      decimal places. This is the same as the top five states.

11.27
1550 Answer Key

1. 60,449.4

11.28
 1. The states are the Hernandez family and the Higgins family. The seats are the pieces of candy. The house size is 313.
      The state populations are three in the Hernandez family and four in the Higgins family. The total population is 7.
 2. The standard divisor is the ratio of the number of children to the number of pieces of candy. 0.0224 children per
      piece of candy.

11.29
 1. 0.98

11.30             Family's Standard Quota
 1. Family              175.6667 candies
       Hernandez

Higgins           234.2222 candies

          Ho      117.1111 candies

Total                            527

      The sum is very close to 527.

11.31
 1. 6, 5, 6, 7, 5, 6
 2. 35
 3. No.

11.32
 1. It is not possible to give a fractional part of a gift card. Also, traditional rounding to the nearest integer results in 4
      gift cards for each student, which leaves one extra gift card.

11.33
 1. 30, 18, 20
 2. 68
 3. 2

11.34
 1. The final Hamilton apportionment is Fictionville as follows: 1, Pretendstead 3, Illusionham 5, and Mythbury 26.

11.35
 1. Method V violates the quota rule because State F receives 4 seats instead of 5 or 6.

11.36
 1. 53.33
 2. 480
 3. 96
 4. Answers may vary. With a modified divisor of 0.100, the modified quota is 120.
 5. The modified quota from part 3 was the smallest, because the divisor was the largest of the three. Dividing the same
      number by a larger value gives a smaller result.

11.37
 1. Each state would receive the following seats: Fictionville 1, Pretendstead 2, Illusionham 4, and Mythbury 28.

11.38
 1. Fictionville 2, Pretendstead 3, Illusionham 5, and Mythbury 25.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1551

11.39
 1. The apportionment is Fictionville 2, Pretendstead 2, Illusionham 5, and Mythbury 26.

11.40
 1. The largest state is Mythbury. The citizens would likely favor the Jefferson method of apportionment most since they
      received the most seats by that method. They would likely favor the Adams and Webster methods of apportionment
      least because they received the least number of seats by those method.
 2. As a group the other three states received nine seats by either the Hamilton method, seven seats by the Jefferson
      Method, and ten seats by either the Adams method or the Webster method. They would likely favor the Adams
      method and Webster method most and favor the Jefferson methods least.

11.41
 1. State A loses 0, seats State B loses 0, and State C loses 3.
 2. State A loses 0 seats, State B loses 1, and State C loses 4.
 3. State C, the largest state, loses the most representatives each time the divisor is increased.

11.42
 1. The standard divisor is 214,079.1236 citizens per seat. The standard quota for Colorado is 2.5210 seats.
 2. The standard divisor is 213,479.4622 citizens per seat. The standard quota for Colorado is 2.5281 seats.
 3. The standard quota increased.
 4. It must have been the case that either the fractional part 0.5281 ranked lower amongst the other fractional parts of
      the state quotas than the fractional part 0.5210 did, or there were fewer remaining seats to be distributed, or both.

11.43
 1. The final apportionment is: A 183, B 124, C 14, and D 2, which sums to 323.
 2. The final apportionment is: A 184, B 125, C 13, and D 2, which sums to 324.
 3. Yes, this demonstrates the Alabama paradox because State C receives 14 seats if the house size is 323, but only 13
      seats if the house size is 324.

11.44
 1. Hospital C lost a respirator while hospital A gained a seat, but hospital C has a higher growth rate than hospital A.

11.45
 1. The Hamilton reapportionment is: 19 for Mudston, 13 for WallaWalla, and 6 for Dilberta. This is an example of the
      population paradox because WallaWalla lost a seat to Dilberta, even though WallaWalla's population grew by 2.24
      percent while Dilberta's only grew by 1.56 percent.

11.46
 1. 90
 2. 95
 3. The original state of Beaversdam lost a seat to the original state of Beruna when the new state of Chippingford was
      added.

11.47
 1. The reapportionment gives 38 seats to Neverwood, 46 seats to Mermaids Lagoon, and 9 seats to Marooners Rock.
      This is an example of the new-states paradox because the original state Mermaids Lagoon lost a seat to the original
      state Neverwood when the new state was added to the union.

11.48
 1.

There are  new seats to be apportioned to New Mexico.

11.49
 1. Only Hamilton's method violates the population paradox.
1552 Answer Key

Check Your Understanding

 1. Answers may vary. Example: Ranked-choice, Borda count, and pairwise comparison.
 2. True.
 3. True
 4. Borda count
 5. Pairwise comparison
 6. Hare
 7. In two-round voting, only the top two candidates from Round 1 move on to Round 2, and there are only two rounds.

      In ranked-choice voting, all candidates except those in last place move on to the next round, and there can be many
      rounds of voting.
 8. (Independence of) Irrelevant Alternatives Criterion
 9. Pairwise comparison
10. Borda count method
11. Pairwise comparison
12. All of them: Plurality, ranked-choice, pairwise comparison, and Borda count
13. True, because a majority candidate is always the Condorcet candidate.
14. False, because the ranked-choice method violates the Condorcet criterion, but it doesn't violate the majority
      criterion.
15. No. Arrow's Impossibility Theorem does not apply to approval voting because it is not a ranked voting system
16. False. Arrow's Impossibility Theorem says that no ranked voting system is perfect and that voter profiles may arise
      that will lead to a violation of one or more fairness criteria, but it does not guarantee that those voter profiles will
      occur or are even likely to occur.
17. True. Candidates are rated as approved or not approved, and voters can give multiple candidates the same rating.
18. Student 1 is correct.
19. Both are correct.
20. Neither are correct.
21. Neither are correct.
22. Student 2 is correct.
23. Student 2 is correct.
24. Both are correct.
25. The Hamilton method.
26. The Hamilton method.
27. The Jefferson method.
28. The Adams method.
29. The Adams method.
30. The Hamilton and Jefferson methods.
31. Webster's method.
32. Larger
33. The Alabama paradox
34. Population paradox
35. Quota rule violation
36. None of these
37. New-states paradox
38. The population paradox could occur.
39. The Alabama paradox could occur.
40. The new-state paradox could occur.

Chapter 12

Your Turn

12.1
 1. The vertices are p, q, r, s, and t. The edges are pq, pr, pt, qr, qs, qt, rs, and st.

12.2
 1. The pairs that are not adjacent are p and s, p and t, and r and t.

12.3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Answer Key 1553

 1. Vertex q

12.4
 1. Graph Representing Common Boundaries Between Regions of Oahu

12.5
 1. The objects that are represented with vertices are poker players. An edge between a pair of vertices would indicate
      the two players competed against each other at table. This is best represented as a graph because players from the
      same table never meet a second time. Also, a player cannot compete against themself; so, there is no need for a
      loop.

12.6
 1. Graph E, 34
 2. Graph D, 18
 3. higher

12.7
 1. 3
 2. Answers may vary. Two possible graphs are shown.
      Graph 1:

      Graph 2:

12.8
 1. 124,750 introductions

12.9
 1.

12.10
 1. Triangle: (a, b, e or a, d, e)
      Quadrilateral: (b, c, d, e or a, b, e, d)
      Pentagon: (a, b, c, d, e)

12.11
1554 Answer Key

 1. (B, D, C, E, F)

12.12
 1. 186

12.13
 1. Graph C1 has 6 edges, but Graph C2 has 8.
      Graph C1 has 4 vertices and Graph C2 has 5.
      Graph C1 has no vertex of degree 4, but Graph C2 has one vertex of degree 4.
      They do not have the same cycles. For example, Graph C2 has a pentagon cycle, but Graph C1 does not.

12.14
 1. Answers may vary.
  · The total number of vertices in each graph is different. The Diamonds graph has 17 vertices while Dots graph has
      only 16.
  · The degrees of vertices differ. The Diamonds graph has vertices of degrees 4 while the Dots graph does not.
  · The graphs have different sizes of cyclic subgraphs. The Diamonds graph has 4 squares (4-cycles), while the Dots
      graph has 3 squares. Also, the Dots graph has 8-cycles while the Diamonds graph does not.

12.15
 1. Answers may vary. There are four possible isomorphisms:
  · a - q, d - s, c - p, and b - r.
  · a - p, d - s, c - q, and b - r.
  · a - q, d - r, c - p, and b - s.
  · a - p, d - r, c - q, and b - s.

12.16
 1. Caden is correct because Graph E could be untangled so that d is to the left of c and the edges bc and ad are no
      longer crossed. Maubi is incorrect because (a, b, c, d) is a quadrilateral in Graph E. Javier is incorrect because the
      portion of the graph he highlighted does not have 3 vertices and is not a triangle.

12.17
 1.

12.18
 1. The degrees are 0. There are no adjacent vertices in Graph N since all vertices are adjacent in Graph M.

12.19
 1. c Only C  V  G  B  B is a walk.

12.20
 1. walk, path, and trail
 2. walk and a trail, but not a path
 3. none of these

12.21
 1. To fly from Palm Beach to any other city, you must take the flight from PBI to TPA. To return, you must take the flight
      from TPA to PBI. This means that the graph of any itinerary that begins and ends at PBI covers the same edge twice
      and is not a circuit.
 2. The degree of PBI is 1 meaning that there is only one edge connecting PBI to other parts of the graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   Answer Key 1555

12.22
 1. Yes. The chromatic number is 4 or less.
 2. 3
 3. 3 or 4
 4. Graphs 1 and 3
 5. Answers may vary. Here is an example of a 3-coloring:

12.23
 1. The chromatic number is 3. Here is a 3-coloring of the graph:

12.24
 1. Graphs G, H, and I are connected; so, they each have a single component with the vertices {a, b, c, d}. Graph F is
      disconnected with two components, {a, c, d} and {b}. Graph J is disconnected with two components, {a, d} and {b, c}.
      Graph K is disconnected with three components, {a}, {b, d}, and {c}.

12.25
 1. Each pair of vertices would be connected by a path that was at most 6 edges long. So, the graph would be
      connected.

12.26
 1. The multigraph of the neighborhood is shown:

 2. Yes, the graph is connected. It has only one component.
 3. There are four corner vertices of degree 2 and the remaining twelve vertices are all degree 4.
 4. Yes
 5. Yes, an Eulerian graph has an Euler circuit; so, it is possible.

12.27
 1. Graph X does not have an Euler circuit because it is disconnected.
 2. a  b  g  d  f  c  g  e  a

12.28
 1.
1556 Answer Key

12.29
 1. Yes.
 2. No. It doesn't cover every edge.
 3. No. It is not a walk, because the vertices b and e are not adjacent.

12.30
 1. In a complete graph with three or more vertices, any three vertices form a triangle which is a cycle. Any edge in a
      graph that is part of a cycle cannot be a bridge so, there are no bridges in a complete graph. Also, any edge that is
      part of a triangle cannot be a local bridge because the removal of any edge of a triangle will leave a path of only two
      edges between the vertices of that edge. So, there are no bridges or local bridges in a complete graph.

12.31
 1. m
 2. qn, qt; qn bridge
 3. rs, st, tq, qn
 4. nm, np; nm,, bridge
 5. om, mp, pn, nm
 6. s  q  r  s  t  q  n  o  m  p  n  m

12.32

 1. The graph has Euler trails. They must begin and end at vertices u and v. An example is
      vwxuzywu

12.33
 1. both

12.34

1.                               and

12.35
 1.

12.36
 1. 120

12.37
 1. 26

12.38
 1. No
 2. No
 3. Yes

12.39
 1. C  A  B  F  D  E

12.40
 1. p  m  o  n  q  t  s  r
 2. none
 3. none

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             Answer Key 1557

12.41
 1. Hamilton path
 2. Euler trail
 3. neither

12.42
 1. brute force algorithm

12.43      VWXYZV
 1.        VWXZYV
       1.  VWYXZV
       2.  VWYZXV
       3.  VWZXYV
       4.  VWZYXV
       5.  VXWYZV
       6.  VXWZYV
       7.  VXYWZV
       8.  V  X  Y  Z  W  V (reverse of 6)
       9.  VXZWYV
     10.   V  X  Z  Y  W  V (reverse of 4)
     11.   VYXWZV
     12.   V  Y  X  Z  W  V (reverse of 5)
     13.   VYWXZV
     14.   V  Y  W  Z  X  V (reverse of 11)
     15.   V  Y  Z  X  W  V (reverse of 2)
     16.   V  Y  Z  W  X  V (reverse of 8)
     17.   V  Z  X  Y  W  V (reverse of 3)
     18.   V  Z  X  W  Y  V (reverse of 15)
     19.   V  Z  Y  X  W  V (reverse of 1)
     20.   V  Z  Y  W  X  V (reverse of 7)
     21.   V  Z  W  X  Y  V (reverse of 13)
     22.   V  Z  W  Y  X  V (reverse of 9)
     23.
     24.

12.44
 1. The officer should travel from Travis Air Force Base to Beal Air Force Base, to Edwards Air Force Base, to Los Angeles
      Air Force Base, and return to Travis.

12.45
 1. D  B  E  A  C  F  D; 550 min or 9 hrs 10 min.

12.46
 1. The star topology is a tree, and the tree topology is a tree. The ring topology and the mesh topology are not trees
      because they contain cycles.

12.47
 1. star topology
 2. tree topology
 3. none

12.48
 1. Vertices k, l, and m are in one component, and vertices g, h, i, and j are in the other.
 2. There are 6 vertices and 5 edges, which confirms Graph I is a tree, because the number of edges is one less than the
      number of vertices.
 3. a quadrilateral

12.49
1558 Answer Key

 1. a True
 2. b False
 3. a True
 4. a True

12.50
 1. Answers may vary. Here are three possible spanning trees of Graph J:

12.51
 1. The three edges must include one edge from list A and one pair of edges from list B.
      List A: be, eh, hi, gi, bg
      List B: ac and ad, ac and af, ac and cd, ac and cf, ad and af, ad and cd, ad and cf, af and cd, af and cf, or cd and cf.

12.52
 1. There are two possible minimum spanning trees, each with a total weight of 174:

Check Your Understanding

 1. a True
 2. b False
 3. a True
 4. b False
 5. b False
 6. b False
 7. a True
 8. b False
 9. a True
10. b
11. a True
12. The sum of the degrees is always double the number of edges, which means it has to be an even number, but 13 is

      odd.

13. Yes. If n is the number of vertices in a complete graph, the number of edges is  which is half the

      number of vertices times one less than the number of vertices.
14. always true
15. never true
16. sometimes true
17. never true
18. always true
19. sometimes true
20. sometimes true
21. never true
22. sometimes true
23. always true

Access for free at openstax.org
                              Answer Key 1559

24. always true
25. sometimes true
26. always true
27. sometimes true
28. always true
29. always true
30. sometimes true
31. always true
32. sometimes true
33. always true
34. always true
35. has no repeated egdes
36. is closed
37. has no repeated vertices
38. has no repeated edges
39.
40. at least
51. edge
52. Fleury's
53. circuit, trail
54. components
55. local bridge
56. bridge
57. vertex
58. complete
59. is
60. is
61. is not
62. is
63. is
64. is not
65. is not
66. is not
67. different from
68. the same as
69. different from
70. different from
71. b False
72. b False
73. b False
74. a True
75. a True
76. b False
77. b False
78. b False
79. a True
80. b False
81. b False
82. a True
83. a True
84. b False
85. b False
86. a True
87. a True
88. a True
89. a True
90. b False
91. b False
1560 Answer Key

92. a True
93. a True
94. a True

Chapter 13

Your Turn

13.1
 1. 46 in

13.2
 1. 34 scales

13.3
 1. 1.618

13.4
 1. 1.25, which is close to a golden rectangle

13.5
 1. 210 gal

13.6
 1. 1,050,000 gal

13.7
 1. 9,828 million gal of water

13.8
 1. 15.8 kW

13.9
 1. $14.18

13.10
 1. $0.06

13.11
 1. 288 kW

13.12
 1. 1.8 mg in 200 mL

13.13
 1. 6 pills

13.14
 1. 42 mg

13.15
 1. 13 mL

13.16
 1. Yara, Jeffrey
 2. 5

13.17
 1. birds chirping

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                  Answer Key 1561

 2. window air conditioner
 3. garbage disposal
 4. live outdoor concert

13.18
 1. up G, down F
 2. up C, down B
 3. up G, down F

13.19
 1. up E, down B
 2. up D#, down B
 3. up F#, down D

13.20
 1. G, G#, A, A#, B, C, C#, D, D#, E, F, F#

13.21
 1. 83 Hz

13.22
 1. 10 games
 2. 66 games
 3. 300 games

13.23
 1. 4 games
 2. 11 games
 3. 24 games

Check Your Understanding

 1. 1.618
 2. 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55
 3. A rectangle whose length divided by the width is approximately equal to or 1.618.
 4.
 5. 100 gal
 6. 33 1/3 hours
 7. 17 hours
 8. medicine dosage required, weight of drug by volume
 9. b Research on coronavirus vaccines began approximately 10 years before the COVID-19 pandemic hit the world.
10. Mathematical modeling is a graphical representation of a behavior, such as exposure to a virus. It can be helpful in

      mapping contract tracing with virus exposure during a pandemic.
11. Frequency is a static measured value, whereas pitch is subjective.
12. higher
13. 20-20,000 Hz
14. increase
15. 0 dB
16. 20-17,000Hz
17. It doubles.
18. Data analytics is used in sports to analyze data on team's players, potential recruits, opposing teams, and opposing

      players. This helps to find patterns and make predictions for future results.
19. Soccer (football)
20.
21.
1562 Answer Key
Access for free at openstax.org
Index                                 chain rule for conditional                                                   Index 1563
                                      arguments 112
Symbols                               chromatic number 1293             discounts 553
                                      circuit 1290                      disjoint sets 22
1099 form 602                         clock arithmetic 211              disjunction 70
68-95-99.7 Rule 892                   closed 1289                       disposition fees 679
                                      cluster sample 817                distribution 839
A                                     coefficient 339                   Distributive Property 340
                                      combinations 733                  dividend 294
  is greater than 151                 combinatorics 724                 dividends 613
absolute value of an integer 152      common ratio 246                  division in a base 323
acquisition fee 679                   complement 24                     divisor 294
acute angle 1008                      composite 131                     documentation fee 676
acyclic 1380                          compound event 771                domain 428
additive system of numbers 273        compound interest 579             dominance of connectives 74
adjacent 1240                         compound statement 70             doubling time 246
adjusted gross income 698             conclusion 64                     down payment 676
Alabama paradox 1212                  conditional 71, 88                down-rank 1169
Algebraic expressions 334             conditional probabilities 777
angle of depression 1111              Condorcet criterion 1166          E
angle of elevation 1111               Condorcet method 1166
annual percentage rate 566            conjunction 70                    edge 1238
apportion 1179                        connective 70                     Effective annual yield 585
apportionment paradox 1212            constant 334                      elements 6
apportionment problem 1179            constant difference 240           empirical probability 757
approval voting ballot 1150           constant of proportionality 369   empty set 7
approval voting system 1150           constant sequence 247             equal 11
Area 952                              constraints 520                   equal sign 337
arithmetic sequence 240               contrapositive 98                 equation 337
Arrow's Impossibility Theorem         converse 98                       equivalent 11
1175                                  correlation coefficient 917       Euler circuits 1313
average (or mean) of a set of 156     countably infinite 10             Euler trail 1326
                                      credit limit 657                  evaluating the function 429
B                                     cubic meter 944                   event 751
                                      cubic units 960                   exemptions 698
bar chart 830                         cumulative distribution function  expanded form 269
base 218                              793                               expected value 798
base 10 288                           cycle 1255                        experiment 739
base 10 system 269                                                      explanatory variable 908
                                      D                                 exponent 218
  is less than 151                                                      exponential expression 268
biconditional 71                      data 816                          exponential notation 17
billing period 658                    data analytics 1444               exponents 134
bimodal 857                           De Morgan's Law 103               expressions 336
binned frequency distribution 821     dealer preparation fee 676        extended warranties 676
binomial 404                          decibels 1438                     extrapolation 925
binomial experiments 790              deductive arguments 109
binomial trials 790                   degree 1241                       F
Bonds 612                             degrees 1007
bridges 1328                          degrees Celsius 944               factorial 729, 1343
brute force algorithm 1364            dependent 739                     FAFSA 645
brute force method 1370               dependent variable 908            fallacy 108
budget 590                            destination fee 676               Fibonacci sequence 244, 1420
                                      directed cycle 1290               finite sets 8
C                                     directed path 1287                fixed expenses 590
                                      directed trail 1287               fixed interest rate 631
cardinal value 10                     directed walk 1284                flat 1441
Cardinal voting systems 1175                                            Fleury's algorithm 1330
cardinality 10                                                          forest 1381
cardinality of the union of two sets                                    formula 352
32
categorical frequency distribution
819
1564 Index                         law of detachment 109               odds against 766
                                   lease 687                           odds for 766
Four-Color Map Theorem 1299        least common multiple 142           odds in favor 766
Four-Color Theorem 1299            line of best fit 921                open 1289
fractional form 544                linear equation 346                 order of operations 158
frequency 1438                     linear inequalities 361             ordinary annuity 605
function 428                       Linear programming 519              origination date 566
                                   liters 944
G                                  Loan amortization 631               P
                                   local bridge 1329, 1329
geometric sequence 246             Logic 59                            part-to-part ratio 1180
geometric solids 1088              logical statement 60                path 1287
glide reflection 1057              loop 1238                           percent 544
golden ratio 1419                  lower quota 1193                    percentiles 879
golden rectangles 1422                                                 permutations 728
grams 944                          M                                   perpendicular lines 997
graph 1238                                                             pie chart 835
graph colorings 1293               majority 1130                       pitch 1440
greatest common divisor 138        majority criterion 1162             place values 269
greedy algorithm 1364              mapping 431                         planar 1268
gross income 698                   mass 970                            polygon 1035
                                   Mathematical modeling 1434          polynomial 404
H                                  mean 864                            population 816
                                   median 859                          population growth rate 1214
half-step 1441                     meters 944                          population paradox 1214
Hamilton circuits 1341             metric system 943                   positional system of numbers 273
Hamilton cycles 1341               minimum spanning tree 1391          positive linear relationship 915
Hamilton paths 1352                mode 857                            Postulate 1 994
Hare Method 1132                   modulo 12 212                       Postulate 2 994
hertz 1438                         modulo 7 216                        preference ranking 1136
Hindu-Arabic numeration system     money market account 603            premises 64
269                                monomial 404                        prime 131
Histograms 841                     mortgage 689                        prime factorization 134
hypothesis 71                      multigraph 1238                     principal 566, 631
                                   multiple 142                        probability 752
I                                  multiplication and division in      probability density function 793
                                   bases 314                           proper subset 15
Inclusion/Exclusion Principle 773  multiplication principle 82         properties of the real numbers
independent 739                    Multiplication Rule for Counting    208
independent variable 908           725                                 proportional 1180
inductive arguments 64             mutually exclusive 771              proportions 367, 828
infinite sets 8                                                        Pythagorean Theorem 1098
installment loan 631               N
instant runoff voting (IRV) 1137                                       Q
integers 9, 149                    natural numbers 8
intercepts 447                     nearest neighbor method 1371        Quadratic equations 408
interest 566                       negation of a logical statement 62  quadratic formula 415
intersection of two sets 29        negative linear relationship 915    quadrilateral 1070
inverse 98                         neighboring 1240                    quantifier 64
irrational numbers 191             net worth 154                       quantiles 879
isomorphic 1266                    new-state paradox 1216              quartile 879
issue price 612                                                        Quintile 879
                                     -coloring 1293                    quotient 294
K                                  nonplanar 1268
                                   normal distributions 886            R                           1137
kilowatt 1427                      number 268
kilowatt-hour 1427                 numeral 268                         radians 1007
Kruskal's algorithm 1391                                               ranked ballot 1136
                                   O                                   ranked voting 1136
L                                                                      ranked-choice voting (RCV)
                                   obtuse angle 1008                   ratio 366
landlord 687                       octave 1442
law of denying the consequent
111

Access for free at openstax.org
rational number 165         1182  simplify an expression 338                                                     Index 1565
Real numbers 204                  slope 451
reapportionment 1214              solutions of a system of equations  (TSP) 1367
reflection 1057                   474                                 tree 1380
regression line 921               sound 108                           tree diagram 742
relation 428                      spanning trees 1386                 trials 790
remainder 294                     spoiler 1153                        truth table 78
replicated 739                    square meter 944                    truth values 60
representative democracies        Square Root Property 414            two-round system 1132
response variable 908             square units 952                    tyranny of the majority 1165
return on investment 604          standard divisor 1184
Revolving credit 631              standard quota 1185                 U
right angle 1008                  standardized score 898
right cylinder 1092               Stem-and-leaf plots 837             union of two sets 30
right prism 1088                  Stocks 613                          units 816
right triangle 204                straight angle 1008                 universal set 21
rise 451                          stratified sample 817               unsubsidized loans 646
run 451                           subjective probability 758          up-rank 1169
runoff election 1132              subset 15                           upper quota 1196
                                  subsidized loans 646
S                                 Subtraction in bases 310            V
                                  symbolic form 61
sample space 739                  system of linear inequalities 491   valid 84
samples 816                       systematic random sample 817        variable 334
savings account 601                                                   variable expenses 590
scaling factor 1025               T                                   variable interest rate 631
scatter plot 908                                                      Venn diagram with three
scientific notation 227           tautology 97                        intersecting sets 40
security deposit 679              tax credits 699                     Venn diagrams 21
seeding 1445                      taxable income 698                  vertex 1007
sequence 239                      Temperature 977                     vertical line test 434
Sequences 17                      term 239                            vertices 1238
series 17                         terms 339                           Volume 960
set 5, 6                          tessellations 1052
set builder notation 9            theoretical probability 752         W
shares 613                        title and registration fee 676
sharp 1441                        total weight 1346                   walk 1284
simple graph 1238                 trail 1287                          weighted graph 1346
simple interest 566               translation 1054                    well-defined sets 6
simple random sample 816          traveling salesperson problem       whole step 1441

                                                                      Z

                                                                      Zero Product Property 412
