Intermediate Algebra 2e

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
LYNN MARECEK, SANTA ANA COLLEGE
ANDREA HONEYCUTT MATHIS, NORTHEAST MISSISSIPPI COMMUNITY COLLEGE
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2020 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra-2e in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-975076-49-8
PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-951693-84-8
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-975076-48-1
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13     978-1-951693-24-4
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR   2020
2 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CE 20 17
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                          Get started at openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra-2e

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Foundations 7

         Introduction 7
         1.1 Use the Language of Algebra 7
         1.2 Integers 26
         1.3 Fractions 43
         1.4 Decimals 57
         1.5 Properties of Real Numbers 73
         Chapter Review 84
         Exercises 90

2 Solving Linear Equations 95

         Introduction 95
         2.1 Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 95
         2.2 Use a Problem Solving Strategy 112
         2.3 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 132
         2.4 Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 149
         2.5 Solve Linear Inequalities 168
         2.6 Solve Compound Inequalities 187
         2.7 Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 197
         Chapter Review 209
         Exercises 213

3 Graphs and Functions 223

         Introduction 223
         3.1 Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 223
         3.2 Slope of a Line 249
         3.3 Find the Equation of a Line 273
         3.4 Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 288
         3.5 Relations and Functions 306
         3.6 Graphs of Functions 319
         Chapter Review 337
         Exercises 342

4 Systems of Linear Equations 355

         Introduction 355
         4.1 Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 355
         4.2 Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 377
         4.3 Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 396
         4.4 Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 411
         4.5 Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 423
         4.6 Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 436
         4.7 Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 450
              Chapter Review 466
              Exercises 469

   5 Polynomials and Polynomial Functions 477

              Introduction 477
              5.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials 477
              5.2 Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 490
              5.3 Multiply Polynomials 513
              5.4 Dividing Polynomials 528
              Chapter Review 541
              Exercises 544

   6 Factoring 551

              Introduction to Factoring 551
              6.1 Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping 551
              6.2 Factor Trinomials 559
              6.3 Factor Special Products 576
              6.4 General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials 588
              6.5 Polynomial Equations 597
              Chapter Review 613
              Exercises 616

   7 Rational Expressions and Functions 621

              Introduction 621
              7.1 Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 621
              7.2 Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 635
              7.3 Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 649
              7.4 Solve Rational Equations 660
              7.5 Solve Applications with Rational Equations 673
              7.6 Solve Rational Inequalities 698
              Chapter Review 709
              Exercises 711

   8 Roots and Radicals 719

              Introduction 719
              8.1 Simplify Expressions with Roots 719
              8.2 Simplify Radical Expressions 734
              8.3 Simplify Rational Exponents 751
              8.4 Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 764
              8.5 Divide Radical Expressions 776
              8.6 Solve Radical Equations 788
              8.7 Use Radicals in Functions 802
              8.8 Use the Complex Number System 810
              Chapter Review 824
              Exercises 827

Access for free at openstax.org
9 Quadratic Equations and Functions 835

         Introduction 835
         9.1 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 835
         9.2 Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 846
         9.3 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 860
         9.4 Solve Equations in Quadratic Form 874
         9.5 Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 880
         9.6 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 894
         9.7 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 920
         9.8 Solve Quadratic Inequalities 939
         Chapter Review 949
         Exercises 952

10 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 959

          Introduction 959
          10.1 Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 959
          10.2 Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 975
          10.3 Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 989
          10.4 Use the Properties of Logarithms 1005
          10.5 Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1015
          Chapter Review 1026
          Exercises 1029

11 Conics 1037

          Introduction 1037
          11.1 Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1037
          11.2 Parabolas 1051
          11.3 Ellipses 1070
          11.4 Hyperbolas 1085
          11.5 Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1098
          Chapter Review 1113
          Exercises 1117

12 Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem 1125

Introduction 1125                    1147
12.1 Sequences 1125
12.2 Arithmetic Sequences 1137
12.3 Geometric Sequences and Series
12.4 Binomial Theorem 1161
Chapter Review 1174
Exercises 1175

Answer Key 1181
Index 1319
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

Welcome to Intermediate Algebra 2e, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to
high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education. Our first
openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 35 books for college and
AP courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. Our adaptive learning technology, designed to improve learning
outcomes through personalized educational paths, is being piloted in college courses throughout the country. Through
our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource organizations,
OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Intermediate Algebra 2e is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its
content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution in Intermediate Algebra 2e

In Intermediate Algebra 2e, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license
within the caption. For art that is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same attribution
to its original source. Some art has been provided through permissions and should only be used with the attribution or
limitations provided in the credit.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Intermediate Algebra 2e

Intermediate Algebra 2e is designed to meet the scope and sequence requirements of a one-semester Intermediate
Algebra course. The book's organization makes it easy to adapt to a variety of course syllabi. The text expands on the
fundamental concepts of algebra while addressing the needs of students with diverse backgrounds and learning styles.
Each topic builds upon previously developed material to demonstrate the cohesiveness and structure of mathematics.

Coverage and Scope

Intermediate Algebra 2e continues the philosophies and pedagogical features of Prealgebra and Elementary Algebra, by
Lynn Marecek and MaryAnne Anthony-Smith. By introducing the concepts and vocabulary of algebra in a nurturing, non-
threatening environment while also addressing the needs of students with diverse backgrounds and learning styles, the
book helps students gain confidence in their ability to succeed in the course and become successful college students.

The material is presented as a sequence of small, and clear steps to conceptual understanding. The order of topics was
carefully planned to emphasize the logical progression throughout the course and to facilitate a thorough
understanding of each concept. As new ideas are presented, they are explicitly related to previous topics.

      Chapter 1: Foundations
      Chapter 1 reviews arithmetic operations with whole numbers, integers, fractions, decimals and real numbers, to
2 Preface

           give the student a solid base that will support their study of algebra.
           Chapter 2: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
           In Chapter 2, students learn to solve linear equations using the Properties of Equality and a general strategy. They
           use a problem-solving strategy to solve number, percent, mixture and uniform motion applications. Solving a
           formula for a specific variable, and also solving both linear and compound inequalities is presented.
           Chapter 3: Graphs and Functions
           Chapter 3 covers the rectangular coordinate system where students learn to plot graph linear equations in two
           variables, graph with intercepts, understand slope of a line, use the slope-intercept form of an equation of a line,
           find the equation of a line, and create graphs of linear inequalities. The chapter also introduces relations and
           functions as well as graphing of functions.
           Chapter 4: Systems of Linear Equations
           Chapter 4 covers solving systems of equations by graphing, substitution, and elimination; solving applications with
           systems of equations, solving mixture applications with systems of equations, and graphing systems of linear
           inequalities. Systems of equations are also solved using matrices and determinants.
           Chapter 5: Polynomials and Polynomial Functions
           In Chapter 5, students learn how to add and subtract polynomials, use multiplication properties of exponents,
           multiply polynomials, use special products, divide monomials and polynomials, and understand integer exponents
           and scientific notation.
           Chapter 6: Factoring
           In Chapter 6, students learn the process of factoring expressions and see how factoring is used to solve quadratic
           equations.
           Chapter 7: Rational Expressions and Functions
           In Chapter 7, students work with rational expressions, solve rational equations and use them to solve problems in a
           variety of applications, and solve rational inequalities.
           Chapter 8: Roots and Radical
           In Chapter 8, students simplify radical expressions, rational exponents, perform operations on radical expressions,
           and solve radical equations. Radical functions and the complex number system are introduced
           Chapter 9: Quadratic Equations
           In Chapter 9, students use various methods to solve quadratic equations and equations in quadratic form and learn
           how to use them in applications. Students will graph quadratic functions using their properties and by
           transformations.
           Chapter 10: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
           In Chapter 10, students find composite and inverse functions, evaluate, graph, and solve both exponential and
           logarithmic functions.
           Chapter 11: Conics
           In Chapter 11, the properties and graphs of circles, parabolas, ellipses and hyperbolas are presented. Students also
           solve applications using the conics and solve systems of nonlinear equations.
           Chapter 12: Sequences, Series and the Binomial Theorem
           In Chapter 12, students are introduced to sequences, arithmetic sequences, geometric sequences and series and
           the binomial theorem.

    All chapters are broken down into multiple sections, the titles of which can be viewed in the Table of Contents.

   Changes to the Second Edition

    The Intermediate Algebra 2e revision focused on mathematical clarity and accuracy. Every Example, Try-It, Section
    Exercise, Review Exercise, and Practice Test item was reviewed by multiple faculty experts, and then verified by authors.
    This intensive effort resulted in hundreds of changes to the text, problem language, answers, instructor solutions, and
    graphics.

    However, OpenStax and our authors are aware of the difficulties posed by shifting problem and exercise numbers when
    textbooks are revised. In an effort to make the transition to the 2nd edition as seamless as possible, we have minimized
    any shifting of exercise numbers. For example, instead of deleting or adding problems where necessary, we replaced
    problems in order to keep the numbering intact. As a result, in nearly all chapters, there will be no shifting of exercise
    numbers; in the chapters where shifting does occur, it will be minor. Faculty and course coordinators should be able to
    use the new edition in a straightforward manner.

    Also, to increase convenience, answers to the Be Prepared Exercises will now appear in the regular solutions manuals,
    rather than as a separate resource.

    A detailed transition guide is available as an instructor resource at openstax.org.

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

Pedagogical Foundation and Features

Examples
Each learning objective is supported by one or more worked examples, which demonstrate the problem-solving
approaches that students must master. Typically, we include multiple examples for each learning objective to model
different approaches to the same type of problem, or to introduce similar problems of increasing complexity.
All examples follow a simple two- or three-part format. First, we pose a problem or question. Next, we demonstrate the
solution, spelling out the steps along the way. Finally (for select examples), we show students how to check the solution.
Most examples are written in a two-column format, with explanation on the left and math on the right to mimic the way
that instructors "talk through" examples as they write on the board in class.
Be Prepared!
Each section, beginning with Section 2.1, starts with a few "Be Prepared!" exercises so that students can determine if they
have mastered the prerequisite skills for the section. Reference is made to specific Examples from previous sections so
students who need further review can easily find explanations. Answers to these exercises can be found in the
supplemental resources that accompany this title.
Try It

Try it The Try It feature includes a pair of exercises that immediately follow an Example, providing the student with an
immediate opportunity to solve a similar problem with an easy reference to the example. In the PDF and the Web View
version of the text, answers to the Try It exercises are located in the Answer Key
How To

How To Examples use a three column format to demonstrate how to solve an example with a certain procedure. The
first column states the formal step, the second column is in words as the teacher would explain the process, and then
the third column is the actual math. A How To procedure box follows each of these How To examples and summarizes
the series of steps from the example. These procedure boxes provide an easy reference for students.
Media

Media The "Media" icon appears at the conclusion of each section, just prior to the Self Check. This icon marks a list of
links to online videos that reinforce the concepts and skills introduced in the section.
Disclaimer: While we have selected videos that closely align to our learning objectives, we did not produce these
tutorials, nor were they specifically produced or tailored to accompany Intermediate Algebra 2e.
Self Check
The Self Check includes the learning objectives for the section so that students can self-assess their mastery and make
concrete plans to improve.

Art Program

Intermediate Algebra 2e contains many figures and illustrations. Art throughout the text adheres to a clear, understated
style, drawing the eye to the most important information in each figure while minimizing visual distractions.

Section Exercises

Each section of every chapter concludes with a well-rounded set of exercises that can be assigned as homework or used
4 Preface

    selectively for guided practice. Exercise sets are named Practice Makes Perfect to encourage completion of homework
    assignments.

       · Exercises correlate to the learning objectives. This facilitates assignment of personalized study plans based on
           individual student needs.

       · Exercises are carefully sequenced to promote building of skills.
       · Values for constants and coefficients were chosen to practice and reinforce arithmetic facts.
       · Even and odd-numbered exercises are paired.
       · Exercises parallel and extend the text examples and use the same instructions as the examples to help students

           easily recognize the connection.
       · Applications are drawn from many everyday experiences, as well as those traditionally found in college math texts.
       · Everyday Math highlights practical situations using the concepts from that particular section
       · Writing Exercises are included in every exercise set to encourage conceptual understanding, critical thinking, and

           literacy.

   Chapter Review Features

    Each chapter concludes with a review of the most important takeaways, as well as additional practice problems that
    students can use to prepare for exams.

       · Key Terms provide a formal definition for each bold-faced term in the chapter.
       · Key Concepts summarize the most important ideas introduced in each section, linking back to the relevant

           Example(s) in case students need to review.
       · Chapter Review Exercises include practice problems that recall the most important concepts from each section.
       · Practice Test includes additional problems assessing the most important learning objectives from the chapter.
       · Answer Key includes the answers to all Try It exercises and every other exercise from the Section Exercises, Chapter

           Review Exercises, and Practice Test.

   Answers to Questions in the Book

    Answers to Examples and Be Prepared! questions are provided just below the question in the book. All Try It answers are
    provided in the Answer Key. Odd-numbered Section Exercises, Review Exercises, and Practice Test questions are provided
    to students in the Answer Key. Even-numbered answers are provided only to instructors in the Instructor Answer Guide
    via the Instructor Resources page.

   Additional Resources

   Student and Instructor Resources

    We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, manipulative
    mathematics worksheets, and an answer guide to the section review exercises. Instructor resources require a verified
    instructor account, which can be requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to
    supplement your OpenStax book.

   Partner Resources

    OpenStax partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to
    students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access
    the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on openstax.org.

   About the Authors

   Senior Contributing Authors

    Lynn Marecek, Santa Ana College

    Andrea Honeycutt Mathis, Northeast Mississippi Community College

   Reviewers

    Shaun Ault, Valdosta State University
    Brandie Biddy, Cecil College
    Kimberlyn Brooks, Cuyahoga Community College
    Michael Cohen, Hofstra University
    Robert Diaz, Fullerton College
    Dianne Hendrickson, Becker College
    Linda Hunt, Shawnee State University
    Stephanie Krehl, Mid-South Community College
    Yixia Lu, South Suburban College

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Preface 5

Teresa Richards, Butte-Glenn College
Christian Roldán- Johnson, College of Lake County Community College
Yvonne Sandoval, El Camino College
Gowribalan Vamadeva, University of Cincinnati Blue Ash College
Kim Watts, North Lake college
Libby Watts, Tidewater Community College
Matthew Watts, Tidewater Community College
6 Preface
     Access for free at openstax.org
                1 · Introduction 7

1  FOUNDATIONS

Figure 1.1 This hand may change someone's life. Amazingly, it was created using a special kind of printer known as a 3D
printer. (credit: U.S. Food and Drug Administration/Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Use the Language of Algebra
  1.2 Integers
  1.3 Fractions
  1.4 Decimals
  1.5 Properties of Real Numbers

      Introduction

For years, doctors and engineers have worked to make artificial limbs, such as this hand for people who need them. This
particular product is different, however, because it was developed using a 3D printer. As a result, it can be printed much
like you print words on a sheet of paper. This makes producing the limb less expensive and faster than conventional
methods.

Biomedical engineers are working to develop organs that may one day save lives. Scientists at NASA are designing ways
to use 3D printers to build on the moon or Mars. Already, animals are benefitting from 3D-printed parts, including a
tortoise shell and a dog leg. Builders have even constructed entire buildings using a 3D printer.

The technology and use of 3D printers depend on the ability to understand the language of algebra. Engineers must be
able to translate observations and needs in the natural world to complex mathematical commands that can provide
directions to a printer. In this chapter, you will review the language of algebra and take your first steps toward working
with algebraic concepts.

1.1 Use the Language of Algebra

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find factors, prime factorizations, and least common multiples
           Use variables and algebraic symbols
           Simplify expressions using the order of operations
           Evaluate an expression
           Identify and combine like terms
           Translate an English phrase to an algebraic expression

       BE PREPARED 1.1 This chapter is intended to be a brief review of concepts that will be needed in an
8 1 · Foundations

                                               Intermediate Algebra course. A more thorough introduction to the topics covered in this
                                              chapter can be found in the Elementary Algebra 2e chapter, Foundations.

    In algebra, we use a letter of the alphabet to represent a number whose value may change or is unknown. Commonly
    used symbols are a, b, c, m, n, x, and y. Further discussion of constants and variables appears later in this section.

   Find Factors, Prime Factorizations, and Least Common Multiples

    The numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 are called multiples of 2. A multiple of 2 can be written as the product of 2 and a counting
    number.

Similarly, a multiple of 3 would be the product of a counting number and 3.

We could find the multiples of any number by continuing this process.

Counting Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Multiples of 2                      2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24

Multiples of 3                      3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36

Multiples of 4                      4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48

Multiples of 5                      5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

Multiples of 6                      6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 66 72

Multiples of 7                      7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 77 84

Multiples of 8                      8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 88 96

Multiples of 9                      9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 90 99 108

Multiple of a Number
A number is a multiple of if it is the product of a counting number and

Another way to say that 15 is a multiple of 3 is to say that 15 is divisible by 3. That means that when we divide 15 by 3,

we get a counting number. In fact,  is 5, so 15 is

Divisible by a Number

If a number is a multiple of n, then m is divisible by n.

If we were to look for patterns in the multiples of the numbers 2 through 9, we would discover the following divisibility
tests:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 9

Divisibility Tests

A number is divisible by:
         2 if the last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8.
         3 if the sum of the digits is divisible by
         5 if the last digit is 5 or
         6 if it is divisible by both 2 and
         10 if it ends with

  EXAMPLE 1.1

Is 5,625 divisible by  2?  3?  5 or 10?  6?

     Solution



  Is 5,625 divisible by 2?

Does it end in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8?  No.
                                 5,625 is not divisible by 2.



  Is 5,625 divisible by 3?

What is the sum of the digits?

Is the sum divisible by 3?       Yes.
                                 5,625 is divisible by 3.



  Is 5,625 divisible by 5 or 10?
  What is the last digit? It is 5. 5,625 is divisible by 5 but not by 10.



  Is 5,625 divisible by 6?
  Is it divisible by both 2 and 3? No, 5,625 is not divisible by 2, so 5,625 is not divisible by 6.

TRY IT 1.1  Is 4,962 divisible by  2?  3?  5?  6?  10?
TRY IT 1.2  Is 3,765 divisible by  2?  3?  5?  6?  10?
10 1 · Foundations

In mathematics, there are often several ways to talk about the same ideas. So far, we've seen that if m is a multiple of n,
we can say that m is divisible by n. For example, since 72 is a multiple of 8, we say 72 is divisible by 8. Since 72 is a
multiple of 9, we say 72 is divisible by 9. We can express this still another way.

Since               we say that 8 and 9 are factors of 72. When we write  we say we have factored 72.

Other ways to factor 72 are                                and    The number 72 has many factors:
                                                                and both a and b are integers, then a and b are
                             and

Factors

In the expression   , both a and b are called factors. If
factors of m.

Some numbers, such as 72, have many factors. Other numbers have only two factors. A prime number is a counting
number greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and itself.

  Prime number and Composite number

  A prime number is a counting number greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and the number itself.
  A composite number is a counting number greater than 1 that is not prime. A composite number has factors other
  than 1 and the number itself.

The counting numbers from 2 to 20 are listed in the table with their factors. Make sure to agree with the "prime" or
"composite" label for each!

The prime numbers less than 20 are 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, and 19. Notice that the only even prime number is 2.
A composite number can be written as a unique product of primes. This is called the prime factorization of the number.
Finding the prime factorization of a composite number will be useful in many topics in this course.

  Prime Factorization

  The prime factorization of a number is the product of prime numbers that equals the number. These prime numbers
  are called the prime factors.

To find the prime factorization of a composite number, find any two factors of the number and use them to create two
branches. If a factor is prime, that branch is complete. Circle that prime. Otherwise it is easy to lose track of the prime
numbers.
If the factor is not prime, find two factors of the number and continue the process. Once all the branches have circled
primes at the end, the factorization is complete. The composite number can now be written as a product of prime

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 11

numbers.

  EXAMPLE 1.2

How to Find the Prime Factorization of a Composite Number
Factor 48.

     Solution

We say               is the prime factorization of 48. We generally write the primes in ascending order. Be sure to

multiply the factors to verify your answer.

If we first factored 48 in a different way, for example as  the result would still be the same. Finish the prime
factorization and verify this for yourself.

TRY IT 1.3 Find the prime factorization of

TRY IT 1.4 Find the prime factorization of

        ...

             HOW TO

Find the prime factorization of a composite number.

Step 1.  Find two factors whose product is the given number, and use these numbers to create two branches.
Step 2.  If a factor is prime, that branch is complete. Circle the prime, like a leaf on the tree.
Step 3.  If a factor is not prime, write it as the product of two factors and continue the process.
Step 4.  Write the composite number as the product of all the circled primes.
12 1 · Foundations

     One of the reasons we look at primes is to use these techniques to find the least common multiple of two numbers.
     This will be useful when we add and subtract fractions with different denominators.

       Least Common Multiple
       The least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers is the smallest number that is a multiple of both numbers.

     To find the least common multiple of two numbers we will use the Prime Factors Method. Let's find the LCM of 12 and 18
     using their prime factors.

       EXAMPLE 1.3
     How to Find the Least Common Multiple Using the Prime Factors Method
     Find the least common multiple (LCM) of 12 and 18 using the prime factors method.

          Solution

Notice that the prime factors of 12  and the prime factors of 18                 are included in the LCM

So 36 is the least common multiple of 12 and 18.

By matching up the common primes, each common prime factor is used only once. This way you are sure that 36 is the
least common multiple.

TRY IT 1.5 Find the LCM of 9 and 12 using the Prime Factors Method.

TRY IT 1.6 Find the LCM of 18 and 24 using the Prime Factors Method.

...

     HOW TO

Find the least common multiple using the Prime Factors Method.

Step 1.  Write each number as a product of primes.
Step 2.  List the primes of each number. Match primes vertically when possible.
Step 3.  Bring down the columns.
Step 4.  Multiply the factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 13

Use Variables and Algebraic Symbols

In algebra, we use a letter of the alphabet to represent a number whose value may change. We call this a variable and
letters commonly used for variables are

  Variable

  A variable is a letter that represents a number whose value may change.

A number whose value always remains the same is called a constant.
  Constant
  A constant is a number whose value always stays the same.

To write algebraically, we need some operation symbols as well as numbers and variables. There are several types of
symbols we will be using. There are four basic arithmetic operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
We'll list the symbols used to indicate these operations below.

  Operation Symbols

  Operation     Notation      Say:                            The result is...
Addition                  plus        the sum of and
Subtraction               minus       the difference of and
Multiplication            times       the product of and
Division                  divided by  the quotient of and

                                        is called the dividend, and is called the divisor

When two quantities have the same value, we say they are equal and connect them with an equal sign.
  Equality Symbol
          is read "a is equal to b."
  The symbol "=" is called the equal sign.

On the number line, the numbers get larger as they go from left to right. The number line can be used to explain the
symbols "<" and ">".

  Inequality
14 1 · Foundations

The expressions        or  can be read from left to right or right to left, though in English we usually read from left

to right. In general,

Inequality Symbols

                           Inequality Symbols  Words

                                               a is not equal to b.

                                               a is less than b.

                                               a is less than or equal to b.

                                               a is greater than b.

                                               a is greater than or equal to b.

Grouping symbols in algebra are much like the commas, colons, and other punctuation marks in English. They help
identify an expression, which can be made up of number, a variable, or a combination of numbers and variables using
operation symbols. We will introduce three types of grouping symbols now.

  Grouping Symbols

Here are some examples of expressions that include grouping symbols. We will simplify expressions like these later in
this section.

What is the difference in English between a phrase and a sentence? A phrase expresses a single thought that is
incomplete by itself, but a sentence makes a complete statement. A sentence has a subject and a verb. In algebra, we
have expressions and equations.

  Expression

  An expression is a number, a variable, or a combination of numbers and variables using operation symbols.

Notice that the English phrases do not form a complete sentence because the phrase does not have a verb.
An equation is two expressions linked by an equal sign. When you read the words the symbols represent in an equation,
you have a complete sentence in English. The equal sign gives the verb.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 15

Equation
An equation is two expressions connected by an equal sign.

Suppose we need to multiply 2 nine times. We could write this as                       This is tedious and it can be

hard to keep track of all those 2s, so we use exponents. We write   as and             as In

expressions such as the 2 is called the base and the 3 is called the exponent. The exponent tells us how many times

we need to multiply the base.

Exponential Notation                       is in expanded notation.

We say is in exponential notation and
    means multiply a by itself, n times.

  The expression is read a to the power.
While we read as to the power", we usually read:

We'll see later why and have special names.
Table 1.1 shows how we read some expressions with exponents.

                               Expression  In Words

                               72          7 to the second power or 7 squared

                               53          5 to the third power or   5 cubed

                               94          9 to the fourth power

                               125         12 to the fifth power

                               Table 1.1

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

To simplify an expression means to do all the math possible. For example, to simplify  we would first multiply

to get 8 and then add the 1 to get 9. A good habit to develop is to work down the page, writing each step of the
16 1 · Foundations

     process below the previous step. The example just described would look like this:

By not using an equal sign when you simplify an expression, you may avoid confusing expressions with equations.
  Simplify an Expression
  To simplify an expression, do all operations in the expression.

We've introduced most of the symbols and notation used in algebra, but now we need to clarify the order of operations.
Otherwise, expressions may have different meanings, and they may result in different values.

For example, consider the expression  Some students simplify this getting 49, by adding  and then

multiplying that result by 7. Others get 25, by multiplying first and then adding 4.

The same expression should give the same result. So mathematicians established some guidelines that are called the
order of operations.

...

     HOW TO

Use the order of operations.

Step 1. Parentheses and Other Grouping Symbols
              Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping symbols, working on the innermost
                  parentheses first.

Step 2. Exponents
              Simplify all expressions with exponents.

Step 3. Multiplication and Division
              Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

Step 4. Addition and Subtraction
              Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

Students often ask, "How will I remember the order?" Here is a way to help you remember: Take the first letter of each
key word and substitute the silly phrase "Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally".

It's good that "My Dear" goes together, as this reminds us that multiplication and division have equal priority. We do not
always do multiplication before division or always do division before multiplication. We do them in order from left to
right.
Similarly, "Aunt Sally" goes together and so reminds us that addition and subtraction also have equal priority and we do
them in order from left to right.

  EXAMPLE 1.4

Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 17

  Solution

Parentheses? Yes, subtract first.
Exponents? No.
Multiplication or division? Yes.
Divide first because we multiply and divide left to right.
Any other multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply.
Any other multiplication of division? No.
Any addition or subtraction? Yes.
Add.

       TRY IT 1.7 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.8 Simplify:

When there are multiple grouping symbols, we simplify the innermost parentheses first and work outward.
  EXAMPLE 1.5

Simplify:
     Solution

  Are there any parentheses (or other
  grouping symbols)? Yes.
  Focus on the parentheses that are inside the
  brackets. Subtract.
  Continue inside the brackets and multiply.
  Continue inside the brackets and subtract.
  The expression inside the brackets requires
  no further simplification.
  Are there any exponents? Yes. Simplify exponents.
18 1 · Foundations

Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply.
Is there any addition of subtraction? Yes.
Add.
Add.

       TRY IT 1.9 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.10 Simplify:

Evaluate an Expression

In the last few examples, we simplified expressions using the order of operations. Now we'll evaluate some
expressions--again following the order of operations. To evaluate an expression means to find the value of the
expression when the variable is replaced by a given number.

  Evaluate an Expression

  To evaluate an expression means to find the value of the expression when the variable is replaced by a given
  number.

To evaluate an expression, substitute that number for the variable in the expression and then simplify the expression.

EXAMPLE 1.6

Evaluate when       

     Solution



  Use definition of exponent.
  Simplify.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 19

  Use definition of exponent.
  Simplify.



  Follow the order of operations.

TRY IT 1.11 Evaluate when               

TRY IT 1.12 Evaluate when               

Identify and Combine Like Terms

Algebraic expressions are made up of terms. A term is a constant, or the product of a constant and one or more
variables.

Term

A term is a constant or the product of a constant and one or more variables.

Examples of terms are              and

The constant that multiplies the variable is called the coefficient.

Coefficient

The coefficient of a term is the constant that multiplies the variable in a term.

Think of the coefficient as the number in front of the variable. The coefficient of the term  is 3. When we write the
coefficient is 1, since

Some terms share common traits. When two terms are constants or have the same variable and exponent, we say they
are like terms.

Look at the following 6 terms. Which ones seem to have traits in common?

We say,
      and are like terms.
        and are like terms.
20 1 · Foundations

             and are like terms.
        Like Terms
        Terms that are either constants or have the same variables raised to the same powers are called like terms.
     If there are like terms in an expression, you can simplify the expression by combining the like terms. We add the
     coefficients and keep the same variable.

        EXAMPLE 1.7
     How To Combine Like Terms
     Simplify:

           Solution

             TRY IT 1.13 Simplify:
             TRY IT 1.14 Simplify:

                    ...

                      HOW TO
        Combine like terms.
        Step 1. Identify like terms.
        Step 2. Rearrange the expression so like terms are together.
        Step 3. Add or subtract the coefficients and keep the same variable for each group of like terms.

    Translate an English Phrase to an Algebraic Expression

     We listed many operation symbols that are used in algebra. Now, we will use them to translate English phrases into
     algebraic expressions. The symbols and variables we've talked about will help us do that. Table 1.2 summarizes them.

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 21

Operation       Phrase                                    Expression

Addition        a plus b
                the sum of and b
                a increased by b
                b more than a
                the total of a and b
                b added to a

Subtraction     a minus
                the difference of a and b
                a decreased by b
                b less than a
                b subtracted from a

Multiplication  a times b
                the product of and
                twice a

Division        a divided by b
                the quotient of a and b
                the ratio of a and b
                b divided into a

Table 1.2

Look closely at these phrases using the four operations:

Each phrase tells us to operate on two numbers. Look for the words of and and to find the numbers.
  EXAMPLE 1.8

Translate each English phrase into an algebraic expression:

 the difference of and 9  the quotient of and 3  twelve more than  seven less than

     Solution

 The key word is difference, which tells us the operation is subtraction. Look for the words of and and to find the

numbers to subtract.

 The key word is quotient, which tells us the operation is division.

 The key words are more than. They tell us the operation is addition. More than means "added to."
22 1 · Foundations

 The key words are less than. They tell us to subtract. Less than means "subtracted from."

TRY IT 1.15         Translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression:
TRY IT 1.16
                     the difference of  and 13  the quotient of and 2  13 more than
                     18 less than

                    Translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression:

                     the sum of         and 19  the product of and y  Eleven more than x  Fourteen

                    less than 11a

We look carefully at the words to help us distinguish between multiplying a sum and adding a product.  This forces

  EXAMPLE 1.9

Translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression:

 eight times the sum of x and y  the sum of eight times x and y

     Solution
There are two operation words--times tells us to multiply and sum tells us to add.

 Because we are multiplying 8 times the sum, we need parentheses around the sum of x and y,

us to determine the sum first. (Remember the order of operations.)

 To take a sum, we look for the words of and and to see what is being added. Here we are taking the sum of eight

times x and y.

TRY IT 1.17         Translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression:

                     four times the sum of p and q
                     the sum of four times p and q

TRY IT 1.18         Translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression:

                     the difference of two times x and 8
                     two times the difference of x and 8

Later in this course, we'll apply our skills in algebra to solving applications. The first step will be to translate an English
phrase to an algebraic expression. We'll see how to do this in the next two examples.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 23

  EXAMPLE 1.10

The length of a rectangle is 14 less than the width. Let w represent the width of the rectangle. Write an expression for
the length of the rectangle.

     Solution
  Write a phrase about the length of the rectangle. 14 less than the width

Substitute w for "the width."             w

Rewrite less than as subtracted from.     14 subtracted from w

Translate the phrase into algebra.        w - 14

TRY IT 1.19           The length of a rectangle is 7 less than the width. Let w represent the width of the rectangle.
                      Write an expression for the length of the rectangle.

TRY IT 1.20           The width of a rectangle is 6 less than the length. Let l represent the length of the rectangle.
                      Write an expression for the width of the rectangle.

The expressions in the next example will be used in the typical coin mixture problems we will see soon.

  EXAMPLE 1.11

June has dimes and quarters in her purse. The number of dimes is seven less than four times the number of quarters.
Let q represent the number of quarters. Write an expression for the number of dimes.

     Solution
  Write a phrase about the number of dimes. seven less than four times the number of quarters

Substitute q for the number of quarters.  7 less than 4 times q

Translate 4 times q.                         7 less than 4q

Translate the phrase into algebra.                4q - 7

TRY IT 1.21           Geoffrey has dimes and quarters in his pocket. The number of dimes is eight less than four times
                      the number of quarters. Let q represent the number of quarters. Write an expression for the
                      number of dimes.

TRY IT 1.22           Lauren has dimes and nickels in her purse. The number of dimes is three more than seven times
                      the number of nickels. Let n represent the number of nickels. Write an expression for the
                      number of dimes.
24 1 · Foundations

        SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Identify Multiples and Factors

In the following exercises, use the divisibility tests to determine whether each number is divisible by 2, by 3, by 5, by 6,
and by 10.

1. 84                            2. 96                           3. 896

4. 942                           5. 22,335                       6. 39,075

Find Prime Factorizations and Least Common Multiples

In the following exercises, find the prime factorization.

7. 86                            8. 78                           9. 455
                                                                 12. 627
10. 400                          11. 432

In the following exercises, find the least common multiple of each pair of numbers using the prime factors method.

13. 8, 12                        14. 12, 16                      15. 28, 40

16. 84, 90                       17. 55, 88                      18. 60, 72

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

19.                              20.                             21.

22.                              23.                             24.

25.                              26.                             27.

28.                              29.                             30.

Evaluate an Expression

In the following exercises, evaluate the following expressions.

31. When                         32. When                        33. When
                                                                 36. When
                                    
                                    
                                    

34. When                         35. When

Simplify Expressions by Combining Like Terms

In the following exercises, simplify the following expressions by combining like terms.

37.                                                        38.

39.                                                        40.

41.                                                        42.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 25

Translate an English Phrase to an Algebraic Expression

In the following exercises, translate the phrases into algebraic expressions.

43.                                                     44.

      the difference of and                                   the difference of       and
      the quotient of and
      Twenty-one more than                                    the quotient of and
      less than                                               Eighteen more than ;
                                                              less than

45.                                                     46.

      the sum of   and                                        the sum of         and

      the product of and                                      the product of     and

      Fifteen more than                                       Twelve more than
      less than                                                less than

47.                                                     48.

      eight times the difference of  and nine                 seven times the difference of  and one
      the difference of eight times  and 9                    the difference of seven times  and 1

49.                                                     50.

      five times the sum of and                               eleven times the sum of and
      the sum of five times and                               the sum of eleven times and

51. Eric has rock and country songs on his playlist.    52. The number of women in a Statistics class is 8

     The number of rock songs is 14 more than twice          more than twice the number of men. Let

     the number of country songs. Let c represent the        represent the number of men. Write an

     number of country songs. Write an expression for        expression for the number of women.

     the number of rock songs.

53. Greg has nickels and pennies in his pocket. The     54. Jeannette has and bills in her wallet. The
      number of pennies is seven less than three times        number of fives is three more than six times the
      the number of nickels. Let n represent the              number of tens. Let represent the number of
      number of nickels. Write an expression for the          tens. Write an expression for the number of fives.
      number of pennies.

Writing Exercises

55. Explain in your own words how to find the prime     56. Why is it important to use the order of operations
      factorization of a composite number.                    to simplify an expression?

57. Explain how you identify the like terms in the      58. Explain the difference between the phrases "4
      expression                                              times the sum of x and y" and "the sum of 4 times
                                                              x and y".
26 1 · Foundations

    Self Check

      Use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

1.2 Integers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions with absolute value
           Add and subtract integers
           Multiply and divide integers
           Simplify expressions with integers
           Evaluate variable expressions with integers
           Translate phrases to expressions with integers
           Use integers in applications

BE PREPARED 1.2                A more thorough introduction to the topics covered in this section can be found in the
                               Elementary Algebra 2e chapter, Foundations.

Simplify Expressions with Absolute Value

A negative number is a number less than 0. The negative numbers are to the left of zero on the number line. See Figure
1.2.

                            Figure 1.2 The number line shows the location of positive and negative numbers.
You may have noticed that, on the number line, the negative numbers are a mirror image of the positive numbers, with
zero in the middle. Because the numbers and are the same distance from zero, each one is called the opposite of
the other. The opposite of is and the opposite of is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2 · Integers 27

  Opposite
  The opposite of a number is the number that is the same distance from zero on the number line but on the opposite
  side of zero.

Figure 1.3 illustrates the definition.

                                     Figure 1.3 The opposite of 3 is .

Opposite Notation

We saw that numbers such as 3 and are opposites because they are the same distance from 0 on the number line.
They are both three units from 0. The distance between 0 and any number on the number line is called the absolute
value of that number.

Absolute Value

The absolute value of a number is its distance from 0 on the number line.

The absolute value of a number is written as and            for all numbers.

Absolute values are always greater than or equal to zero.

For example,

Figure 1.4 illustrates this idea.

                                            Figure 1.4 The numbers 5 and are 5 units away from 0.

The absolute value of a number is never negative because distance cannot be negative. The only number with absolute
value equal to zero is the number zero itself because the distance from 0 to 0 on the number line is zero units.

In the next example, we'll order expressions with absolute values.

EXAMPLE 1.12

Fill in  or    for each of the following pairs of numbers:

                                                  

     Solution


28 1 · Foundations

  Simplify.
  Order.



  Simplify.
  Order.



  Simplify.
  Order.



  Simplify.
  Order.

TRY IT 1.23         Fill in      or for each of the following pairs of numbers:

                                       

TRY IT 1.24         Fill in      or for each of the following pairs of numbers:

                                                                                 

We now add absolute value bars to our list of grouping symbols. When we use the order of operations, first we simplify
inside the absolute value bars as much as possible, then we take the absolute value of the resulting number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                  1.2 · Integers 29

Grouping Symbols

In the next example, we simplify the expressions inside absolute value bars first just as we do with parentheses.
  EXAMPLE 1.13

Simplify:
     Solution

  Work inside parentheses first:
  subtract 2 from 6.
  Multiply 3(4).
  Subtract inside the absolute value bars.
  Take the absolute value.
  Subtract.

       TRY IT 1.25 Simplify:
       TRY IT 1.26 Simplify:

Add and Subtract Integers

So far, we have only used the counting numbers and the whole numbers.

Our work with opposites gives us a way to define the integers. The whole numbers and their opposites are called the
integers. The integers are the numbers

  Integers
  The whole numbers and their opposites are called the integers.
  The integers are the numbers

Most students are comfortable with the addition and subtraction facts for positive numbers. But doing addition or
subtraction with both positive and negative numbers may be more challenging.
We will use two color counters to model addition and subtraction of negatives so that you can visualize the procedures
instead of memorizing the rules.
30 1 · Foundations

     We let one color (blue) represent positive. The other color (red) will represent the negatives.

     If we have one positive counter and one negative counter, the value of the pair is zero. They form a neutral pair. The
     value of this neutral pair is zero.

We will use the counters to show how to add:

The first example,    adds 5 positives and 3 positives--both positives.

The second example,              adds 5 negatives and 3 negatives--both negatives.

When the signs are the same, the counters are all the same color, and so we add them. In each case we get 8--either 8
positives or 8 negatives.

So what happens when the signs are different? Let's add  and

When we use counters to model addition of positive and negative integers, it is easy to see whether there are more
positive or more negative counters. So we know whether the sum will be positive or negative.

EXAMPLE 1.14

Add:                             

  Solution



  1 negative plus 4 negatives is 5 negatives



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           1.2 · Integers 31

  There are more positives, so the sum is positive.



There are more negatives, so the sum is negative.

TRY IT 1.27 Add:                                     

TRY IT 1.28 Add:                                     

We will continue to use counters to model the subtraction. Perhaps when you were younger, you read         as "5 take
away 3." When you use counters, you can think of subtraction the same way!

We will use the counters to show to subtract:

The first example,       we subtract 3 positives from 5 positives and end up with 2 positives.

In the second example,   we subtract 3 negatives from 5 negatives and end up with 2 negatives.

Each example used counters of only one color, and the "take away" model of subtraction was easy to apply.

What happens when we have to subtract one positive and one negative number? We'll need to use both blue and red
counters as well as some neutral pairs. If we don't have the number of counters needed to take away, we add neutral
pairs. Adding a neutral pair does not change the value. It is like changing quarters to nickels--the value is the same, but
it looks different.

Let's look at       and

Model the first number.
32 1 · Foundations

        We now add the needed
        neutral pairs.

        We remove the number
        of counters modeled by
        the second number.

        Count what is left.

EXAMPLE 1.15

Subtract:                          

  Solution



  Take 1 negative from 3 negatives and get 2 negatives positives.



  Take 1 positive from 3 negatives and get 2 negatives.



  Take 1 positive from the one added neutral pair.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.2 · Integers 33

Take 1 negative from the one added neutral pair.

  TRY IT 1.29 Subtract:                                       

  TRY IT 1.30 Subtract:                                       

Have you noticed that subtraction of signed numbers can be done by adding the opposite? In the last example,       is

the same as           and  is the same as         You will often see this idea, the Subtraction Property, written

as follows:

Subtraction Property

Subtracting a number is the same as adding its opposite.

EXAMPLE 1.16

Simplify:     and              and                                   and    and

  Solution



Subtract.



  Subtract.



  Subtract.



  Subtract.

  TRY IT 1.31 Simplify:      and                                and         and
34 1 · Foundations

                                        and

TRY IT 1.32 Simplify:                        and    and                                              and  

                                 and

What happens when there are more than three integers? We just use the order of operations as usual.
  EXAMPLE 1.17

Simplify:
     Solution

Simplify inside the parentheses first.
Subtract left to right.
Subtract.

       TRY IT 1.33 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.34 Simplify:

Multiply and Divide Integers

Since multiplication is mathematical shorthand for repeated addition, our model can easily be applied to show
multiplication of integers. Let's look at this concrete model to see what patterns we notice. We will use the same
examples that we used for addition and subtraction. Here, we are using the model just to help us discover the pattern.
We remember that means add a, b times.

The next two examples are more interesting. What does it mean to multiply 5 by It means subtract times.
Looking at subtraction as "taking away", it means to take away 5, 3 times. But there is nothing to take away, so we start
by adding neutral pairs on the workspace.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1.2 · Integers 35

In summary:

Notice that for multiplication of two signed numbers, when the

What about division? Division is the inverse operation of multiplication. So,  because        In words, this

expression says that 15 can be divided into 3 groups of 5 each because adding five three times gives 15. If you look at

some examples of multiplying integers, you might figure out the rules for dividing integers.

Division follows the same rules as multiplication with regard to signs.
  Multiplication and Division of Signed Numbers

For multiplication and division of two signed numbers:

                                                    Same signs  Result

             · Two positives Positive

             · Two negatives Positive

If the signs are the same, the result is positive.
36 1 · Foundations

                                   Different signs                Result

                                   · Positive and negative Negative

                                   · Negative and positive Negative

If the signs are different, the result is negative.

  EXAMPLE 1.18                      

Multiply or divide: 

     Solution



  Divide, with signs that are the same the quotient is positive.



  Multiply, with same signs.



  Multiply, with different signs.



Divide, with different signs, the quotient is negative.

TRY IT 1.35 Multiply or divide:                           

TRY IT 1.36 Multiply or divide:                           

When we multiply a number by 1, the result is the same number. Each time we multiply a number by  we get its
opposite!

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             1.2 · Integers 37

Multiplication by

Multiplying a number by gives its opposite.

Simplify Expressions with Integers

What happens when there are more than two numbers in an expression? The order of operations still applies when
negatives are included. Remember Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally?

Let's try some examples. We'll simplify expressions that use all four operations with integers--addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. Remember to follow the order of operations.

EXAMPLE 1.19

Simplify:          

  Solution

Notice the difference in parts (a) and (b). In part (a), the exponent means to raise what is in the parentheses, the to
the 4th power. In part (b), the exponent means to raise just the 2 to the 4th power and then take the opposite.



  Write in expanded form.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.



Write in expanded form.
We are asked to find the opposite of .
Multiply.
Multiply.
Multiply.

  TRY IT 1.37 Simplify:                 

  TRY IT 1.38 Simplify:                 
38 1 · Foundations

The last example showed us the difference between      and  This distinction is important to prevent future

errors. The next example reminds us to multiply and divide in order left to right.

EXAMPLE 1.20

Simplify:                        

  Solution



  Exponents first.
  Multiply.
  Divide.



Multiply and divide left to right, so divide first.
Multiply.
Add.

  TRY IT 1.39 Simplify:                              

  TRY IT 1.40 Simplify:                              

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

Remember that to evaluate an expression means to substitute a number for the variable in the expression. Now we can
use negative numbers as well as positive numbers.

EXAMPLE 1.21

Evaluate                         when
     Solution

  Simplify exponents.
  Multiply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               1.2 · Integers 39

Subtract.
Add.

TRY IT 1.41 Evaluate:                     when

TRY IT 1.42 Evaluate:                     when

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Integers

Our earlier work translating English to algebra also applies to phrases that include both positive and negative numbers.

EXAMPLE 1.22

Translate and simplify: the sum of 8 and  increased by
     Solution

Translate.
Simplify. Be careful not to confuse the brackets with an absolute value sign.
Add.

TRY IT 1.43 Translate and simplify the sum of 9 and     increased by 4.

TRY IT 1.44 Translate and simplify the sum of and       increased by 7.

Use Integers in Applications

We'll outline a plan to solve applications. It's hard to find something if we don't know what we're looking for or what to
call it! So when we solve an application, we first need to determine what the problem is asking us to find. Then we'll write
a phrase that gives the information to find it. We'll translate the phrase into an expression and then simplify the
expression to get the answer. Finally, we summarize the answer in a sentence to make sure it makes sense.

  EXAMPLE 1.23

How to Solve Application Problems Using Integers
In the morning, the temperature in Kendallville, Indiana was 11 degrees. By mid-afternoon, the temperature had
dropped to degrees. What was the difference in the morning and afternoon temperatures?
40 1 · Foundations

           Solution

TRY IT 1.45          In the morning, the temperature in Anchorage, Alaska was degrees. By mid-afternoon the
                     temperature had dropped to 30 degrees below zero. What was the difference in the morning
                     and afternoon temperatures?

TRY IT 1.46          The temperature in Denver was degrees at lunchtime. By sunset the temperature had
                     dropped to degrees. What was the difference in the lunchtime and sunset temperatures?

...

     HOW TO

Use Integers in Applications.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what we are asked to find.
Step 3.  Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
Step 4.  Translate the phrase to an expression.
Step 5.  Simplify the expression.
Step 6.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.2 · Integers 41

     MEDIA
     Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with integers.
     Subtracting Integers with Counters (https://openstax.org/l/25subintegers)

        SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions with Absolute Value

In the following exercises, fill in    or for each of the following pairs of numbers.

59.                                    60.               61.

                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            

62.

   
   
   
   

In the following exercises, simplify.

63.                                    64.               65.

66.                                    67.               68.

69.                                    70.

Add and Subtract Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

71.                                    72.               73.

                                                         76.
                                                         79.
                                          
                                                            
74.                                    75.                  
                                                            
77.                                    78.                  

80.                                    81.               82.

                                       84.               85.                             
                                                         88.                               
   
                                                         91.

83.

86.                                    87.             

89.                                    90.
42 1 · Foundations

92.                               93.                              94.

Multiply and Divide Integers

In the following exercises, multiply or divide.

95.                                                          96.

                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                

97.                                                          98.

                                                                
                                                                
                                                                
                                                                

Simplify and Evaluate Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

99.                               100.                             101.

102.                              103.                             104.

105.                              106.                             107.

108.                              109.                             110.

111.                              112.                             113.

114.                              115.                             116.

117.                              118.

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

119.                  when        120.                 when        121.  when

                                                                               when
                                                                         and
122.                when          123.                 when        124.

                                                 and

125.                        when  126.                       when

Translate English Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible.

127. the sum of 3 and             128. the sum of and              129.
        increased by 7                    increased by
                                                                        the difference of
130.                              131. the quotient of and
                                          the sum of and                   and
     the difference of
                                                                        subtract from
        and
                                                                   132. the product of and
     subtract from                                                         the difference of and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 1.3 · Fractions 43

Use Integers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

133. Temperature On January 15, the high                      134. Temperature On January 21, the high

temperature in Anaheim, California, was 84°.                  temperature in Palm Springs, California, was

That same day, the high temperature in                        and the high temperature in Whitefield, New

Embarrass, Minnesota, was           What was the              Hampshire, was               What was the difference

difference between the temperature in Anaheim                 between the temperature in Palm Springs and

and the temperature in Embarrass?                             the temperature in Whitefield?

135. Football On the first down, the Chargers had the         136. Football On first down, the Steelers had the ball
        ball on their 25-yard line. They lost 6 yards on the          on their 30-yard line. They gained 9 yards on the
        first-down play, gained 10 yards on the second-               first-down play, lost 14 yards on the second-
        down play, and lost 8 yards on the third-down                 down play, and lost 2 yards on the third-down
        play. What was the yard line at the end of the                play. What was the yard line at the end of the
        third-down play?                                              third-down play?

137. Checking Account Mayra has $124 in her                   138. Checking Account Reymonte has a balance of
        checking account. She writes a check for $152.                        in his checking account. He deposits $281
        What is the new balance in her checking
        account?                                                      to the account. What is the new balance?

Writing Exercises

139. Explain why the sum of and 2 is negative, but            140. Give an example from your life experience of
        the sum of 8 and is positive.                                 adding two negative numbers.

141. In your own words, state the rules for                   142. Why is
        multiplying and dividing integers.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

1.3 Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify fractions
           Multiply and divide fractions
           Add and subtract fractions
           Use the order of operations to simplify fractions
           Evaluate variable expressions with fractions

BE PREPARED 1.3               A more thorough introduction to the topics covered in this section can be found in the
                              Elementary Algebra 2e chapter, Foundations.
44 1 · Foundations

    Simplify Fractions

     A fraction is a way to represent parts of a whole. The fraction represents two of three equal parts. See Figure 1.5. In
     the fraction the 2 is called the numerator and the 3 is called the denominator. The line is called the fraction bar.

               Figure 1.5 In the circle, of the circle is shaded--2 of the 3 equal parts.

Fraction

A fraction is written where       and

a is the numerator and b is the denominator.

A fraction represents parts of a whole. The denominator is the number of equal parts the whole has been divided
into, and the numerator indicates how many parts are included.

Fractions that have the same value are equivalent fractions. The Equivalent Fractions
Property allows us to find equivalent fractions and also simplify fractions.

Equivalent Fractions Property

If a, b, and c are numbers where

then      and

A fraction is considered simplified if there are no common factors, other than 1, in its numerator and denominator.
For example,

         is simplified because there are no common factors of 2 and

          is not simplified because 5 is a common factor of 10 and

We simplify, or reduce, a fraction by removing the common factors of the numerator and denominator. A fraction is not
simplified until all common factors have been removed. If an expression has fractions, it is not completely simplified until
the fractions are simplified.
Sometimes it may not be easy to find common factors of the numerator and denominator. When this happens, a good
idea is to factor the numerator and the denominator into prime numbers. Then divide out the common factors using the
Equivalent Fractions Property.

  EXAMPLE 1.24

How To Simplify a Fraction
Simplify:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   1.3 · Fractions 45

TRY IT 1.47 Simplify:

TRY IT 1.48 Simplify:

We now summarize the steps you should follow to simplify fractions.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Simplify a fraction.

Step 1.  Rewrite the numerator and denominator to show the common factors.
         If needed, factor the numerator and denominator into prime numbers first.
Step 2.  Simplify using the Equivalent Fractions Property by dividing out common factors.
Step 3.  Multiply any remaining factors.

Multiply and Divide Fractions

Many people find multiplying and dividing fractions easier than adding and subtracting fractions.
To multiply fractions, we multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

Fraction Multiplication

If a, b, c, and d are numbers where  and  then

  To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

When multiplying fractions, the properties of positive and negative numbers still apply, of course. It is a good idea to
determine the sign of the product as the first step. In Example 1.25, we will multiply a negative by a negative, so the
product will be positive.
When multiplying a fraction by an integer, it may be helpful to write the integer as a fraction. Any integer, a, can be
written as So, for example,

  EXAMPLE 1.25

Multiply:
     Solution

The first step is to find the sign of the product. Since the signs are the same, the product is positive.
46 1 · Foundations

Determine the sign of the product. The signs
are the same, so the product is positive.

Write 20x as a fraction.

Multiply.

Rewrite 20 to show the common factor 5
and divide it out.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 1.49 Multiply:

       TRY IT 1.50 Multiply:

Now that we know how to multiply fractions, we are almost ready to divide. Before we can do that, we need some
vocabulary. The reciprocal of a fraction is found by inverting the fraction, placing the numerator in the denominator and
the denominator in the numerator. The reciprocal of is Since 4 is written in fraction form as the reciprocal of 4 is

To divide fractions, we multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

Fraction Division

If a, b, c, and d are numbers where            and  then

To divide fractions, we multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

We need to say                   and  to be sure we don't divide by zero!
  EXAMPLE 1.26

Find the quotient:
     Solution

To divide, multiply the first fraction by the
reciprocal of the second.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              1.3 · Fractions 47

Determine the sign of the product, and
then multiply.
Rewrite showing common factors.

Remove common factors.

Simplify.

       TRY IT 1.51 Divide:

       TRY IT 1.52 Divide:

The numerators or denominators of some fractions contain fractions themselves. A fraction in which the numerator or
the denominator is a fraction is called a complex fraction.

  Complex Fraction
  A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or the denominator contains a fraction.

Some examples of complex fractions are:

To simplify a complex fraction, remember that the fraction bar means division. For example, the complex fraction
means

  EXAMPLE 1.27
Simplify:

     Solution

Rewrite as division.
Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
Multiply.
48 1 · Foundations

        Look for common factors.
        Divide common factors and simplify.

TRY IT 1.53 Simplify:

TRY IT 1.54 Simplify:

Add and Subtract Fractions

When we multiplied fractions, we just multiplied the numerators and multiplied the denominators right straight across.
To add or subtract fractions, they must have a common denominator.

Fraction Addition and Subtraction

If a, b, and c are numbers where             then

  To add or subtract fractions, add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator.

The least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions is the smallest number that can be used as a common
denominator of the fractions. The LCD of the two fractions is the least common multiple (LCM) of their denominators.

  Least Common Denominator
  The least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions is the least common multiple (LCM) of their denominators.

After we find the least common denominator of two fractions, we convert the fractions to equivalent fractions with the
LCD. Putting these steps together allows us to add and subtract fractions because their denominators will be the same!

  EXAMPLE 1.28
How to Add or Subtract Fractions
Add:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                1.3 · Fractions 49

Solution

TRY IT 1.55 Add:

TRY IT 1.56 Add:

...

     HOW TO

Add or subtract fractions.

Step 1.    Do they have a common denominator?
             Yes--go to step 2.
             No--rewrite each fraction with the LCD (least common denominator).
             Find the LCD.
             Change each fraction into an equivalent fraction with the LCD as its denominator.

Step 2. Add or subtract the fractions.
Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

We now have all four operations for fractions. Table 1.3 summarizes fraction operations.

Fraction Multiplication                 Fraction Division

Table 1.3
50 1 · Foundations                                    Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
                                                      Fraction Subtraction
        Multiply the numerators and multiply the
        denominators
        Fraction Addition

Add the numerators and place the sum over the         Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the
common denominator.                                   common denominator.

                                 To multiply or divide fractions, an LCD is NOT needed.
                                     To add or subtract fractions, an LCD is needed.

Table 1.3

When starting an exercise, always identify the operation and then recall the methods needed for that operation.

EXAMPLE 1.29

Simplify:     

  Solution

First ask, "What is the operation?" Identifying the operation will determine whether or not we need a common

denominator. Remember, we need a common denominator to add or subtract, but not to multiply or divide.



What is the operation? The operation is subtraction.

Do the fractions have a common denominator? No.

Find the LCD of 6 and 10                                                                 The LCD is 30.

  Rewrite each fraction as an equivalent fraction with the LCD.

  Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominators.
  Simplify, if possible. There are no common factors. The fraction is simplified.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1.3 · Fractions 51

What is the operation? Multiplication.

To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

Rewrite, showing common factors.
Remove common factors.

Simplify.

Notice, we needed an LCD to add         but not to multiply

TRY IT 1.57 Simplify:                   

TRY IT 1.58 Simplify:                   

Use the Order of Operations to Simplify Fractions

The fraction bar in a fraction acts as grouping symbol. The order of operations then tells us to simplify the numerator
and then the denominator. Then we divide.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Simplify an expression with a fraction bar.

Step 1. Simplify the expression in the numerator. Simplify the expression in the denominator.
Step 2. Simplify the fraction.

Where does the negative sign go in a fraction? Usually the negative sign is in front of the fraction, but you will sometimes
see a fraction with a negative numerator, or sometimes with a negative denominator. Remember that fractions represent
division. When the numerator and denominator have different signs, the quotient is negative.

  Placement of Negative Sign in a Fraction
  For any positive numbers a and b,

  EXAMPLE 1.30
Simplify:

     Solution
The fraction bar acts like a grouping symbol. So completely simplify the numerator and the denominator separately.
52 1 · Foundations

        Multiply.
        Simplify.
        Divide.

             TRY IT 1.59 Simplify:
             TRY IT 1.60 Simplify:
     Now we'll look at complex fractions where the numerator or denominator contains an expression that can be simplified.
     So we first must completely simplify the numerator and denominator separately using the order of operations. Then we
     divide the numerator by the denominator as the fraction bar means division.
       EXAMPLE 1.31
     How to Simplify Complex Fractions
     Simplify:
           Solution

             TRY IT 1.61 Simplify:

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          1.3 · Fractions 53

       TRY IT 1.62 Simplify:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Simplify complex fractions.
  Step 1. Simplify the numerator.
  Step 2. Simplify the denominator.
  Step 3. Divide the numerator by the denominator. Simplify if possible.

  EXAMPLE 1.32

Simplify:

     Solution
It may help to put parentheses around the numerator and the denominator.

  Simplify the numerator (LCD = 6) and simplify the denominator (LCD = 12).

  Simplify.
  Divide the numerator by the denominator.
  Simplify.
  Divide out common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 1.63 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.64 Simplify:

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Fractions

We have evaluated expressions before, but now we can evaluate expressions with fractions. Remember, to evaluate an
expression, we substitute the value of the variable into the expression and then simplify.
54 1 · Foundations

EXAMPLE 1.33

Evaluate            when         and

     Solution
Substitute the values into the expression.

Simplify exponents first.

Multiply; divide out the common factors.

Notice we write 16 as            to make it easy to

remove common factors.

Simplify.

      TRY IT 1.65 Evaluate             when          and

      TRY IT 1.66 Evaluate             when          and

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with fractions.
      Adding Fractions with Unlike Denominators (https://openstax.org/l/25addfractions)

        SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Fractions

In the following exercises, simplify.

143.                                   144.                   145.

146.                                   147.                   148.

149.                                   150.

Multiply and Divide Fractions

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

151.                                   152.                   153.

154.                                   155.                   156.

157.                                   158.                   159.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         1.3 · Fractions 55

160.                                   161.        162.
                                                   165.
163.                                   164.
                                                   169.
166.                                               172.

In the following exercises, simplify.              175.
                                                   178.
167.                                   168.        181.
                                                   184.
170.                                   171.        187.

Add and Subtract Fractions                             
                                                       
In the following exercises, add or subtract.
                                                   190.
173.                                   174.
                                                       
176.                                   177.            

179.                                   180.        195.
                                                   198.
182.                                   183.        201.

185.                                   186.        204.
                                                   207.
                                           
                                           

188.                                   189.

                                           
                                           

191.                                   192.

                                           
                                           

Use the Order of Operations to Simplify Fractions

In the following exercises, simplify.

193.                                   194.

196.                                   197.

199.                                   200.

202.                                   203.

205.                                   206.

208.
56 1 · Foundations

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

209.                                   210.              211.

212.                                   213.              214.

215.                                   216.              217.

218.                                   219.              220.

221.                                   222.              223.

224.                                   225.              226.

227.                                   228.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Fractions

In the following exercises, evaluate.

229.    when                           230.      when    231.  when

                                                               and

232.  when                             233.  when        234.  when
        and

Writing Exercises

235. Why do you need a common denominator to add         236. How do you find the LCD of 2 fractions?
        or subtract fractions? Explain.
                                                         238. Explain how you find the reciprocal of a negative
237. Explain how you find the reciprocal of a fraction.          number.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             1.4 · Decimals 57

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

1.4 Decimals

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Round decimals
           Add and subtract decimals
           Multiply and divide decimals
           Convert decimals, fractions, and percents
           Simplify expressions with square roots
           Identify integers, rational numbers, irrational numbers, and real numbers
           Locate fractions and decimals on the number line

BE PREPARED 1.4  A more thorough introduction to the topics covered in this section can be found in the
                 Elementary Algebra 2e chapter, Foundations.

Round Decimals

Decimals are another way of writing fractions whose denominators are powers of ten.

Just as in whole numbers, each digit of a decimal corresponds to the place value based on the powers of ten. Figure 1.6
shows the names of the place values to the left and right of the decimal point.

                                                                              Figure 1.6

When we work with decimals, it is often necessary to round the number to the nearest required place value. We
summarize the steps for rounding a decimal here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Round decimals.

Step 1.  Locate the given place value and mark it with an arrow.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Underline the digit to the right of the place value.

         Is the underlined digit greater than or equal to 5?
           Yes: add 1 to the digit in the given place value.
           No: do not change the digit in the given place value

Step 4. Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the right of the rounding digit.
58 1 · Foundations

EXAMPLE 1.34

Round 18.379 to the nearest      hundredth    tenth   whole number.

     Solution
Round

 to the nearest hundredth

Locate the hundredths place with an arrow.

  Underline the digit to the right of the given
  place value.

  Because 9 is greater than or equal to 5, add 1 to
  the 7.

  Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the
  right of the rounding digit.
  Notice that the deleted digits were NOT
  replaced with zeros.

 to the nearest tenth

  Locate the tenths place with an arrow.

  Underline the digit to the right of the
  given place value.

  Because 7 is greater than or equal to 5,
  add 1 to the 3.

  Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to
  the right of the rounding digit.

  Notice that the deleted digits were NOT
  replaced with zeros.

 to the nearest whole number

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.4 · Decimals 59

Locate the ones place with an arrow.

Underline the digit to the right of the
given place value.

Since 3 is not greater than or equal to 5,
do not add 1 to the 8.
Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to
the right of the rounding digit.

  TRY IT 1.67 Round        to the nearest  hundredth  tenth  whole number.

  TRY IT 1.68 Round          to the nearest  thousandth  hundredth  tenth.

Add and Subtract Decimals

To add or subtract decimals, we line up the decimal points. By lining up the decimal points this way, we can add or
subtract the corresponding place values. We then add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers and then
place the decimal point in the sum.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Add or subtract decimals.

Step 1.  Determine the sign of the sum or difference.
Step 2.  Write the numbers so the decimal points line up vertically.
Step 3.  Use zeros as placeholders, as needed.
Step 4.  Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the
         decimal point in the answer under the decimal points in the given numbers.
Step 5.  Write the sum or difference with the appropriate sign.

EXAMPLE 1.35

Add or subtract:           

  Solution


60 1 · Foundations

The difference will be negative. To subtract, we add the numerals. Write the numbers so
the decimal points line up vertically.

Put 0 as a placeholder after the 5 in 23.5.

Remember,           so           .

  Add the numbers as if they were whole numbers.
  Then place the decimal point in the sum.

  Write the result with the correct sign.



The difference will be negative. To subtract, we subtract 14.65 from 20.
Write the numbers so the decimal points line up vertically.
Remember, 20 is a whole number, so place the decimal point after the 0.
Put in zeros to the right as placeholders.

Subtract and place the decimal point in the answer.

Write the result with the correct sign.

TRY IT 1.69 Add or subtract:                         

TRY IT 1.70 Add or subtract:                         

Multiply and Divide Decimals

When we multiply signed decimals, first we determine the sign of the product and then multiply as if the numbers were
both positive. We multiply the numbers temporarily ignoring the decimal point and then count the number of decimal
points in the factors and that sum tells us the number of decimal places in the product. Finally, we write the product with
the appropriate sign.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.4 · Decimals 61

...

     HOW TO

Multiply decimals.

Step 1.  Determine the sign of the product.
Step 2.  Write in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right. Multiply the numbers as if they were whole
         numbers, temporarily ignoring the decimal points.
Step 3.  Place the decimal point. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum of
         the number of decimal places in the factors.
Step 4.  Write the product with the appropriate sign.

  EXAMPLE 1.36
Multiply:

     Solution

The signs are different. The product              The product will be negative.
will be negative.

Write in vertical format, lining up the
numbers on the right.

Multiply.

Add the number of decimal places in
the factors (1 + 3).
Place the decimal point 4 places from the right.

  The signs are the different, so the product is negative.

       TRY IT 1.71 Multiply:
       TRY IT 1.72 Multiply:
Often, especially in the sciences, you will multiply decimals by powers of 10 (10, 100, 1000, etc). If you multiply a few
products on paper, you may notice a pattern relating the number of zeros in the power of 10 to number of decimal
places we move the decimal point to the right to get the product.
62 1 · Foundations

                    ...

                      HOW TO
        Multiply a decimal by a power of ten.
        Step 1. Move the decimal point to the right the same number of places as the

                   number of zeros in the power of 10.
        Step 2. Add zeros at the end of the number as needed.

        EXAMPLE 1.37

   Multiply: 5.63 by  10  100  1000.

           Solution
     By looking at the number of zeros in the multiple of ten, we see the number of places we need to move the decimal to
     the right.

   

        There is 1 zero in 10, so move the decimal point 1 place to the right.

   

        There are 2 zeroes in 100, so move the decimal point 2 places to the right.

   

        There are 3 zeroes in 1,000, so move the decimal point 3 place to the right.
        A zero must be added to the end.

       TRY IT 1.73 Multiply 2.58 by  10  100  1000.
       TRY IT 1.74 Multiply 14.2 by  10  100  1000.

     Just as with multiplication, division of signed decimals is very much like dividing whole numbers. We just have to figure
     out where the decimal point must be placed and the sign of the quotient. When dividing signed decimals, first determine
     the sign of the quotient and then divide as if the numbers were both positive. Finally, write the quotient with the

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1.4 · Decimals 63

appropriate sign.
We review the notation and vocabulary for division:

We'll write the steps to take when dividing decimals for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Divide decimals.

Step 1.  Determine the sign of the quotient.
Step 2.  Make the divisor a whole number by "moving" the decimal point all the way to the right. "Move" the decimal
         point in the dividend the same number of places--adding zeros as needed.
Step 3.  Divide. Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
Step 4.  Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

  EXAMPLE 1.38

Divide:
     Solution

Remember, you can "move" the decimals in the divisor and dividend because of the Equivalent Fractions Property.

The signs are the same.                              The quotient is positive.

Make the divisor a whole number by "moving" the
decimal point all the way to the right.

"Move" the decimal point in the dividend the same
number of places.

Divide.
Place the decimal point in the quotient above the
decimal point in the dividend.

Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

       TRY IT 1.75 Divide:

       TRY IT 1.76 Divide:

Convert Decimals, Fractions, and Percents

In our work, it is often necessary to change the form of a number. We may have to change fractions to decimals or
decimals to percent.
64 1 · Foundations

We convert decimals into fractions by identifying the place value of the last (farthest right) digit. In the decimal  the

3 is in the hundredths place, so 100 is the denominator of the fraction equivalent to 0.03.

The steps to take to convert a decimal to a fraction are summarized in the procedure box.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Convert a decimal to a proper fraction and a fraction to a decimal.

Step 1.  To convert a decimal to a proper fraction, determine the place value of the final digit.
Step 2.
         Write the fraction.
           numerator--the "numbers" to the right of the decimal point
           denominator--the place value corresponding to the final digit

Step 3. To convert a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator of the fraction by the denominator of the fraction.

EXAMPLE 1.39

Write:              as a fraction   as a decimal.

     Solution



Determine the place value of the final digit.

Write the fraction for 0.374:
The numerator is 374.
The denominator is 1,000.

Simplify the fraction.

Divide out the common factors.

 Since a fraction bar means division, we begin by writing the fraction as  Now divide.

TRY IT 1.77 Write:                  as a fraction   as a decimal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.4 · Decimals 65

TRY IT 1.78 Write:   as a fraction                          as a decimal.

A percent is a ratio whose denominator is 100. Percent means per hundred. We use the percent symbol, %, to show
percent. Since a percent is a ratio, it can easily be expressed as a fraction. Percent means per 100, so the denominator of
the fraction is 100. We then change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator. After doing
this many times, you may see the pattern.

To convert a percent number to a decimal number, we move the decimal point two places to the left.

To convert a decimal to a percent, remember that percent means per hundred. If we change the decimal to a fraction
whose denominator is 100, it is easy to change that fraction to a percent. After many conversions, you may recognize the
pattern.

To convert a decimal to a percent, we move the decimal point two places to the right and then add the percent sign.

...

     HOW TO

Convert a percent to a decimal and a decimal to a percent.

Step 1.  To convert a percent to a decimal, move the decimal point two places to the left after removing the percent
Step 2.  sign.
         To convert a decimal to a percent, move the decimal point two places to the right and then add the percent
         sign.

  EXAMPLE 1.40

Convert each:

 percent to a decimal: 62%, 135%, and 13.7%.
 decimal to a percent: 0.51, 1.25, and 0.093.

     Solution



  Move the decimal point two places to the left.



Move the decimal point two places to the right.
    TRY IT 1.79 Convert each:
66 1 · Foundations

                        percent to a decimal: 9%, 87%, and 3.9%.
                        decimal to a percent: 0.17, 1.75, and 0.0825.

    TRY IT 1.80        Convert each:

                        percent to a decimal: 3%, 91%, and 8.3%.
                        decimal to a percent: 0.41, 2.25, and 0.0925.

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots

Remember that when a number is multiplied by itself, we write and read it " squared." The result is called the
square of a number n. For example, is read "8 squared" and 64 is called the square of 8. Similarly, 121 is the square
of 11 because is 121. It will be helpful to learn to recognize the perfect square numbers.

Square of a number

If          then m is the square of n.

What about the squares of negative numbers? We know that when the signs of two numbers are the same, their product
is positive. So the square of any negative number is also positive.

Because             we say 100 is the square of 10. We also say that 10 is a square root of 100. A number whose square

is m is called a square root of a number m.

Square Root of a Number

If          then n is a square root of m.

Notice              also, so is also a square root of 100. Therefore, both 10 and are square roots of 100. So,

every positive number has two square roots--one positive and one negative. The radical sign, , denotes the positive

square root. The positive square root is called the principal square root. When we use the radical sign that always

means we want the principal square root.

Square Root Notation

    is read "the square root of ."

If          then                 for
                                    is the positive number whose square is m.
The square root of m,

We know that every positive number has two square roots and the radical sign indicates the positive one. We write

            If we want to find the negative square root of a number, we place a negative in front of the radical sign. For

example,               We read             as "the opposite of the principal square root of 10."

EXAMPLE 1.41

Simplify:                        

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.4 · Decimals 67

     Solution



  Since



  Since



  The negative is in front of the radical sign.

TRY IT 1.81 Simplify:                            

TRY IT 1.82 Simplify:                            

Identify Integers, Rational Numbers, Irrational Numbers, and Real Numbers

We have already described numbers as counting numbers, whole numbers, and integers. What is the difference
between these types of numbers? Difference could be confused with subtraction. How about asking how we distinguish
between these types of numbers?

What type of numbers would we get if we started with all the integers and then included all the fractions? The numbers
we would have form the set of rational numbers. A rational number is a number that can be written as a ratio of two
integers.

In general, any decimal that ends after a number of digits (such as 7.3 or  ) is a rational number. We can use the

reciprocal (or multiplicative inverse) of the place value of the last digit as the denominator when writing the decimal as a

fraction. The decimal for is the number The bar over the 3 indicates that the number 3 repeats infinitely.

Continuously has an important meaning in calculus. The number(s) under the bar is called the repeating block and it
repeats continuously.

Since all integers can be written as a fraction whose denominator is 1, the integers (and so also the counting and whole
numbers. are rational numbers.

Every rational number can be written both as a ratio of integers  where p and q are integers and  and as a
decimal that stops or repeats.
68 1 · Foundations

Rational Number

A rational number is a number of the form  where p and q are integers and
Its decimal form stops or repeats.

Are there any decimals that do not stop or repeat? Yes! The number (the Greek letter pi, pronounced "pie"), which is
very important in describing circles, has a decimal form that does not stop or repeat. We use three dots (...) to indicate
the decimal does not stop or repeat.

The square root of a number that is not a perfect square is a decimal that does not stop or repeat.
A numbers whose decimal form does not stop or repeat cannot be written as a fraction of integers. We call this an
irrational number.

  Irrational Number

  An irrational number is a number that cannot be written as the ratio of two integers.
  Its decimal form does not stop and does not repeat.

Let's summarize a method we can use to determine whether a number is rational or irrational.

  Rational or Irrational

  If the decimal form of a number
    · repeats or stops, the number is a rational number.
    · does not repeat and does not stop, the number is an irrational number.

We have seen that all counting numbers are whole numbers, all whole numbers are integers, and all integers are
rational numbers. The irrational numbers are numbers whose decimal form does not stop and does not repeat. When
we put together the rational numbers and the irrational numbers, we get the set of real numbers.

  Real Number

  A real number is a number that is either rational or irrational.

Later in this course we will introduce numbers beyond the real numbers. Figure 1.7 illustrates how the number sets
we've used so far fit together.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         1.4 · Decimals 69

                     Figure 1.7 This chart shows the number sets that make up the set of real numbers.

Does the term "real numbers" seem strange to you? Are there any numbers that are not "real," and, if so, what could they

be? Can we simplify  Is there a number whose square is

None of the numbers that we have dealt with so far has a square that is  Why? Any positive number squared is

positive. Any negative number squared is positive. So we say there is no real number equal to  The square root of

a negative number is not a real number.

EXAMPLE 1.42

Given the numbers    real numbers.       list the  whole numbers  integers  rational numbers 

irrational numbers 

Solution

 Remember, the whole numbers are              so 8 is the only whole number given.

 The integers are the whole numbers and their opposites (which includes 0). So the whole number 8 is an integer,

and is the opposite of a whole number so it is an integer, too. Also, notice that 64 is the square of 8 so

So the integers are  and

 Since all integers are rational, then   and  are rational. Rational numbers also include fractions and

decimals that repeat or stop, so and     are rational. So the list of rational numbers is                  and

 Remember that 5 is not a perfect square, so  is irrational.
 All the numbers listed are real numbers.

TRY IT 1.83          Given the numbers                        list the  whole numbers  integers 
                     rational numbers
                                              real numbers.
                      irrational numbers 

TRY IT 1.84          Given numbers                                         list the  whole numbers       integers

                      rational numbers        irrational numbers         real numbers.

Locate Fractions and Decimals on the Number Line

We now want to include fractions and decimals on the number line. Let's start with fractions and locate
                             and on the number line.
70 1 · Foundations

We'll start with the whole numbers 3 and because they are the easiest to plot. See Figure 1.8.

The proper fractions listed are and We know the proper fraction has value less than one and so would be

located between 0 and 1. The denominator is 5, so we divide the unit from 0 to 1 into 5 equal parts  We plot

Similarly, is between 0 and After dividing the unit into 5 equal parts we plot

Finally, look at the improper fractions         Locating these points may be easier if you change each of them to a
mixed number.

Figure 1.8 shows the number line with all the points plotted.

                                                  Figure 1.8

EXAMPLE 1.43

Locate and label the following on a number line:               and

     Solution                                     is between 0 and 1. Divide the distance between 0 and 1 into four equal
Locate and plot the integers,

Locate the proper fraction first. The fraction
parts, then we plot Similarly plot

Now locate the improper fractions        and It is easier to plot them if we convert them to mixed numbers and then
plot them as described above:

       TRY IT 1.85 Locate and label the following on a number line:

       TRY IT 1.86 Locate and label the following on a number line:

Since decimals are forms of fractions, locating decimals on the number line is similar to locating fractions on the number
line.

  EXAMPLE 1.44

Locate on the number line:  0.4 

     Solution

 The decimal number 0.4 is equivalent to a proper fraction, so 0.4 is located between 0 and 1. On a number line,

divide the interval between 0 and 1 into 10 equal parts. Now label the parts 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0. We
write 0 as 0.0 and 1 as 1.0, so that the numbers are consistently in tenths. Finally, mark 0.4 on the number line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1.4 · Decimals 71

 The decimal    is equivalent to              so it is located between 0 and  On a number line, mark off and label

the hundredths in the interval between 0 and

      TRY IT 1.87 Locate on the number line:        

      TRY IT 1.88 Locate on the number line:        

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with decimals.
      Arithmetic Basics: Dividing Decimals (https://openstax.org/l/25dividedecim)

        SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Round Decimals

In the following exercises, round each number to the nearest  hundredth  tenth  whole number.

239. 5.781                             240. 1.638     241. 0.299

242. 0.697                             243. 63.479    244. 84.281

Add and Subtract Decimals

In the following exercises, add or subtract.

245.                                   246.           247.

248.                                   249.           250.

251.                                   252.           253.

254.                                   255.           256.

Multiply and Divide Decimals

In the following exercises, multiply.

257.                                   258.           259.

260.                                   261.           262.

263.                                   264.           265.

266.                                   267.           268.

In the following exercises, divide. Round money monetary answers to the nearest cent.

269.                                   270.           271.

272.                                   273.           274.
72 1 · Foundations

Convert Decimals, Fractions and Percents

In the following exercises, write each decimal as a fraction.

275.                                   276. 1.464                 277.

278.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a decimal.

279.                                   280.                       281.

282.

In the following exercises, convert each percent to a decimal.

283.                                   284.                       285.

286.

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a percent.

287.                                   288. 3                     289.

290.

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots

In the following exercises, simplify.

291.                                   292.                       293.

294.                                   295.                       296.

Identify Integers, Rational Numbers, Irrational Numbers, and Real Numbers

In the following exercises, list the  whole numbers,  integers,  rational numbers,  irrational numbers,  real
numbers for each set of numbers.

297.                                   298.                       299.

300.

Locate Fractions and Decimals on the Number Line
In the following exercises, locate the numbers on a number line.

301.                                   302.                       303.

304.                                   305.                       306.     
                                       308.  
307.                

Writing Exercises

309. How does knowing about U.S. money help you                310. When the Szetos sold their home, the selling
        learn about decimals?                                          price was 500% of what they had paid for the
                                                                       house 30 years ago. Explain what 500% means in
311. In your own words, explain the difference                         this context.
        between a rational number and an irrational
        number.                                                312. Explain how the sets of numbers (counting,
                                                                       whole, integer, rational, irrationals, reals) are
                                                                       related to each other.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 73

Self Check

 Use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

1.5 Properties of Real Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the commutative and associative properties
           Use the properties of identity, inverse, and zero
           Simplify expressions using the Distributive Property

BE PREPARED 1.5       A more thorough introduction to the topics covered in this section can be found in the
                      Elementary Algebra 2e chapter, Foundations.

Use the Commutative and Associative Properties

The order we add two numbers doesn't affect the result. If we add       or       the results are the same--they both

equal 17. So,         The order in which we add does not matter!

Similarly, when multiplying two numbers, the order does not affect the result. If we multiply or  the results are

the same--they both equal 72. So,          The order in which we multiply does not matter!

These examples illustrate the Commutative Property.

Commutative Property

When adding or multiplying, changing the order gives the same result.

The Commutative Property has to do with order. We subtract         and      , and see that                Since changing

the order of the subtraction does not give the same result, we know that subtraction is not commutative.

Division is not commutative either. Since            changing the order of the division did not give the same result.

The commutative properties apply only to addition and multiplication!

Addition and multiplication are commutative.

Subtraction and division are not commutative.

When adding three numbers, changing the grouping of the numbers gives the same result. For example,
                                     since each side of the equation equals 17.
74 1 · Foundations                                        since each side of the equation equals 5.

     This is true for multiplication, too. For example,
     These examples illustrate the Associative Property.

        Associative Property

  When adding or multiplying, changing the grouping gives the same result.

The Associative Property has to do with grouping. If we change how the numbers are grouped, the result will be the
same. Notice it is the same three numbers in the same order--the only difference is the grouping.
We saw that subtraction and division were not commutative. They are not associative either.

When simplifying an expression, it is always a good idea to plan what the steps will be. In order to combine like terms in
the next example, we will use the Commutative Property of addition to write the like terms together.

  EXAMPLE 1.45
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use the Commutative Property of addition to reorder so that like terms are together.
  Add like terms.

       TRY IT 1.89 Simplify:
       TRY IT 1.90 Simplify:
When we have to simplify algebraic expressions, we can often make the work easier by applying the Commutative
Property or Associative Property first.
  EXAMPLE 1.46
Simplify:
     Solution

  Notice that the last 2 terms have a common denominator, so change the grouping.
  Add in parentheses first.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 75

Simplify the fraction.
Add.
Convert to an improper fraction.

TRY IT 1.91 Simplify:

TRY IT 1.92 Simplify:

Use the Properties of Identity, Inverse, and Zero

What happens when we add 0 to any number? Adding 0 doesn't change the value. For this reason, we call 0 the additive

identity. The Identity Property of Addition that states that for any real number  and

What happens when we multiply any number by one? Multiplying by 1 doesn't change the value. So we call 1 the

multiplicative identity. The Identity Property of Multiplication that states that for any real number         and

We summarize the Identity Properties here.
  Identity Property

What number added to 5 gives the additive identity, 0? We know

The missing number was the opposite of the number!
We call the additive inverse of The opposite of a number is its additive inverse. A number and its opposite add to
zero, which is the additive identity. This leads to the Inverse Property of Addition that states for any real number

What number multiplied by gives the multiplicative identity, 1? In other words, times what results in 1? We know

The missing number was the reciprocal of the number!
We call the multiplicative inverse of a. The reciprocal of a number is its multiplicative inverse. This leads to the
Inverse Property of Multiplication that states that for any real number
We'll formally state the inverse properties here.
76 1 · Foundations

       Inverse Property

The Identity Property of addition says that when we add 0 to any number, the result is that same number. What happens
when we multiply a number by 0? Multiplying by 0 makes the product equal zero.

What about division involving zero? What is     Think about a real example: If there are no cookies in the cookie jar

and 3 people are to share them, how many cookies does each person get? There are no cookies to share, so each person

gets 0 cookies. So,

We can check division with the related multiplication fact. So we know           because

Now think about dividing by zero. What is the result of dividing 4 by Think about the related multiplication fact:

Is there a number that multiplied by 0 gives Since any real number multiplied by 0 gives 0, there is no real number

that can be multiplied by 0 to obtain 4. We conclude that there is no answer to  and so we say that division by 0 is

undefined.

We summarize the properties of zero here.

Properties of Zero

Multiplication by Zero: For any real number a,

Division by Zero: For any real number a,

We will now practice using the properties of identities, inverses, and zero to simplify expressions.
  EXAMPLE 1.47

Simplify:
     Solution

  Notice that the first and third terms are opposites; use the Commutative Property of
  addition to re-order the terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 77

Add left to right.
Add.

       TRY IT 1.93 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.94 Simplify:

Now we will see how recognizing reciprocals is helpful. Before multiplying left to right, look for reciprocals--their product
is 1.

  EXAMPLE 1.48
Simplify:

     Solution

  Notice the first and third terms are reciprocals, so use the Commutative Property of multiplication to
  re-order the factors.
  Multiply left to right.
  Multiply.

  TRY IT 1.95 Simplify:

  TRY IT 1.96 Simplify:

The next example makes us aware of the distinction between dividing 0 by some number or some number being divided
by 0.

EXAMPLE 1.49

Simplify:           where    where

  Solution





  TRY IT 1.97 Simplify:      where    where
78 1 · Foundations

TRY IT 1.98 Simplify:            where    where

Simplify Expressions Using the Distributive Property

Suppose that three friends are going to the movies. They each need $9.25--that's 9 dollars and 1 quarter--to pay for
their tickets. How much money do they need all together?

You can think about the dollars separately from the quarters. They need 3 times $9 so $27 and 3 times 1 quarter, so 75
cents. In total, they need $27.75. If you think about doing the math in this way, you are using the Distributive Property.

Distributive Property

In algebra, we use the Distributive Property to remove parentheses as we simplify expressions.
  EXAMPLE 1.50

Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 1.99 Simplify:
       TRY IT 1.100 Simplify:
Some students find it helpful to draw in arrows to remind them how to use the Distributive Property. Then the first step
in Example 1.50 would look like this:

  EXAMPLE 1.51
Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
          1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 79

Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 1.101 Simplify:
       TRY IT 1.102 Simplify:
Using the Distributive Property as shown in the next example will be very useful when we solve money applications in
later chapters.
  EXAMPLE 1.52
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 1.103 Simplify:
       TRY IT 1.104 Simplify:
When we distribute a negative number, we need to be extra careful to get the signs correct!
  EXAMPLE 1.53
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.
  Simplify.
80 1 · Foundations

Notice that you could also write the result as  Do you know why?

       TRY IT 1.105 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.106 Simplify:

In the next example, we will show how to use the Distributive Property to find the opposite of an expression.
  EXAMPLE 1.54

Simplify:
     Solution

Multiplying by results in the opposite.
Distribute.
Simplify.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 1.107 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.108 Simplify:

There will be times when we'll need to use the Distributive Property as part of the order of operations. Start by looking at
the parentheses. If the expression inside the parentheses cannot be simplified, the next step would be multiply using the
Distributive Property, which removes the parentheses. The next two examples will illustrate this.

  EXAMPLE 1.55

Simplify:
     Solution

We follow the order of operations. Multiplication comes before subtraction, so we will distribute the 2 first and then
subtract.

Distribute.
Multiply.
Combine like terms.

TRY IT 1.109 Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 81

       TRY IT 1.110 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 1.56
Simplify:

     Solution

  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 1.111 Simplify:

       TRY IT 1.112 Simplify:

All the properties of real numbers we have used in this chapter are summarized here.
             Commutative Property
             When adding or multiplying, changing the order gives the same result

Associative Property
When adding or multiplying, changing the grouping gives the same result.

Distributive Property

Identity Property
82 1 · Foundations

                             Inverse Property

      Properties of Zero

        SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, simplify.

313.                                              314.

315.                                              316.

317.                                              318.

319.                                              320.

321.                                              322.

323.                                              324.

325.                                              326.

327.                                              328.

Use the Properties of Identity, Inverse and Zero

In the following exercises, simplify.

329.                                              330.

331.                                              332.

333.                                              334.

335.                                              336.

337.  where                                       338.           where
                                                        where
339.  where                                       340.
                                                                    where
341.         where                                342.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.5 · Properties of Real Numbers 83

Simplify Expressions Using the Distributive Property

In the following exercises, simplify using the Distributive Property.

343.               344.                                                345.

346.               347.                                                348.

349.               350.                                                351.

352.               353.                                                354.

355.               356.                                                357.

358.               359.                                                360.

361.               362.                                                363.

364.               365.                                                366.

367.               368.                                                369.

370.               371.                                                372.

373.               374.                                                375.

376.               377.                                                378.

379.               380.

Writing Exercises

381. In your own words, state the Associative         382. What is the difference between the additive
        Property of addition.                                 inverse and the multiplicative inverse of a
                                                              number?

383. Simplify      using the Distributive             384. Explain how you can multiply    without

      Property and explain each step.                 paper or calculator by thinking of                as

                                                                       and then using the Distributive

                                                      Property.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?
84 1 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

absolute value The absolute value of a number is its distance from on the number line.

additive identity The number 0 is the additive identity because adding 0 to any number does not change its value.

additive inverse The opposite of a number is its additive inverse.

coefficient The coefficient of a term is the constant that multiplies the variable in a term.

complex fraction A fraction in which the numerator or the denominator is a fraction is called a complex fraction.

composite number A composite number is a counting number that is not prime. It has factors other than 1 and the

number itself.

constant A constant is a number whose value always stays the same.

denominator In a fraction, written where               the denominator b is the number of equal parts the whole has

been divided into.

divisible by a number If a number m is a multiple of n, then m is divisible by n.

equation An equation is two expressions connected by an equal sign.

equivalent fractions Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value.

evaluate an expression To evaluate an expression means to find the value of the expression when the variables are

replaced by given numbers.

expression An expression is a number, a variable, or a combination of numbers and variables using operation symbols.

factors If             then a and b are factors of m.

fraction A fraction is written where      and a is the numerator and b is the denominator. A fraction represents

parts of a whole.

integers The whole numbers and their opposites are called the integers.

irrational number An irrational number is a number that cannot be written as the ratio of two integers. Its decimal

form does not stop and does not repeat.

least common denominator The least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions is the least common multiple

(LCM) of their denominators.

least common multiple The least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers is the smallest number that is a multiple of

both numbers.

like terms Terms that are either constants or have the same variables raised to the same powers are called like terms.

multiple of a number A number is a multiple of n if it is the product of a counting number and n.

multiplicative identity The number 1 is the multiplicative identity because multiplying 1 by any number does not

change its value.

multiplicative inverse The reciprocal of a number is its multiplicative inverse.

negative numbers Numbers less than are negative numbers.

numerator In a fraction, written where    the numerator a indicates how many parts are included.

opposite The opposite of a number is the number that is the same distance from zero on the number line but on the

opposite side of zero.

order of operations The order of operations are established guidelines for simplifying an expression.

percent A percent is a ratio whose denominator is 100.

prime factorization The prime factorization of a number is the product of prime numbers that equals the number.

prime number A prime number is a counting number greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and the number itself.

principal square root The positive square root is called the principal square root.

rational number A rational number is a number of the form where p and q are integers and               Its decimal form

stops or repeats.

real number A real number is a number that is either rational or irrational.

reciprocal The reciprocal of a fraction is found by inverting the fraction, placing the numerator in the denominator and

the denominator in the numerator.

simplify an expression To simplify an expression means to do all the math possible.

square of a number If            then m is the square of n.

square root of a number If         then n is a square root of m.

term A term is a constant, or the product of a constant and one or more variables.

variable A variable is a letter that represents a number whose value may change.

Key Concepts

1.1 Use the Language of Algebra

  · Divisibility Tests

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1 · Chapter Review 85

    A number is divisible by:
          2 if the last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8.
          3 if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3.
          5 if the last digit is 5 or 0.
          6 if it is divisible by both 2 and 3.
          10 if it ends with 0.

· How to find the prime factorization of a composite number.
    Step 1. Find two factors whose product is the given number, and use these numbers to create two branches.
    Step 2. If a factor is prime, that branch is complete. Circle the prime, like a bud on the tree.
    Step 3. If a factor is not prime, write it as the product of two factors and continue the process.
    Step 4. Write the composite number as the product of all the circled primes.

· How To Find the least common multiple using the prime factors method.
    Step 1. Write each number as a product of primes.
    Step 2. List the primes of each number. Match primes vertically when possible.
    Step 3. Bring down the columns.
    Step 4. Multiply the factors.

· Equality Symbol
            is read "a is equal to b."

    The symbol "=" is called the equal sign.
· Inequality

· Inequality Symbols  Inequality Symbols  Words
· Grouping Symbols
                                          a is not equal to b.

                                          a is less than b.

                                          a is less than or equal to b.

                                          a is greater than b.

                                          a is greater than or equal to b.

                      Table 1.4

· Exponential Notation
        means multiply a by itself, n times.

   The expression is read a to the power.
· Simplify an Expression

    To simplify an expression, do all operations in the expression.
· How to use the order of operations.

    Step 1. Parentheses and Other Grouping Symbols
                  Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping symbols, working on the innermost
                      parentheses first.

    Step 2. Exponents
86 1 · Chapter Review

              Simplify all expressions with exponents.

Step 3. Multiplication and Division
              Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

Step 4. Addition and Subtraction
              Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

· How to combine like terms.
    Step 1. Identify like terms.
    Step 2. Rearrange the expression so like terms are together.
    Step 3. Add or subtract the coefficients and keep the same variable for each group of like terms.

                                 Operation       Phrase                     Expression

                                 Addition        a plus b
                                                 the sum of and b
                                                 a increased by b
                                                 b more than a
                                                 the total of a and b
                                                 b added to a

                                 Subtraction     a minus
                                                 the difference of a and b
                                                 a decreased by b
                                                 b less than a
                                                 b subtracted from a

                                 Multiplication  a times b
                                                 the product of and
                                                 twice a

                                 Division        a divided by b

                                                 the quotient of a and b
                                                 the ratio of a and b
                                                 b divided into a

                                 Table 1.5

1.2 Integers

  · Opposite Notation

· Absolute Value

The absolute value of a number is its distance from 0 on the number line.

The absolute value of a number n is written as and            for all numbers.

Absolute values are always greater than or equal to zero.

· Grouping Symbols

· Subtraction Property

    Subtracting a number is the same as adding its opposite.
· Multiplication and Division of Signed Numbers

    For multiplication and division of two signed numbers:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1 · Chapter Review 87

                                              Same signs        Result

                                              · Two positives Positive

                                              · Two negatives Positive

                           If the signs are the same, the result is positive.

                                              Different signs   Result

                                        · Positive and negative Negative

                                        · Negative and positive Negative

                           If the signs are different, the result is negative.

· Multiplication by

    Multiplying a number by gives its opposite.
· How to Use Integers in Applications.

    Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood
    Step 2. Identify what we are asked to find.
    Step 3. Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
    Step 4. Translate the phrase to an expression.
    Step 5. Simplify the expression.
    Step 6. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

1.3 Fractions                                 then

  · Equivalent Fractions Property

      If a, b, and c are numbers where

· How to simplify a fraction.
    Step 1. Rewrite the numerator and denominator to show the common factors.
               If needed, factor the numerator and denominator into prime numbers first.
    Step 2. Simplify using the Equivalent Fractions Property by dividing out common factors.
    Step 3. Multiply any remaining factors.

· Fraction Multiplication

If a, b, c, and d are numbers where     and         then

To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

· Fraction Division

If a, b, c, and d are numbers where           and         then

To divide fractions, we multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

· Fraction Addition and Subtraction

If a, b, and c are numbers where        then

To add or subtract fractions, add or subtract the numerators and place the result over the common denominator.

· How to add or subtract fractions.

Step 1.  Do they have a common denominator?
           Yes--go to step 2.
           No--rewrite each fraction with the LCD (least common denominator).
           Find the LCD.
88 1 · Chapter Review

                     Change each fraction into an equivalent fraction with the LCD as its denominator.

      Step 2. Add or subtract the fractions.
      Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

  · How to simplify an expression with a fraction bar.
      Step 1. Simplify the expression in the numerator. Simplify the expression in the denominator.
      Step 2. Simplify the fraction.

  · Placement of Negative Sign in a Fraction
      For any positive numbers a and b,

  · How to simplify complex fractions.
      Step 1. Simplify the numerator.
      Step 2. Simplify the denominator.
      Step 3. Divide the numerator by the denominator. Simplify if possible.

1.4 Decimals

  · How to round decimals.
      Step 1. Locate the given place value and mark it with an arrow.
      Step 2. Underline the digit to the right of the place value.
      Step 3. Is the underlined digit greater than or equal to
                     Yes: add 1 to the digit in the given place value.
                     No: do not change the digit in the given place value

      Step 4. Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the right of the rounding digit.

  · How to add or subtract decimals.
      Step 1. Determine the sign of the sum or difference.
      Step 2. Write the numbers so the decimal points line up vertically.
      Step 3. Use zeros as placeholders, as needed.
      Step 4. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal point in the answer
                  under the decimal points in the given numbers.
      Step 5. Write the sum or difference with the appropriate sign

  · How to multiply decimals.
      Step 1. Determine the sign of the product.
      Step 2. Write in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right. Multiply the numbers as if they were whole
                  numbers, temporarily ignoring the decimal points.
      Step 3. Place the decimal point. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum of the number of decimal
                  places in the factors.
      Step 4. Write the product with the appropriate sign.

  · How to multiply a decimal by a power of ten.
      Step 1. Move the decimal point to the right the same number of places as the number of zeros in the power of 10.
      Step 2. Add zeros at the end of the number as needed.

  · How to divide decimals.
      Step 1. Determine the sign of the quotient.
      Step 2. Make the divisor a whole number by "moving" the decimal point all the way to the right. "Move" the decimal
                  point in the dividend the same number of places--adding zeros as needed.
      Step 3. Divide. Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
      Step 4. Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

  · How to convert a decimal to a proper fraction and a fraction to a decimal.
      Step 1. To convert a decimal to a proper fraction, determine the place value of the final digit.
      Step 2. Write the fraction.
                     numerator--the "numbers" to the right of the decimal point
                     denominator--the place value corresponding to the final digit

      Step 3. To convert a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator of the fraction by the denominator of the fraction.

  · How to convert a percent to a decimal and a decimal to a percent.
      Step 1. To convert a percent to a decimal, move the decimal point two places to the left after removing the percent

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1 · Chapter Review 89

           sign.
Step 2. To convert a decimal to a percent, move the decimal point two places to the right and then add the percent

           sign.

· Square Root Notation

    is read "the square root of m."

If  then                for

The square root of m,   is the positive number whose square is m.

· Rational or Irrational

    If the decimal form of a number
    repeats or stops, the number is a rational number.
    does not repeat and does not stop, the number is an irrational number.

· Real Numbers

                                                                                 Figure 1.9

1.5 Properties of Real Numbers

  Commutative Property
  When adding or multiplying, changing the order gives the same result

  Associative Property
  When adding or multiplying, changing the grouping gives the same result.

  Distributive Property
90 1 · Exercises

  Identity Property

  Inverse Property

Properties of Zero

Exercises                                                    386. Find the prime factorization of 252.

Review Exercises

Use the Language of Algebra

Identify Multiples and Factors

385. Use the divisibility tests to determine whether
        180 is divisible by 2, by 3, by 5, by 6, and by 10.

387. Find the least common multiple of 24 and 40.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

388.                                                         389.

Evaluate an Expression

In the following exercises, evaluate the following expressions.

390. When                                                    391.  when

Simplify Expressions by Combining Like Terms

In the following exercises, simplify the following expressions by combining like terms.

392.                                                         393.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1 · Exercises 91

Translate an English Phrase to an Algebraic Expression

In the following exercises, translate the phrases into algebraic expressions.

394.                                                    395.

       the sum of         and                                eleven times the difference of  and two
                                                             the difference of eleven times  and two
       the product of and
       twelve more than
       less than

396. Dushko has nickels and pennies in his pocket.

      The number of pennies is four less than five

      times the number of nickels. Let represent the

      number of nickels. Write an expression for the

      number of pennies.

Integers

Simplify Expressions with Absolute Value

In the following exercise, fill in     or for each of the following pairs of numbers.

397.

    
    
    
    

In the following exercises, simplify.

398.                                   399.

Add and Subtract Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

400.                                   401.             402.

                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             

403.                                   404.

Multiply and Divide Integers

In the following exercise, multiply or divide.

405.      
          
      

Simplify and Evaluate Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

406.                                   407.             408.

409.                                   410.
92 1 · Exercises

For the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

411.   when                            412.             when

Translate English Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible.

413. the sum of and                    414.  the difference of 17
        increased by 23                    and  subtract 17

                                               from

Use Integers in Applications

In the following exercise, solve.

415. Temperature On July 10,
        the high temperature in
        Phoenix, Arizona, was
        109°, and the high
        temperature in Juneau,
        Alaska, was 63°. What was
        the difference between
        the temperature in
        Phoenix and the
        temperature in Juneau?

Fractions
Simplify Fractions
In the following exercises, simplify.

416.                                   417.

Multiply and Divide Fractions
In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

418.                                   419.                        420.

Add and Subtract Fractions

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

421.                                   422.                        423.                     

424.              

Use the Order of Operations to Simplify Fractions

In the following exercises, simplify.

425.                                   426.                        427.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        1 · Exercises 93

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Fractions

In the following exercises, evaluate.

428.        when                       429.  when

            and

Decimals

Round Decimals

430. Round        to the

      nearest  hundredth
       tenth  whole

      number.

Add and Subtract Decimals

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

431.                                   432.                       433.

Multiply and Divide Decimals

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

434.                                   435.                       436.

437.                                   438.                       439.

Convert Decimals, Fractions and Percents

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a fraction.

440.                                   441.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a decimal.

442.                                   443.

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a percent.

444.                                   445.

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots

In the following exercises, simplify.

446.                                   447.

Identify Integers, Rational Numbers, Irrational Numbers, and Real Numbers

In the following exercise, list the  whole numbers  integers  rational numbers  irrational numbers  real numbers
for each set of numbers

448.

Locate Fractions and Decimals on the Number Line

In the following exercises, locate the numbers on a number line.

449.                                   450.  
94 1 · Exercises

Properties of Real Numbers

Use the Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, simplify.

451.                                   452.                                453.

Use the Properties of Identity, Inverse and Zero

In the following exercises, simplify.

454.                                   455.                                456.

457.

Simplify Expressions Using the Distributive Property

In the following exercises, simplify using the Distributive Property.

458.                                   459.                                460.

461.                                   462.                                463.

464.                                   465.

Practice Test                          467. Combine like terms:            468. Evaluate when
                                                                                   and
466. Find the prime
        factorization of               470. Dushko has nickels and         471. Round          to the
                                               pennies in his pocket. The
469. Translate to an algebraic                 number of pennies is              nearest
        expression and simplify:               seven less than four times
                                               the number of nickels. Let         hundredth 
     eleven less than                            represent the number
                                               of nickels. Write an              thousandth
        negative eight                         expression for the
                                               number of pennies.
     the difference of
                                       473. Locate               on
        and , increased by 5
                                             a number line.
472. Convert

     to a decimal 

               to a percent

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

474.                                   475.                                476.
                                                                           479.
477.                                   478.                                482.

480.                                   481.

483.                                   484.                                485.

486.                                   487.                                488.

489.                                   490.                                491.

492.                                   493.                                494.

495.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2 · Introduction 95

2  SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS

Figure 2.1 This drone is flying high in the sky while its pilot remains safely on the ground. (credit: "Unsplash" / Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations
  2.2 Use a Problem Solving Strategy
  2.3 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable
  2.4 Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications
  2.5 Solve Linear Inequalities
  2.6 Solve Compound Inequalities
  2.7 Solve Absolute Value Inequalities

      Introduction

Imagine being a pilot, but not just any pilot--a drone pilot. Drones, or unmanned aerial vehicles, are devices that can be
flown remotely. They contain sensors that can relay information to a command center where the pilot is located. Larger
drones can also carry cargo. In the near future, several companies hope to use drones to deliver materials and piloting a
drone will become an important career. Law enforcement and the military are using drones rather than send personnel
into dangerous situations. Building and piloting a drone requires the ability to program a set of actions, including taking
off, turning, and landing. This, in turn, requires the use of linear equations. In this chapter, you will explore linear
equations, develop a strategy for solving them, and relate them to real-world situations.

2.1 Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve linear equations using a general strategy
           Classify equations
           Solve equations with fraction or decimal coefficients

       BE PREPARED 2.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.51.

   BE PREPARED 2.2  Simplify:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.55.
96 2 · Solving Linear Equations

BE PREPARED 2.3                  Find the LCD of and
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.28.

Solve Linear Equations Using a General Strategy

Solving an equation is like discovering the answer to a puzzle. The purpose in solving an equation is to find the value or
values of the variable that makes it a true statement. Any value of the variable that makes the equation true is called a
solution to the equation. It is the answer to the puzzle!

  Solution of an Equation

  A solution of an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when substituted into the equation.

To determine whether a number is a solution to an equation, we substitute the value for the variable in the equation. If
the resulting equation is a true statement, then the number is a solution of the equation.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution to an Equation.

Step 1.  Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

         Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
           If it is true, the number is a solution.
           If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

  EXAMPLE 2.1

Determine whether the values are solutions to the equation:



     Solution
Since a solution to an equation is a value of the variable that makes the equation true, begin by substituting the value of
the solution for the variable.



Multiply.
Simplify.

Since      does not result in a true equation,  is not a solution to the equation



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 97

Multiply.
Simplify.

Since      results in a true equation,  is a solution to the equation

TRY IT 2.1       Determine whether the values are solutions to the equation:

                 

TRY IT 2.2       Determine whether the values are solutions to the equation:

                 

There are many types of equations that we will learn to solve. In this section we will focus on a linear equation.

Linear Equation

A linear equation is an equation in one variable that can be written, where a and b are real numbers and            as:

To solve a linear equation it is a good idea to have an overall strategy that can be used to solve any linear equation. In
the next example, we will give the steps of a general strategy for solving any linear equation. Simplifying each side of the
equation as much as possible first makes the rest of the steps easier.

EXAMPLE 2.2

How to Solve a Linear Equation Using a General Strategy

Solve:           .

Solution
98 2 · Solving Linear Equations

TRY IT 2.3 Solve:

TRY IT 2.4 Solve:

These steps are summarized in the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations below.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve linear equations using a general strategy.

Step 1.  Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
         Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
Step 2.  Combine like terms.
Step 3.  Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equation.
Step 4.  Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
         Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the equation.
Step 5.  Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
         Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1.
         Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
         State the solution to the equation.
         Check the solution.
         Substitute the solution into the original equation to make sure the result is a true statement.

  EXAMPLE 2.3
Solve:

     Solution

Distribute.
Add m to both sides to get the variables only on the left.
Simplify.
Add 4 to both sides to get constants only on the right.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                             2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 99

Divide both sides by three.
Simplify.
Check:
Let

       TRY IT 2.5 Solve:

       TRY IT 2.6 Solve:

We can solve equations by getting all the variable terms to either side of the equal sign. By collecting the variable terms
on the side where the coefficient of the variable is larger, we avoid working with some negatives. This will be a good
strategy when we solve inequalities later in this chapter. It also helps us prevent errors with negatives.

  EXAMPLE 2.4
Solve:

     Solution

  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.
  Subtract from each side to get the variables only on
  the right since
  Simplify.
  Subtract 21 from each side to get the constants on left.
  Simplify.

  Divide both sides by 6.
100 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Simplify.
         Check:
         Let

       TRY IT 2.7 Solve:
       TRY IT 2.8 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 2.5
Solve:

     Solution

Simplify from the innermost parentheses first.

Combine like terms in the brackets.

Distribute.

Add        to both sides to get the

variables to the right.

Simplify.

Subtract 600 from both sides to get the
constants to the left.

Simplify.

Divide both sides by 85.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 101

Check:
Let

TRY IT 2.9 Solve:

TRY IT 2.10 Solve:

Classify Equations

Whether or not an equation is true depends on the value of the variable. The equation              is true when we

replace the variable, x, with the value but not true when we replace x with any other value. An equation like this is

called a conditional equation. All the equations we have solved so far are conditional equations.

Conditional Equation

An equation that is true for one or more values of the variable and false for all other values of the variable is a
conditional equation.

Now let's consider the equation  Do you recognize that the left side and the right side are

equivalent? Let's see what happens when we solve for y.

Solve:

Distribute.                                                                     is true.
Subtract to each side to get the to one side.
Simplify--the y's are eliminated.

                                                                           But

This means that the equation     is true for any value of y. We say the solution to the equation is all of

the real numbers. An equation that is true for any value of the variable is called an identity.
102 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Identity
         An equation that is true for any value of the variable is called an identity.
         The solution of an identity is all real numbers.

       What happens when we solve the equation
       Solve:

Add to both sides to leave the constant alone on the right.
Simplify--the are eliminated.

                                                                                           But

Solving the equation             led to the false statement                                     The equation  will not be true for

any value of z. It has no solution. An equation that has no solution, or that is false for all values of the variable, is called a

contradiction.

Contradiction

An equation that is false for all values of the variable is called a contradiction.
A contradiction has no solution.

The next few examples will ask us to classify an equation as conditional, an identity, or as a contradiction.
  EXAMPLE 2.6

Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the solution:

     Solution

Distribute.

Combine like terms.

Subtract from each side to get the n's to one side.

Simplify.

This is a true statement.                            The equation is an identity.

                                                     The solution is all real numbers.

TRY IT 2.11 Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 103

                     solution:

TRY IT 2.12          Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the
                     solution:

  EXAMPLE 2.7
Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the solution:

     Solution

Distribute.                     This is a conditional equation.
Combine like terms.             The solution is
Add 4 to both sides.
Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.
The equation is true when

TRY IT 2.13          Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the
                     solution:

TRY IT 2.14          Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the
                     solution:

  EXAMPLE 2.8
Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the solution:

     Solution

Distribute.
Combine like terms.
104 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Subtract     from both sides.
Simplify.
But                                      The equation is a contradiction.
                                         It has no solution.

TRY IT 2.15                       Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the
                                  solution:

TRY IT 2.16                       Classify the equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state the
                                  solution:

We summarize the methods for classifying equations in the table.

Type of equation                  What happens when you solve it?                                       Solution

Conditional                       True for one or more values of the variables and false for all other  One or more
Equation                          values                                                                values

Identity                          True for any value of the variable                                    All real numbers

Contradiction                     False for all values of the variable                                  No solution

Table 2.1

Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

We could use the General Strategy to solve the next example. This method would work fine, but many students do not
feel very confident when they see all those fractions. So, we are going to show an alternate method to solve equations
with fractions. This alternate method eliminates the fractions.
We will apply the Multiplication Property of Equality and multiply both sides of an equation by the least common
denominator (LCD) of all the fractions in the equation. The result of this operation will be a new equation, equivalent to
the first, but without fractions. This process is called clearing the equation of fractions.
To clear an equation of decimals, we think of all the decimals in their fraction form and then find the LCD of those
denominators.

  EXAMPLE 2.9

How to Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients
Solve:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 105

       TRY IT 2.17 Solve:
       TRY IT 2.18 Solve:
Notice in the previous example, once we cleared the equation of fractions, the equation was like those we solved earlier
in this chapter. We changed the problem to one we already knew how to solve. We then used the General Strategy for
Solving Linear Equations.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients.
  Step 1. Find the least common denominator (LCD) of all the fractions and decimals (in fraction form) in the equation.
  Step 2. Multiply both sides of the equation by that LCD. This clears the fractions and decimals.
  Step 3. Solve using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.
  EXAMPLE 2.10
Solve:

     Solution
We want to clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD of all the fractions in the equation.

  Find the LCD of all fractions in the equation.
  The LCD is 12.
106 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Multiply both sides of the equation by 12.
         Distribute.
         Simplify--notice, no more fractions.
         Combine like terms.
         Divide by five.
         Simplify.
         Check:
         Let

              TRY IT 2.19 Solve:
              TRY IT 2.20 Solve:
       In the next example, we'll distribute before we clear the fractions.
         EXAMPLE 2.11
       Solve:
            Solution

         Distribute.
         Simplify.
         Multiply by the LCD, four.
         Distribute.
         Simplify.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 107

  Collect the variables to the left.
  Simplify.
  Collect the constants to the right.
  Simplify.
  An alternate way to solve this equation is to clear the fractions without distributing first. If you multiply the factors
  correctly, this method will be easier.

  Multiply by the LCD, 4.
  Multiply four times the fractions.
  Distribute.
  Collect the variables to the left.
  Simplify.
  Collect the constants to the right.
  Simplify.
  Check:
  Let
  Finish the check on your own.

       TRY IT 2.21 Solve:
       TRY IT 2.22 Solve:
When you multiply both sides of an equation by the LCD of the fractions, make sure you multiply each term by the
LCD--even if it does not contain a fraction.
  EXAMPLE 2.12
Solve:
108 2 · Solving Linear Equations

            Solution

         Multiply both sides by the LCD, 4.
         Distribute.
         Simplify.

Collect the variables to the left.
Simplify.
Collect the constants to the right.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by five.
Simplify.
Check:

Let
Finish the check on your own.

TRY IT 2.23 Solve:

TRY IT 2.24 Solve:

Some equations have decimals in them. This kind of equation may occur when we solve problems dealing with money or

percentages. But decimals can also be expressed as fractions. For example,  and  So, with an

equation with decimals, we can use the same method we used to clear fractions--multiply both sides of the equation by
the least common denominator.

The next example uses an equation that is typical of the ones we will see in the money applications in a later section.
Notice that we will clear all decimals by multiplying by the LCD of their fraction form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 109

  EXAMPLE 2.13

Solve:
     Solution

Look at the decimals and think of the equivalent fractions:

Notice, the LCD is 100. By multiplying by the LCD we will clear the decimals from the equation.

    Distribute first.
    Combine like terms.
    To clear decimals, multiply by 100.
    Distribute.
    Subtract 15 from both sides.
    Simplify.

    Divide by 30.

    Simplify.                            into the original equation.
    Check it yourself by substituting

    TRY IT 2.25 Solve:
    TRY IT 2.26 Solve:

        SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Equations Using the General Strategy

In the following exercises, determine whether the given values are solutions to the equation.

1.                                                           2.

                                                                      

3.                                                           4.

                                                                      

In the following exercises, solve each linear equation.

5.                                                           6.
110 2 · Solving Linear Equations

7.                                                     8.

9.                                                     10.

11.                                                    12.

13.                                                    14.

15.                                                    16.

17.                                                    18.

19.                                                    20.

21.                                                    22.

23.                                                    24.

25.                                                    26.

27.                                                    28.

29.                                                        30.

Classify Equations

In the following exercises, classify each equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state
the solution.

31.                                                    32.

33.                                                    34.

35.                                                    36.

37.                                                    38.

39.                                                    40.

41.                                                    42.

Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

In the following exercises, solve each equation with fraction coefficients.

43.                                                    44.

45.                                                    46.

47.                                                    48.

49.                                                    50.

51.                                                    52.

53.                                                    54.

55.                                                    56.

57.                                                    58.

59.                                                    60.

61.                                                    62.

63.                                                    64.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.1 · Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations 111

In the following exercises, solve each equation with decimal coefficients.

65.                                                       66.

67.                                                       68.

69.                                                       70.

71.                                                       72.

Everyday Math

73. Fencing Micah has 74 feet of fencing to make a        74. Stamps Paula bought $22.82 worth of 49-cent
      dog run in his yard. He wants the length to be 2.5
      feet more than the width. Find the length, L, by         stamps and 21-cent stamps. The number of
      solving the equation
                                                               21-cent stamps was eight less than the number of

                                                               49-cent stamps. Solve the equation

                                                                                      for s, to find

                                                               the number of 49-cent stamps Paula bought.

Writing Exercises

75. Using your own words, list the steps in the           76. Explain why you should simplify both sides of an
      general strategy for solving linear equations.            equation as much as possible before collecting
                                                                the variable terms to one side and the constant
                                                                terms to the other side.

77. What is the first step you take when solving the      78. If an equation has several fractions, how does
                                                                multiplying both sides by the LCD make it easier
     equation      Why is this your first                       to solve?

     step?

79. If an equation has fractions only on one side, why    80. For the equation                     how do you
      do you have to multiply both sides of the equation        clear the decimal?
      by the LCD?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
112 2 · Solving Linear Equations

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

2.2 Use a Problem Solving Strategy

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use a problem solving strategy for word problems
           Solve number word problems
           Solve percent applications
           Solve simple interest applications

       BE PREPARED 2.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Translate "six less than twice x" into an algebraic expression.
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 1.8.

BE PREPARED 2.5                   Convert 4.5% to a decimal.
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.40.

BE PREPARED 2.6                   Convert 0.6 to a percent.
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.40.

Have you ever had any negative experiences in the past with word problems? When we feel we have no control, and
continue repeating negative thoughts, we set up barriers to success. Realize that your negative experiences with word
problems are in your past. To move forward you need to calm your fears and change your negative feelings.

Start with a fresh slate and begin to think positive thoughts. Repeating some of the following statements may be helpful
to turn your thoughts positive. Thinking positive thoughts is a first step towards success.

      I think I can! I think I can!

      While word problems were hard in the past, I think I can try them now.

      I am better prepared now--I think I will begin to understand word problems.

      I am able to solve equations because I practiced many problems and I got help when I needed it--I can try that
      with word problems.

      It may take time, but I can begin to solve word problems.

You are now well prepared and you are ready to succeed. If you take control and believe you can be successful, you will
be able to master word problems.

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Word Problems

Now that we can solve equations, we are ready to apply our new skills to word problems. We will develop a strategy we
can use to solve any word problem successfully.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 113

  EXAMPLE 2.14

Normal yearly snowfall at the local ski resort is 12 inches more than twice the amount it received last season. The normal
yearly snowfall is 62 inches. What was the snowfall last season at the ski resort?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                  What was the snowfall last season?

Step 3. Name what we are looking for and                    Let the snowfall last season.
choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
information.

Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Subtract 12 from each side.

Simplify.

Divide each side by two.

Simplify.                                                   The snowfall last season was 25 inches.

Step 6. Check: First, is our answer reasonable?
Yes, having 25 inches of snow seems OK.
The problem says the normal snowfall is twelve
inches more than twice the number of last season.
Twice 25 is 50 and 12 more than that is 62.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 2.27  Guillermo bought textbooks and notebooks at the bookstore. The number of textbooks was
             three more than twice the number of notebooks. He bought seven textbooks. How many
             notebooks did he buy?

TRY IT 2.28  Gerry worked Sudoku puzzles and crossword puzzles this week. The number of Sudoku puzzles
             he completed is eight more than twice the number of crossword puzzles. He completed 22
             Sudoku puzzles. How many crossword puzzles did he do?

We summarize an effective strategy for problem solving.
114 2 · Solving Linear Equations

...

     HOW TO

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for word problems.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
         information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using proper algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem to make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Solve Number Word Problems

We will now apply the problem solving strategy to "number word problems." Number word problems give some clues
about one or more numbers and we use these clues to write an equation. Number word problems provide good practice
for using the Problem Solving Strategy.

  EXAMPLE 2.15

The sum of seven times a number and eight is thirty-six. Find the number.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.              the number

Step 3. Name what you are looking for and               Let n = the number.
choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate:
Restate the problem as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Subtract eight from each side and simplify.
Divide each side by seven and simplify.

Step 6. Check.
Is the sum of seven times four plus eight equal to 36?

Step 7. Answer the question.                            The number is 4.

Did you notice that we left out some of the steps as we solved this equation? If you're not yet ready to leave out these
steps, write down as many as you need.

TRY IT 2.29 The sum of four times a number and two is fourteen. Find the number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 115

TRY IT 2.30 The sum of three times a number and seven is twenty-five. Find the number.

Some number word problems ask us to find two or more numbers. It may be tempting to name them all with different
variables, but so far, we have only solved equations with one variable. In order to avoid using more than one variable, we
will define the numbers in terms of the same variable. Be sure to read the problem carefully to discover how all the
numbers relate to each other.

  EXAMPLE 2.16

The sum of two numbers is negative fifteen. One number is nine less than the other. Find the numbers.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. two numbers

Step 3. Name what you are looking for by        number.
choosing a variable to represent the first Let   number
number.
"One number is nine less than the other."

Step 4. Translate.                   The sum of two numbers is negative fifteen.
Write as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Combine like terms.
Add nine to each side and simplify.
Simplify.

Step 6. Check.
Is nine less than

Is their sum

Step 7. Answer the question.         The numbers are and

TRY IT 2.31  The sum of two numbers is negative twenty-three. One number is seven less than the other. Find
             the numbers.

TRY IT 2.32  The sum of two numbers is negative eighteen. One number is forty more than the other. Find
             the numbers.
116 2 · Solving Linear Equations

      Some number problems involve consecutive integers. Consecutive integers are integers that immediately follow each
      other. Examples of consecutive integers are:

Notice that each number is one more than the number preceding it. Therefore, if we define the first integer as n, the

next consecutive integer is     The one after that is one more than    so it is           which is

We will use this notation to represent consecutive integers in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 2.17

Find three consecutive integers whose sum is
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. three consecutive integers

                                                               Let  integer.
Step 3. Name each of the three numbers                               consecutive integer
                                                                     consecutive integer

Step 4. Translate.              The sum of the three integers is
Restate as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Combine like terms.
Subtract three from each side.
Divide each side by three.

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.    The three consecutive integers are
                                              and

       TRY IT 2.33 Find three consecutive integers whose sum is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 117

       TRY IT 2.34 Find three consecutive integers whose sum is

Now that we have worked with consecutive integers, we will expand our work to include consecutive even integers and
consecutive odd integers. Consecutive even integers are even integers that immediately follow one another. Examples
of consecutive even integers are:

Notice each integer is two more than the number preceding it. If we call the first one n, then the next one is  The

one after that would be  or

Consecutive odd integers are odd integers that immediately follow one another. Consider the consecutive odd integers
63, 65, and 67.

Does it seem strange to have to add two (an even number) to get the next odd number? Do we get an odd number or an
even number when we add 2 to 3? to 11? to 47?
Whether the problem asks for consecutive even numbers or odd numbers, you do not have to do anything different. The
pattern is still the same--to get to the next odd or the next even integer, add two.

  EXAMPLE 2.18
Find three consecutive even integers whose sum is .

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.
  Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. three consecutive even integers

  Step 3. Name.

  Step 4. Translate.
  Restate as one sentence.
  Translate into an equation.
118 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 6 from each side.
Divide each side by 3.

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.                The three consecutive integers are 38, 40, and 42.

TRY IT 2.35 Find three consecutive even integers whose sum is 102.

TRY IT 2.36 Find three consecutive even integers whose sum is

When a number problem is in a real life context, we still use the same strategies that we used for the previous examples.

  EXAMPLE 2.19

A married couple together earns $110,000 a year. The wife earns $16,000 less than twice what her husband earns. What
does the husband earn?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                     How much does the husband earn?

Step 3. Name.                                                  Let h = the amount the husband earns.
Choose a variable to represent the amount the husband earns.
The wife earns $16,000 less than twice that.

Step 4. Translate.                                             2h - 16,000 = the amount the wife
Restate the problem in one sentence with                       Together the husband and wife earn
all the important information.                                 $110,000.
Translate into an equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
Step 5. Solve the equation.                                                     2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 119
Combine like terms.
Add 16,000 to both sides and simplify.                            $42,000 amount husband earns
Divide each side by three.

Step 6. Check:                                                    The husband earns $42,000 a year.
If the wife earns $68,000 and the husband earns $42,000, is that
$110,000? Yes!

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 2.37           According to the National Automobile Dealers Association, the average cost of a car in 2014 was
                      $28,400. This was $1,600 less than six times the cost in 1975. What was the average cost of a car
                      in 1975?

TRY IT 2.38           US Census data shows that the median price of new home in the U.S. in November 2014 was
                      $280,900. This was $10,700 more than 14 times the price in November 1964. What was the
                      median price of a new home in November 1964?

Solve Percent Applications

There are several methods to solve percent equations. In algebra, it is easiest if we just translate English sentences into
algebraic equations and then solve the equations. Be sure to change the given percent to a decimal before you use it in
the equation.

EXAMPLE 2.20

Translate and solve:

 What number is 45% of 84?  8.5% of what amount is $4.76?         168 is what percent of 112?

     Solution



Translate into algebra. Let n = the number.
Multiply.

                                             37.8 is 45% of 84.
120 2 · Solving Linear Equations



Translate. Let n = the amount.
Multiply.
Divide both sides by 0.085 and simplify.

                                                8.5% of $56 is $4.76



  We are asked to find percent, so we must
  have our result in percent form.
  Translate into algebra. Let p = the percent.

  Multiply.

  Divide both sides by 112 and simplify.

  Convert to percent.

                                                168 is 150% of 112.

  TRY IT 2.39                     Translate and solve:  What number is 45% of 80?  7.5% of what amount is $1.95? 

                                  110 is what percent of 88?

  TRY IT 2.40                     Translate and solve:  What number is 55% of 60?  8.5% of what amount is $3.06? 

                                  126 is what percent of 72?

Now that we have a problem solving strategy to refer to, and have practiced solving basic percent equations, we are
ready to solve percent applications. Be sure to ask yourself if your final answer makes sense--since many of the
applications we will solve involve everyday situations, you can rely on your own experience.

  EXAMPLE 2.21

The label on Audrey's yogurt said that one serving provided 12 grams of protein, which is 24% of the recommended daily
amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of protein?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 121

  Solution                                What total amount of protein is recommended?
What are you asked to find?               Let total amount of protein.

Choose a variable to represent it.

Write a sentence that gives the
information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Solve.

Check: Does this make sense?
Yes, 24% is about of the total and
12 is about of 50.

Write a complete sentence to answer the question. The amount of protein that is recommended is 50 g.

TRY IT 2.41           One serving of wheat square cereal has 7 grams of fiber, which is 28% of the recommended daily
                      amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of fiber?

TRY IT 2.42           One serving of rice cereal has 190 mg of sodium, which is 8% of the recommended daily
                      amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of sodium?

Remember to put the answer in the form requested. In the next example we are looking for the percent.

EXAMPLE 2.22

Veronica is planning to make muffins from a mix. The package says each muffin will be 240 calories and 60 calories will
be from fat. What percent of the total calories is from fat?

Solution

What are you asked to find?               What percent of the total calories is fat?

Choose a variable to represent it.        Let percent of fat.

Write a sentence that gives the
information to find it.

Translate the sentence into an equation.

Multiply.

Divide both sides by 240.

Put in percent form.
122 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Check: does this make sense?

Yes,  is one-fourth; 60 is one-fourth

of 240. So,  makes sense.

Write a complete sentence to answer the question. Of the total calories in each muffin,  is fat.

TRY IT 2.43                       Mitzi received some gourmet brownies as a gift. The wrapper said each brownie was 480
                                  calories, and had 240 calories of fat. What percent of the total calories in each brownie comes
                                  from fat? Round the answer to the nearest whole percent.

TRY IT 2.44                       The mix Ricardo plans to use to make brownies says that each brownie will be 190 calories, and
                                  76 calories are from fat. What percent of the total calories are from fat? Round the answer to
                                  the nearest whole percent.

It is often important in many fields--business, sciences, pop culture--to talk about how much an amount has increased
or decreased over a certain period of time. This increase or decrease is generally expressed as a percent and called the
percent change.
To find the percent change, first we find the amount of change, by finding the difference of the new amount and the
original amount. Then we find what percent the amount of change is of the original amount.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Find percent change.
  Step 1. Find the amount of change.

  Step 2. Find what percent the amount of change is of the original amount.

  EXAMPLE 2.23

Recently, the California governor proposed raising community college fees from $36 a unit to $46 a unit. Find the
percent change. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

     Solution
  Find the amount of change.

Find the percent.                      Change is what percent of the original amount?

Let the percent.

Translate to an equation.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 36.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 123

Change to percent form; round to the
nearest tenth

Write a complete sentence to answer   The new fees are approximately a  increase
the question.                         over the old fees.

Remember to round the division to the nearest thousandth in order to round the percent to the nearest tenth.

TRY IT 2.45   Find the percent change. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.) In 2011, the IRS increased
              the deductible mileage cost to 55.5 cents from 51 cents.

TRY IT 2.46   Find the percent change. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.) In 1995, the standard bus
              fare in Chicago was $1.50. In 2008, the standard bus fare was 2.25.

Applications of discount and mark-up are very common in retail settings.

When you buy an item on sale, the original price has been discounted by some dollar amount. The discount rate,
usually given as a percent, is used to determine the amount of the discount. To determine the amount of discount, we
multiply the discount rate by the original price.

The price a retailer pays for an item is called the original cost. The retailer then adds a mark-up to the original cost to
get the list price, the price he sells the item for. The mark-up is usually calculated as a percent of the original cost. To
determine the amount of mark-up, multiply the mark-up rate by the original cost.

  Discount

The sale price should always be less than the original price.
Mark-up

The list price should always be more than the original cost.

EXAMPLE 2.24

Liam's art gallery bought a painting at an original cost of $750. Liam marked the price up 40%. Find   the amount of
mark-up and  the list price of the painting.

     Solution


124 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Identify what you are asked to find, and    What is the amount of mark-up?
choose a variable to represent it.          Let the amount of mark-up.

Write a sentence that gives the
information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Solve the equation.

Write a complete sentence.                  The mark-up on the painting was $300.

                                            What is the list price?
                                            Let the list price.
  Identify what you are asked to find, and
  choose a variable to represent it.

Write a sentence that gives the
information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Solve the equation.

Check.                                      Is the list price more than the original cost?
                                            Is $1,050 more than $750? Yes.

Write a complete sentence.                  The list price of the painting was $1,050.

TRY IT 2.47                       Find  the amount of mark-up and  the list price: Jim's music store bought a guitar at

                                  original cost $1,200. Jim marked the price up 50%.

TRY IT 2.48                       Find  the amount of mark-up and  the list price: The Auto Resale Store bought Pablo's

                                  Toyota for $8,500. They marked the price up 35%.

Solve Simple Interest Applications

Interest is a part of our daily lives. From the interest earned on our savings to the interest we pay on a car loan or credit
card debt, we all have some experience with interest in our lives.

The amount of money you initially deposit into a bank is called the principal, P, and the bank pays you interest, I. When
you take out a loan, you pay interest on the amount you borrow, also called the principal.

In either case, the interest is computed as a certain percent of the principal, called the rate of interest, r. The rate of
interest is usually expressed as a percent per year, and is calculated by using the decimal equivalent of the percent. The
variable t, (for time) represents the number of years the money is saved or borrowed.

Interest is calculated as simple interest or compound interest. Here we will use simple interest.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 125

Simple Interest
If an amount of money, P, called the principal, is invested or borrowed for a period of t years at an annual interest
rate r, the amount of interest, I, earned or paid is

Interest earned or paid according to this formula is called simple interest.

The formula we use to calculate interest is  To use the formula we substitute in the values for variables that are

given, and then solve for the unknown variable. It may be helpful to organize the information in a chart.

EXAMPLE 2.25

Areli invested a principal of $950 in her bank account that earned simple interest at an interest rate of 3%. How much
interest did she earn in five years?

     Solution

Identify what you are asked to find, and choose a variable to represent it. What is the simple interest?

Write the formula.                                                            The interest is $142.50.
Substitute in the given information.
Simplify.
Check.
Is $142.50 a reasonable amount of interest on $950?
Yes.
Write a complete sentence.

TRY IT 2.49   Nathaly deposited $12,500 in her bank account where it will earn 4% simple interest. How much
              interest will Nathaly earn in five years?

TRY IT 2.50   Susana invested a principal of $36,000 in her bank account that earned simple interest at an

              interest rate of               How much interest did she earn in three years?

There may be times when we know the amount of interest earned on a given principal over a certain length of time, but
we do not know the rate.
126 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         EXAMPLE 2.26
       Hang borrowed $7,500 from her parents to pay her tuition. In five years, she paid them $1,500 interest in addition to the
       $7,500 she borrowed. What was the rate of simple interest?

            Solution

Identify what you are asked to find, and choose a variable to represent it. What is the rate of simple interest?

Write the formula.
Substitute in the given information.
Multiply.
Divide.
Change to percent form.

Check.

Write a complete sentence.       The rate of interest was 4%.

TRY IT 2.51  Jim lent his sister $5,000 to help her buy a house. In three years, she paid him the $5,000, plus
             $900 interest. What was the rate of simple interest?

TRY IT 2.52  Loren lent his brother $3,000 to help him buy a car. In four years, his brother paid him back the
             $3,000 plus $660 in interest. What was the rate of simple interest?

In the next example, we are asked to find the principal--the amount borrowed.

  EXAMPLE 2.27

Sean's new car loan statement said he would pay $4,866.25 in interest from a simple interest rate of 8.5% over five years.
How much did he borrow to buy his new car?

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
Identify what you are asked to find, and choose a variable to                                 2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 127
represent it.
                                                                     What is the amount borrowed (the
Write the formula.                                                   principal)?
Substitute in the given information.
Multiply.
Divide.

Check.

Write a complete sentence.                                           The principal was $11,450.

TRY IT 2.53  Eduardo noticed that his new car loan papers stated that with a 7.5% simple interest rate, he
             would pay $6,596.25 in interest over five years. How much did he borrow to pay for his car?

TRY IT 2.54  In five years, Gloria's bank account earned $2,400 interest at 5% simple interest. How much had
             she deposited in the account?

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with using a problem solving strategy.

      Begining Arithmetic Problems (https://openstax.org/l/37begalgwordpro)

        SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Word Problems

81. List five positive thoughts     82. List five negative thoughts
      you can say to yourself that        that you have said to
      will help you approach              yourself in the past that
      word problems with a                will hinder your progress
      positive attitude. You may          on word problems. You
      want to copy them on a              may want to write each
      sheet of paper and put it in        one on a small piece of
      the front of your notebook,         paper and rip it up to
      where you can read them             symbolically destroy the
      often.                              negative thoughts.
128 2 · Solving Linear Equations

In the following exercises, solve using the problem solving strategy for word problems. Remember to write a complete
sentence to answer each question.

83. There are 16 girls in a          84. There are 18 Cub Scouts in       85. Huong is organizing
      school club. The number of           Troop 645. The number of             paperback and hardback
      girls is four more than              scouts is three more than            books for her club's used
      twice the number of boys.            five times the number of             book sale. The number of
      Find the number of boys.             adult leaders. Find the              paperbacks is 12 less than
                                           number of adult leaders.             three times the number of
                                                                                hardbacks. Huong had 162
                                                                                paperbacks. How many
                                                                                hardback books were
                                                                                there?

86. Jeff is lining up children's
      and adult bicycles at the
      bike shop where he works.
      The number of children's
      bicycles is nine less than
      three times the number of
      adult bicycles. There are 42
      adult bicycles. How many
      children's bicycles are
      there?

Solve Number Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each number word problem.

87. The difference of a number       88. The difference of a number       89. The sum of three times a
      and 12 is three. Find the            and eight is four. Find the          number and eight is 23.
      number.                              number.                              Find the number.

90. The sum of twice a number        91. The difference of twice a        92. The difference of four
      and six is 14. Find the              number and seven is 17.              times a number and seven
      number.                              Find the number.                     is 21. Find the number.

93. Three times the sum of a         94. Six times the sum of a           95. One number is six more
      number and nine is 12.               number and eight is 30.              than the other. Their sum is
      Find the number.                     Find the number.                     42. Find the numbers.

96. One number is five more          97. The sum of two numbers is        98. The sum of two numbers is
      than the other. Their sum is         20. One number is four               27. One number is seven
      33. Find the numbers.                less than the other. Find            less than the other. Find
                                           the numbers.                         the numbers.

99. One number is 14 less than       100. One number is 11 less           101. The sum of two numbers
      another. If their sum is               than another. If their sum           is 14. One number is two
      increased by seven, the                is increased by eight, the           less than three times the
      result is 85. Find the                 result is 71. Find the               other. Find the numbers.
      numbers.                               numbers.
                                                                          104. The sum of two
102. The sum of two numbers          103. The sum of two                          consecutive integers is 89.
        is zero. One number is               consecutive integers is 77.          Find the integers.
        nine less than twice the             Find the integers.
        other. Find the numbers.                                          107. Find three consecutive
                                                                                  integers whose sum is
105. The sum of three                106. The sum of three
        consecutive integers is 78.          consecutive integers is 60.
        Find the integers.                   Find the integers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 129

108. Find three consecutive          109. Find three consecutive           110. Find three consecutive
        integers whose sum is                even integers whose sum               even integers whose sum
                                             is 258.                               is 222.
111. Find three consecutive
        odd integers whose sum       112. Find three consecutive           113. Philip pays $1,620 in rent
        is                                   odd integers whose sum                every month. This amount
                                             is                                    is $120 more than twice
114. Marc just bought an SUV                                                       what his brother Paul
        for $54,000. This is $7,400  115. Laurie has $46,000                       pays for rent. How much
        less than twice what his             invested in stocks and                does Paul pay for rent?
        wife paid for her car last           bonds. The amount
        year. How much did his               invested in stocks is         116. Erica earned a total of
        wife pay for her car?                $8,000 less than three                $50,450 last year from her
                                             times the amount                      two jobs. The amount she
                                             invested in bonds. How                earned from her job at
                                             much does Laurie have                 the store was $1,250
                                             invested in bonds?                    more than three times the
                                                                                   amount she earned from
                                                                                   her job at the college.
                                                                                   How much did she earn
                                                                                   from her job at the
                                                                                   college?

Solve Percent Applications

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

117.  What number is 45%             118.  What number is 65%              119.  250% of 65 is what
    of 120?  81 is 75% of                of 100?  93 is 75% of                 number?  8.2% of what
    what number?  What                   what number?  What                    amount is $2.87?  30 is

        percent of 260 is 78?                percent of 215 is 86?                 what percent of 20?

120.  150% of 90 is what
    number?  6.4% of what
    amount is $2.88?  50 is

        what percent of 40?

In the following exercises, solve.   122. When Hiro and his co-            123. One serving of oatmeal
                                             workers had lunch at a                has 8 grams of fiber,
121. Geneva treated her                      restaurant near their                 which is 33% of the
        parents to dinner at their           work, the bill was $90.50.            recommended daily
        favorite restaurant. The             They want to leave 18% of             amount. What is the total
        bill was $74.25. Geneva              the total bill as a tip. How          recommended daily
        wants to leave 16% of the            much should the tip be?               amount of fiber?
        total bill as a tip. How
        much should the tip be?      125. A bacon cheeseburger at          126. A grilled chicken salad at
                                             a popular fast food                   a popular fast food
124. One serving of trail mix                restaurant contains 2070              restaurant contains 650
        has 67 grams of                      milligrams (mg) of                    milligrams (mg) of
        carbohydrates, which is              sodium, which is 86% of               sodium, which is 27% of
        22% of the recommended               the recommended daily                 the recommended daily
        daily amount. What is the            amount. What is the total             amount. What is the total
        total recommended daily              recommended daily                     recommended daily
        amount of                            amount of sodium?                     amount of sodium?
        carbohydrates?
130 2 · Solving Linear Equations

127. The nutrition fact sheet at      128. The nutrition fact sheet at    129. Emma gets paid $3,000
        a fast food restaurant                a fast food restaurant              per month. She pays $750
        says the fish sandwich                says a small portion of             a month for rent. What
        has 380 calories, and 171             chicken nuggets has 190             percent of her monthly
        calories are from fat.                calories, and 114 calories          pay goes to rent?
        What percent of the total             are from fat. What
        calories is from fat?                 percent of the total
                                              calories is from fat?
130. Dimple gets paid $3,200
        per month. She pays $960
        a month for rent. What
        percent of her monthly
        pay goes to rent?

In the following exercises, solve.    132. Ayodele received a raise       133. Annual student fees at
                                              in her hourly pay, from             the University of
131. Tamanika received a raise                $24.50 to $25.48. Find the          California rose from
        in her hourly pay, from               percent change.                     about $4,000 in 2000 to
        $15.50 to $17.36. Find the                                                about $12,000 in 2010.
        percent change.                                                           Find the percent change.

134. The price of a share of          135. A grocery store reduced        136. The price of a share of
        one stock rose from                   the price of a loaf of              one stock fell from $8.75
        $12.50 to $50. Find the               bread from $2.80 to                 to $8.54. Find the percent
        percent change.                       $2.73. Find the percent             change.
                                              change.
137. Hernando's salary was
        $49,500 last year. This       138. In ten years, the
        year his salary was cut to            population of Detroit fell
        $44,055. Find the percent             from 950,000 to about
        change.                               712,500. Find the percent
                                              change.

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount and  the sale price.

139. Janelle bought a beach chair on sale at 60% off.  140. Errol bought a skateboard helmet on sale at 40%
        The original price was $44.95.                         off. The original price was $49.95.

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount and  the discount rate (Round to the nearest tenth of a
percent if needed.)

141. Larry and Donna bought a sofa at the sale price   142. Hiroshi bought a lawnmower at the sale price of
        of $1,344. The original price of the sofa was          $240. The original price of the lawnmower is
        $1,920.                                                $300.

In the following exercises, find  the amount of the mark-up and  the list price.

143. Daria bought a bracelet at       144. Regina bought a                145. Tom paid $0.60 a pound
        original cost $16 to sell in          handmade quilt at                   for tomatoes to sell at his
        her handicraft store. She             original cost $120 to sell          produce store. He added
        marked the price up 45%.              in her quilt store. She             a 33% mark-up. What
        What was the list price of            marked the price up 55%.            price did he charge his
        the bracelet?                         What was the list price of          customers for the
                                              the quilt?                          tomatoes?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.2 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 131

146. Flora paid her supplier
        $0.74 a stem for roses to
        sell at her flower shop.
        She added an 85% mark-
        up. What price did she
        charge her customers for
        the roses?

Solve Simple Interest Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

147. Casey deposited $1,450 in        148. Terrence deposited               149. Robin deposited $31,000
        a bank account that                   $5,720 in a bank account              in a bank account that
        earned simple interest at             that earned simple                    earned simple interest at
        an interest rate of 4%.               interest at an interest rate          an interest rate of 5.2%.
        How much interest was                 of 6%. How much interest              How much interest was
        earned in two years?                  was earned in four years?             earned in three years?

150. Carleen deposited                151. Hilaria borrowed $8,000          152. Kenneth lent his niece
        $16,400 in a bank account             from her grandfather to               $1,200 to buy a computer.
        that earned simple                    pay for college. Five years           Two years later, she paid
        interest at an interest rate          later, she paid him back              him back the $1,200, plus
        of 3.9% How much                      the $8,000, plus $1,200               $96 interest. What was
        interest was earned in                interest. What was the                the rate of simple
        eight years?                          rate of simple interest?              interest?

153. Lebron lent his daughter         154. Pablo borrowed $50,000           155. In 10 years, a bank
        $20,000 to help her buy a             to start a business. Three            account that paid 5.25%
        condominium. When she                 years later, he repaid the            simple interest earned
        sold the condominium                  $50,000, plus $9,375                  $18,375 interest. What
        four years later, she paid            interest. What was the                was the principal of the
        him the $20,000, plus                 rate of simple interest?              account?
        $3,000 interest. What was
        the rate of simple                                                  158. Margaret's car loan
        interest?                                                                   statement said she would
                                                                                    pay $7,683.20 in simple
156. In 25 years, a bond that         157. Joshua's computer loan                   interest for a five-year
        paid 4.75% simple                     statement said he would               loan at 9.8%. How much
        interest earned $2,375                pay $1,244.34 in simple               did Margaret borrow to
        interest. What was the                interest for a three-year             buy the car?
        principal of the bond?                loan at 12.4%. How much
                                              did Joshua borrow to buy
                                              the computer?

Everyday Math

159. Tipping At the campus coffee cart, a medium           160. Tipping Four friends went out to lunch and the
        coffee costs $1.65. MaryAnne brings $2.00 with             bill came to $53.75 They decided to add enough
        her when she buys a cup of coffee and leaves the           tip to make a total of $64, so that they could
        change as a tip. What percent tip does she leave?          easily split the bill evenly among themselves.
                                                                   What percent tip did they leave?

Writing Exercises

161. What has been your past experience solving            162. Without solving the problem "44 is 80% of what
        word problems? Where do you see yourself                   number" think about what the solution might be.
        moving forward?                                            Should it be a number that is greater than 44 or
                                                                   less than 44? Explain your reasoning.
132 2 · Solving Linear Equations

163. After returning from vacation, Alex said he      164. Because of road construction in one city,
        should have packed 50% fewer shorts and 200%          commuters were advised to plan that their
        more shirts. Explain what Alex meant.                 Monday morning commute would take 150% of
                                                              their usual commuting time. Explain what this
                                                              means.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objective of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

2.3 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve a formula for a specific variable
           Use formulas to solve geometry applications

BE PREPARED 2.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                  Evaluate  when

                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

BE PREPARED 2.8                   The length of a rectangle is three less than the width. Let w represent the width. Write an
                                  expression for the length of the rectangle.
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.10.

BE PREPARED 2.9                   Evaluate  when      and

                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.33.

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

We have all probably worked with some geometric formulas in our study of mathematics. Formulas are used in so many
fields, it is important to recognize formulas and be able to manipulate them easily.

It is often helpful to solve a formula for a specific variable. If you need to put a formula in a spreadsheet, it is not unusual
to have to solve it for a specific variable first. We isolate that variable on one side of the equals sign with a coefficient of
one and all other variables and constants are on the other side of the equal sign.

Geometric formulas often need to be solved for another variable, too. The formula          is used to find the

volume of a right circular cone when given the radius of the base and height. In the next example, we will solve this
formula for the height.

EXAMPLE 2.28

Solve the formula                 for h.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 133

     Solution
  Write the formula.

  Remove the fraction on the right.
  Simplify.
  Divide both sides by

We could now use this formula to find the height of a right circular cone when we know the volume and the radius of the
base, by using the formula

TRY IT 2.55 Use the formula                to solve for b.

TRY IT 2.56 Use the formula                to solve for h.

In the sciences, we often need to change temperature from Fahrenheit to Celsius or vice versa. If you travel in a foreign
country, you may want to change the Celsius temperature to the more familiar Fahrenheit temperature.

EXAMPLE 2.29

Solve the formula           for F.
     Solution

Write the formula.

Remove the fraction on the right.

Simplify.

Add 32 to both sides.

We can now use the formula                 to find the Fahrenheit temperature when we know the Celsius temperature.

TRY IT 2.57 Solve the formula              for C.

TRY IT 2.58 Solve the formula              for b.

The next example uses the formula for the surface area of a right cylinder.

EXAMPLE 2.30

Solve the formula                  for h.
134 2 · Solving Linear Equations

  Solution                                from each side.
Write the formula.
Isolate the h term by subtracting
Simplify.

Solve for h by dividing both sides by

Simplify.

TRY IT 2.59 Solve the formula                              for t.

TRY IT 2.60 Solve the formula                              for r.

Sometimes we might be given an equation that is solved for y and need to solve it for x, or vice versa. In the following
example, we're given an equation with both x and y on the same side and we'll solve it for y.

EXAMPLE 2.31

Solve the formula                 for y.

Solution

We will isolate y on one side of the equation.

Subtract from both sides to isolate the term with y.

Simplify.

Divide both sides by 7 to make the coefficient of y one.

Simplify.

TRY IT 2.61 Solve the formula                   for y.

TRY IT 2.62 Solve the formula                   for y.

Use Formulas to Solve Geometry Applications

In this objective we will use some common geometry formulas. We will adapt our problem solving strategy so that we
can solve geometry applications. The geometry formula will name the variables and give us the equation to solve.

In addition, since these applications will all involve shapes of some sort, most people find it helpful to draw a figure and
label it with the given information. We will include this in the first step of the problem solving strategy for geometry
applications.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 135

...

     HOW TO

Solve geometry applications.

Step 1.  Read the problem and make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what we are looking for by choosing a variable to represent it. Draw the figure and label it with the
         given information.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
         given information.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

When we solve geometry applications, we often have to use some of the properties of the figures. We will review those
properties as needed.

The next example involves the area of a triangle. The area of a triangle is one-half the base times the height. We can

write this as  where b = length of the base and h = height.

  EXAMPLE 2.32
The area of a triangular painting is 126 square inches. The base is 18 inches. What is the height?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.  height of a triangle

Step 3. Name.

Choose a variable to represent it.          Let the height.

Draw the figure and label it with the given information. Area = 126 sq. in.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
136 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Substitute in the given information.
         Step 5. Solve the equation.
         Divide both sides by 9.
         Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.                              The height of the triangle is 14 inches.

TRY IT 2.63   The area of a triangular church window is 90 square meters. The base of the window is 15
              meters. What is the window's height?

TRY IT 2.64   A triangular tent door has an area of 15 square feet. The height is five feet. What is the length of
              the base?

In the next example, we will work with a right triangle. To solve for the measure of each angle, we need to use two

triangle properties. In any triangle, the sum of the measures of the angles is  We can write this as a formula:

                                 Also, since the triangle is a right triangle, we remember that a right triangle has one

angle.

Here, we will have to define one angle in terms of another. We will wait to draw the figure until we write expressions for
all the angles we are looking for.

EXAMPLE 2.33

The measure of one angle of a right triangle is 40 degrees more than the measure of the smallest angle. Find the
measures of all three angles.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                the measures of all three angles

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Draw the figure and label it with the given information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 137

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute into the formula.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.    The three angles measure            and

TRY IT 2.65     The measure of one angle of a right triangle is 50 more than the measure of the smallest angle.
                Find the measures of all three angles.

TRY IT 2.66     The measure of one angle of a right triangle is 30 more than the measure of the smallest angle.
                Find the measures of all three angles.

The next example uses another important geometry formula. The Pythagorean Theorem tells how the lengths of the
three sides of a right triangle relate to each other. Writing the formula in every exercise and saying it aloud as you write it
may help you memorize the Pythagorean Theorem.

  The Pythagorean Theorem

  In any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs, and c is the length of the hypotenuse, the sum of the
  squares of the lengths of the two legs equals the square of the length of the hypotenuse.

We will use the Pythagorean Theorem in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 2.34

Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the other leg in
138 2 · Solving Linear Equations

  Solution
Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. the length of the leg of the triangle

Step 3. Name.

Choose a variable to represent it.  Let a = the leg of the triangle.

Label side a.

Step 4. Translate.

Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Isolate the variable term.
Use the definition of square root.
Simplify.

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.        The length of the leg is 5.

TRY IT 2.67 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the leg in the figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 139

TRY IT 2.68 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the leg in the figure.

The next example is about the perimeter of a rectangle. Since the perimeter is just the distance around the rectangle, we
find the sum of the lengths of its four sides--the sum of two lengths and two widths. We can write is as
where L is the length and is the width. To solve the example, we will need to define the length in terms of the width.

  EXAMPLE 2.35

The length of a rectangle is six centimeters more than twice the width. The perimeter is 96 centimeters. Find the length
and width.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                the length and the width

                                                         Let  width.

                                                              length

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent the width.
The length is six more than twice the width.

                                                                                                cm
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
140 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.             The length is 34 cm and the width is 14 cm.

TRY IT 2.69                       The length of a rectangle is seven more than twice the width. The perimeter is 110 inches. Find
                                  the length and width.

TRY IT 2.70                       The width of a rectangle is eight yards less than twice the length. The perimeter is 86 yards. Find
                                  the length and width.

The next example is about the perimeter of a triangle. Since the perimeter is just the distance around the triangle, we

find the sum of the lengths of its three sides. We can write this as  where a, b, and c are the lengths of the

sides.

EXAMPLE 2.36

One side of a triangle is three inches more than the first side. The third side is two inches more than twice the first. The
perimeter is 29 inches. Find the length of the three sides of the triangle.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for. the lengths of the three sides of a triangle

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to
represent the length of the first side.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 141

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.               The lengths of the sides of the triangle
                                           are 6, 9, and 14 inches.

TRY IT 2.71  One side of a triangle is seven inches more than the first side. The third side is four inches less
             than three times the first. The perimeter is 28 inches. Find the length of the three sides of the
             triangle.

TRY IT 2.72  One side of a triangle is three feet less than the first side. The third side is five feet less than
             twice the first. The perimeter is 20 feet. Find the length of the three sides of the triangle.

  EXAMPLE 2.37

The perimeter of a rectangular soccer field is 360 feet. The length is 40 feet more than the width. Find the length and
width.

  Solution                                 the length and width of the soccer field
Step 1. Read the problem.
Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.
142 2 · Solving Linear Equations

                                                                                 Let w = width.
                                                                                                 length

         Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
         The length is 40 feet more than the width.
         Draw the figure and label it with the
         given information.

         Step 4. Translate.
         Write the appropriate formula and
         substitute.

         Step 5. Solve the equation.

         Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.     The length of the soccer field is 110 feet
                                 and the width is 70 feet.

TRY IT 2.73  The perimeter of a rectangular swimming pool is 200 feet. The length is 40 feet more than the
             width. Find the length and width.

TRY IT 2.74  The length of a rectangular garden is 30 yards more than the width. The perimeter is 300 yards.
             Find the length and width.

Applications of these geometric properties can be found in many everyday situations as shown in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 2.38

Kelvin is building a gazebo and wants to brace each corner by placing a 10" piece of wood diagonally as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 143

How far from the corner should he fasten the wood if wants the distances from the corner to be equal? Approximate to
the nearest tenth of an inch.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      the distance from the corner that the
                                               bracket should be attached

                                                                         Let  the distance from the corner.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Isolate the variable.
Use the definition of square root.
Simplify. Approximate to the nearest tenth.

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.                   Kelvin should fasten each piece of wood
                                               approximately 7.1" from the corner.

TRY IT 2.75  John puts the base of a 13-foot ladder five feet from the wall of his house as shown in the figure.
             How far up the wall does the ladder reach?
144 2 · Solving Linear Equations

TRY IT 2.76                        Randy wants to attach a 17-foot string of lights to the top of the 15 foot mast of his sailboat, as
                                   shown in the figure. How far from the base of the mast should he attach the end of the light
                                   string?

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with solving for a variable in literal equations.
Solving Literal Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37literalequat)

        SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

In the following exercises, solve the given formula for the specified variable.

165. Solve the formula                 166. Solve the formula                167. Solve the formula
        for d.                                 for                                                    for L.

168. Solve the formula                 169. Solve the formula                170. Solve the formula
                         for H.                             for b.                                for h.

171. Solve the formula                 172. Solve the formula                173. Solve the formula
                         for                                    for                                            for

174. Solve the formula                 175. Solve the formula                176. Solve the formula
                                  for                                for a.                                for a.

177. Solve                             for 178. Solve                        for 179. Solve the formula
        a.                                               c.                                                       for p.

180. Solve the formula                 181. Solve the formula                182. Solve the formula
                           for l.                                   for L.                                for W.

In the following exercises, solve for the formula for y.

183. Solve the formula                 184. Solve the formula                185. Solve the formula
                         for y.                                 for y.                                   for y.

186. Solve the formula                 187. Solve the formula                188. Solve the formula
                            for y.                             for y.                                for y.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 145

189. Solve the formula                190. Solve the formula                191. Solve the formula
                         for y.                                  for y.                                for y.

192. Solve the formula                193. Solve the formula                194. Solve the formula
                           for y.                                for y.                                for y.

Use Formulas to Solve Geometry Applications

In the following exercises, solve using a geometry formula.

195. A triangular flag has area       196. A triangular window has          197. What is the base of a
        0.75 square feet and                  area 24 square feet and               triangle with area 207
        height 1.5 foot. What is its          height six feet. What is its          square inches and height
        base?                                 base?                                 18 inches?

198. What is the height of a          199. The two smaller angles of        200. The measure of the
        triangle with area 893                a right triangle have                 smallest angle of a right
        square inches and base                equal measures. Find the              triangle is less than
        38 inches?                            measures of all three                 the measure of the next
                                              angles.                               larger angle. Find the
                                                                                    measures of all three
                                                                                    angles.

201. The angles in a triangle         202. The angles in a triangle
        are such that one angle is            are such that one angle is
        twice the smallest angle,             20 more than the smallest
        while the third angle is              angle, while the third
        three times as large as               angle is three times as
        the smallest angle. Find              large as the smallest
        the measures of all three             angle. Find the measures
        angles.                               of all three angles.

In the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.

203.                                  204.                                  205.

206.
146 2 · Solving Linear Equations

In the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the leg. Round to the nearest tenth if
necessary.

207.                                208.                                 209.

210.                                211.                                 212.

213.                                214.

In the following exercises, solve using a geometry formula.

215. The width of a rectangle is    216. The length of a rectangle       217. The width of the rectangle
        seven meters less than              is eight feet more than              is 0.7 meters less than the
        the length. The perimeter           the width. The perimeter             length. The perimeter of a
        is 58 meters. Find the              is 60 feet. Find the length          rectangle is 52.6 meters.
        length and width.                   and width.                           Find the dimensions of
                                                                                 the rectangle.
218. The length of the              219. The perimeter of a
        rectangle is 1.1 meters             rectangle of 150 feet. The   220. The length of the
        less than the width. The            length of the rectangle is           rectangle is three times
        perimeter of a rectangle            twice the width. Find the            the width. The perimeter
        is 49.4 meters. Find the            length and width of the              of a rectangle is 72 feet.
        dimensions of the                   rectangle.                           Find the length and width
        rectangle.                                                               of the rectangle.
                                    222. The length of a rectangle
221. The length of the                      is five inches more than     223. The perimeter of a
        rectangle is three meters           twice the width. The                 triangle is 39 feet. One
        less than twice the width.          perimeter is 34 inches.              side of the triangle is one
        The perimeter of a                  Find the length and width.           foot longer than the
        rectangle is 36 meters.                                                  second side. The third
        Find the dimensions of                                                   side is two feet longer
        the rectangle.                                                           than the second side. Find
                                                                                 the length of each side.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.3 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 147

224. The perimeter of a               225. One side of a triangle is        226. One side of a triangle is
        triangle is 35 feet. One              twice the smallest side.              three times the smallest
        side of the triangle is five          The third side is five feet           side. The third side is
        feet longer than the                  more than the shortest                three feet more than the
        second side. The third                side. The perimeter is 17             shortest side. The
        side is three feet longer             feet. Find the lengths of             perimeter is 13 feet. Find
        than the second side. Find            all three sides.                      the lengths of all three
        the length of each side.                                                    sides.
                                      228. The perimeter of a
227. The perimeter of a                       rectangular atrium is 160     229. A rectangular parking lot
        rectangular field is 560              feet. The length is 16 feet           has perimeter 250 feet.
        yards. The length is 40               more than the width. Find             The length is five feet
        yards more than the                   the length and width of               more than twice the
        width. Find the length and            the atrium.                           width. Find the length and
        width of the field.                                                         width of the parking lot.

230. A rectangular rug has
        perimeter 240 inches. The
        length is 12 inches more
        than twice the width. Find
        the length and width of
        the rug.

In the following exercises, solve. Approximate answers to the nearest tenth, if necessary.

231. A 13-foot string of lights       232. am wants to put a banner         233. Chi is planning to put a
        will be attached to the top           across her garage door                diagonal path of paving
        of a 12-foot pole for a               diagonally, as shown, to              stones through her flower
        holiday display as shown.             congratulate her son for his          garden as shown. The flower
        How far from the base of              college graduation. The               garden is a square with side
        the pole should the end               garage door is 12 feet high           10 feet. What will the length
        of the string of lights be            and 16 feet wide.                     of the path be?
        anchored?                             Approximately how long
                                              should the banner be to fit
                                              the garage door?
148 2 · Solving Linear Equations

       234. Brian borrowed a 20-foot
               extension ladder to use
               when he paints his house. If
               he sets the base of the
               ladder six feet from the
               house as shown, how far up
               will the top of the ladder
               reach?

Everyday Math                                             236. Converting temperature Yon was visiting the
                                                                  United States and he saw that the temperature
235. Converting temperature While on a tour in                    in Seattle one day was 50° Fahrenheit. Solve for
        Greece, Tatyana saw that the temperature was
        40° Celsius. Solve for F in the formula           C in the formula  to find the Celsius
                              to find the Fahrenheit
        temperature.                                      temperature.

237. Christa wants to put a fence around her              238. Jose just removed the children's play set from his
        triangular flowerbed. The sides of the flowerbed          back yard to make room for a rectangular
        are six feet, eight feet and 10 feet. How many            garden. He wants to put a fence around the
        feet of fencing will she need to enclose her              garden to keep the dog out. He has a 50-foot roll
        flowerbed?                                                of fence in his garage that he plans to use. To fit
                                                                  in the backyard, the width of the garden must be
Writing Exercises                                                 10 feet. How long can he make the other side?

239. If you need to put tile on your kitchen floor, do    240. If you need to put a fence around your backyard,
        you need to know the perimeter or the area of             do you need to know the perimeter or the area
        the kitchen? Explain your reasoning.                      of the backyard? Explain your reasoning.

241. Look at the two figures below.                       242. Write a geometry word problem that relates to
                                                                  your life experience, then solve it and explain all
                                                                  your steps.

 Which figure looks like it has the larger area?

Which looks like it has the larger perimeter?

 Now calculate the area and perimeter of

each figure. Which has the larger area? Which
has the larger perimeter?

 Were the results of part (b) the same as your

answers in part (a)? Is that surprising to you?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                 2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 149

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

2.4 Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve coin word problems
           Solve ticket and stamp word problems
           Solve mixture word problems
           Solve uniform motion applications

       BE PREPARED 2.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.52.

BE PREPARED 2.11  The number of adult tickets is three more than twice the number of children tickets. Let c
                  represent the number of children tickets. Write an expression for the number of adult
                  tickets.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.11.

BE PREPARED 2.12  Convert 4.2% to a decimal.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.40.

Solve Coin Word Problems

Using algebra to find the number of nickels and pennies in a piggy bank may seem silly. You may wonder why we just
don't open the bank and count them. But this type of problem introduces us to some techniques that will be useful as we
move forward in our study of mathematics.

If we have a pile of dimes, how would we determine its value? If we count the number of dimes, we'll know how many we
have--the number of dimes. But this does not tell us the value of all the dimes. Say we counted 23 dimes, how much are
they worth? Each dime is worth $0.10--that is the value of one dime. To find the total value of the pile of 23 dimes,
multiply 23 by $0.10 to get $2.30.
The number of dimes times the value of each dime equals the total value of the dimes.

This method leads to the following model.
150 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Total Value of Coins

For the same type of coin, the total value of a number of coins is found by using the model

  · number is the number of coins
  · value is the value of each coin
  · total value is the total value of all the coins

If we had several types of coins, we could continue this process for each type of coin, and then we would know the total
value of each type of coin. To get the total value of all the coins, add the total value of each type of coin.

  EXAMPLE 2.39

Jesse has $3.02 worth of pennies and nickels in his piggy bank. The number of nickels is three more than eight times the
number of pennies. How many nickels and how many pennies does Jesse have?

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.                                        pennies and nickels
Determine the types of coins involved.
Create a table.                                                  Pennies are worth $0.01.
Write in the value of each type of coin.                         Nickels are worth $0.05.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                        the number of pennies and nickels

Step 3. Name. Represent the number of each type of coin          Let  number of pennies.
using variables.
The number of nickels is defined in terms of the                      number of nickels
number of pennies, so start with pennies.
The number of nickels is three more than eight times
the number of pennies.

In the chart, multiply the number and the value to
get the total value of each type of coin.

Step 4. Translate. Write the equation by adding the total value
of all the types of coins.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 151

How many nickels?

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it
makes sense.
Jesse has 7 pennies and 59 nickels.
Is the total value

TRY IT 2.77  Jesse has $6.55 worth of quarters and nickels in his pocket. The number of nickels is five more
             than two times the number of quarters. How many nickels and how many quarters does Jesse
             have?

TRY IT 2.78  Elane has $7.00 total in dimes and nickels in her coin jar. The number of dimes that Elane has is
             seven less than three times the number of nickels. How many of each coin does Elane have?

The steps for solving a coin word problem are summarized below.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve coin word problems.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
           Determine the types of coins involved.
           Create a table to organize the information.
           Label the columns "type," "number," "value," and "total value."
           List the types of coins.
           Write in the value of each type of coin.

          Write in the total value of all the coins.

Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.
         Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
           Use variable expressions to represent the number of each type of coin and write them in the table.
           Multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin.

Step 4.  Translate into an equation.
           It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information. Then,

               translate the sentence into an equation.
           Write the equation by adding the total values of all the types of coins.

Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
152 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

Problems involving tickets or stamps are very much like coin problems. Each type of ticket and stamp has a value, just
like each type of coin does. So to solve these problems, we will follow the same steps we used to solve coin problems.

EXAMPLE 2.40

Danny paid $15.75 for stamps. The number of 49-cent stamps was five less than three times the number of 35-cent
stamps. How many 49-cent stamps and how many 35-cent stamps did Danny buy?

Solution

Step 1. Determine the types of stamps involved.                49-cent stamps and 35-cent stamps

Step 2. Identify we are looking for.                           the number of 49-cent stamps and the number of
                                                               35-cent stamps

Step 3. Write variable expressions to represent the number of  Let x = number of 35-cent stamps.
each type of stamp.

"The number of 49-cent stamps was five less                    number of 49-cent stamps
than three times the number of 35-cent
stamps."

Step 4. Write the equation from the total values.
Step 5. Solve the equation.

How many 49-cent stamps?
Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.          Danny bought ten 35-cent stamps and twenty-five
                                                               49-cent stamps.

TRY IT 2.79                       Eric paid $19.88 for stamps. The number of 49-cent stamps was eight more than twice the
                                  number of 35-cent stamps. How many 49-cent stamps and how many 35-cent stamps did Eric
                                  buy?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 153

TRY IT 2.80   Kailee paid $14.74 for stamps. The number of 49-cent stamps was four less than three times the
              number of 20-cent stamps. How many 49-cent stamps and how many 20-cent stamps did Kailee
              buy?

In most of our examples so far, we have been told that one quantity is four more than twice the other, or something
similar. In our next example, we have to relate the quantities in a different way.

Suppose Aniket sold a total of 100 tickets. Each ticket was either an adult ticket or a child ticket. If he sold 20 child tickets,
how many adult tickets did he sell?

     Did you say "80"? How did you figure that out? Did you subtract 20 from 100?

If he sold 45 child tickets, how many adult tickets did he sell?

     Did you say "55"? How did you find it? By subtracting 45 from 100?

Now, suppose Aniket sold x child tickets. Then how many adult tickets did he sell? To find out, we would follow the same
logic we used above. In each case, we subtracted the number of child tickets from 100 to get the number of adult tickets.
We now do the same with x.

We have summarized this in the table.

We will apply this technique in the next example.

EXAMPLE 2.41

A whale-watching ship had 40 paying passengers on board. The total revenue collected from tickets was $1,196. Full-fare
passengers paid $32 each and reduced-fare passengers paid $26 each. How many full-fare passengers and how many
reduced-fare passengers were on the ship?

Solution

Step 1. Determine the types of tickets involved.      full-fare tickets and reduced-fare tickets

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.             the number of full-fare tickets and reduced-fare tickets

Step 3. Name. Represent the number of each type       Let f = the number of full-fare tickets.
of ticket using variables.                                         the number of reduced-fare tickets

We know the total number of tickets sold was 40.
This means the number of reduced-fare tickets is 40
less the number of full-fare tickets.
Multiply the number times the value to get the total
value of each type of ticket.
154 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Step 4. Translate. Write the equation by adding the
         total values of each type of ticket.

         Step 5. Solve the equation.

         How many reduced-fare?

         Step 6. Check the answer.
         There were 26 full-fare tickets at $32 each and 14
         reduced-fare tickets at $26 each. Is the total value
         $116?

Step 7. Answer the question.                                   They sold 26 full-fare and 14 reduced-fare tickets.

TRY IT 2.81   During her shift at the museum ticket booth, Leah sold 115 tickets for a total of $1,163. Adult
              tickets cost $12 and student tickets cost $5. How many adult tickets and how many student
              tickets did Leah sell?

TRY IT 2.82   Galen sold 810 tickets for his church's carnival for a total revenue of $2,820. Children's tickets
              cost $3 each and adult tickets cost $5 each. How many children's tickets and how many adult
              tickets did he sell?

Solve Mixture Word Problems

Now we'll solve some more general applications of the mixture model. In mixture problems, we are often mixing two
quantities, such as raisins and nuts, to create a mixture, such as trail mix. In our tables we will have a row for each item
to be mixed as well as one for the final mixture.

EXAMPLE 2.42

Henning is mixing raisins and nuts to make 25 pounds of trail mix. Raisins cost $4.50 a pound and nuts cost $8 a pound.
If Henning wants his cost for the trail mix to be $6.60 a pound, how many pounds of raisins and how many pounds of
nuts should he use?

Solution

Step 1. Determine what is being mixed.                         The 25 pounds of trail mix will come from mixing raisins and
                                                               nuts.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                      the number of pounds of raisins and nuts

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 155

Step 3. Represent the number of each type of    Let  number of pounds of raisins.
ticket using variables.
                                                     number of pounds of nuts
As before, we fill in a chart to organize our
information.                                    The value of the raisins plus the value of the nuts will be
We enter the price per pound for each item.     the value of the trail mix.
We multiply the number times the value to get
the total value.

Notice that the last column in the table gives
the information for the total amount of the
mixture.

Step 4. Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Find the number of pounds of nuts.
Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.                    Henning mixed ten pounds of raisins with 15 pounds of nuts.

TRY IT 2.83              Orlando is mixing nuts and cereal squares to make a party mix. Nuts sell for $7 a pound and
                         cereal squares sell for $4 a pound. Orlando wants to make 30 pounds of party mix at a cost of
                         $6.50 a pound, how many pounds of nuts and how many pounds of cereal squares should he
                         use?

TRY IT 2.84              Becca wants to mix fruit juice and soda to make a punch. She can buy fruit juice for $3 a gallon
                         and soda for $4 a gallon. If she wants to make 28 gallons of punch at a cost of $3.25 a gallon,
                         how many gallons of fruit juice and how many gallons of soda should she buy?

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

When you are driving down the interstate using your cruise control, the speed of your car stays the same--it is uniform.

We call a problem in which the speed of an object is constant a uniform motion application. We will use the distance,

rate, and time formula,       to compare two scenarios, such as two vehicles travelling at different rates or in opposite

directions.
156 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Our problem solving strategies will still apply here, but we will add to the first step. The first step will include drawing a
diagram that shows what is happening in the example. Drawing the diagram helps us understand what is happening so
that we will write an appropriate equation. Then we will make a table to organize the information, like we did for the
coin, ticket, and stamp applications.

The steps are listed here for easy reference:

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a uniform motion application.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
           Draw a diagram to illustrate what is happening.
           Create a table to organize the information.
           Label the columns rate, time, distance.
           List the two scenarios.
           Write in the information you know.

Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.
         Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
           Complete the chart.
           Use variable expressions to represent that quantity in each row.
           Multiply the rate times the time to get the distance.

Step 4. Translate into an equation.
              Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information.
              Then, translate the sentence into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  EXAMPLE 2.43

Wayne and Dennis like to ride the bike path from Riverside Park to the beach. Dennis's speed is seven miles per hour
faster than Wayne's speed, so it takes Wayne two hours to ride to the beach while it takes Dennis 1.5 hours for the ride.
Find the speed of both bikers.

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.

  · Draw a diagram to illustrate what it happening. Shown below is a sketch of what is happening in the example.

  · Create a table to organize the information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 157

 Label the columns "Rate," "Time," and "Distance."
 List the two scenarios.
 Write in the information you know.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
      You are asked to find the speed of both bikers.
      Notice that the distance formula uses the word "rate," but it is more common to use "speed"
      when we talk about vehicles in everyday English.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
  · Complete the chart
  · Use variable expressions to represent that quantity in each row.
      We are looking for the speed of the bikers. Let's let r represent Wayne's speed. Since Dennis' speed is 7 mph faster,
      we represent that as

      Fill in the speeds into the chart.

  · Multiply the rate times the time to get the distance.

Step 4. Translate into an equation.
  · Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information.
  · Then, translate the sentence into an equation.
      The equation to model this situation will come from the relation between the distances. Look at the diagram we
      drew above. How is the distance travelled by Dennis related to the distance travelled by Wayne?
      Since both bikers leave from Riverside and travel to the beach, they travel the same distance. So we write:

Step 5. Solve the equation using algebra techniques.
158 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Now solve this equation.
                                       So Wayne's speed is 21 mph.

Find Dennis' speed.

                                  Dennis' speed 28 mph.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
Wayne rode at 21 mph and Dennis rode at 28 mph.

TRY IT 2.85                       An express train and a local train leave Pittsburgh to travel to Washington, D.C. The express train
                                  can make the trip in four hours and the local train takes five hours for the trip. The speed of the
                                  express train is 12 miles per hour faster than the speed of the local train. Find the speed of both
                                  trains.

TRY IT 2.86                       Jeromy can drive from his house in Cleveland to his college in Chicago in 4.5 hours. It takes his
                                  mother six hours to make the same drive. Jeromy drives 20 miles per hour faster than his
                                  mother. Find Jeromy's speed and his mother's speed.

In Example 2.43, we had two bikers traveling the same distance. In the next example, two people drive toward each
other until they meet.

  EXAMPLE 2.44

Carina is driving from her home in Anaheim to Berkeley on the same day her brother is driving from Berkeley to
Anaheim, so they decide to meet for lunch along the way in Buttonwillow. The distance from Anaheim to Berkeley is 395
miles. It takes Carina three hours to get to Buttonwillow, while her brother drives four hours to get there. Carina's
average speed is 15 miles per hour faster than her brother's average speed. Find Carina's and her brother's average
speeds.

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.

  · Draw a diagram to illustrate what it happening. Below shows a sketch of what is happening in the example.

· Create a table to organize the information.
    Label the columns rate, time, distance.
    List the two scenarios.
    Write in the information you know.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 159

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.

      We are asked to find the average speeds of Carina and her brother.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

  · Complete the chart.
  · Use variable expressions to represent that quantity in each row.

      We are looking for their average speeds. Let's let r represent the average speed of Carina's brother. Since Carina's
      speed is 15 mph faster, we represent that as
      Fill in the speeds into the chart.

  · Multiply the rate times the time to get the distance.

Step 4. Translate into an equation.

  · Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information.
  · Then, translate the sentence into an equation.

      Again, we need to identify a relationship between the distances in order to write an equation. Look at the diagram
      we created above and notice the relationship between the distance Carina traveled and the distance her brother
      traveled.
      The distance Carina traveled plus the distance her brother travel must add up to 410 miles. So we write:

Step 5. Solve the equation using algebra techniques.

Now solve this equation.
                                       So Carina's brother's speed was 50 mph.

Carina's speed is

                   Carina's speed was 65 mph.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
160 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Carina drove 65 mph and her brother 50 mph.

TRY IT 2.87                       Christopher and his parents live 115 miles apart. They met at a restaurant between their homes
                                  to celebrate his mother's birthday. Christopher drove one and a half hours while his parents
                                  drove one hour to get to the restaurant. Christopher's average speed was ten miles per hour
                                  faster than his parents' average speed. What were the average speeds of Christopher and of his
                                  parents as they drove to the restaurant?

TRY IT 2.88                       Ashley goes to college in Minneapolis, 234 miles from her home in Sioux Falls. She wants her
                                  parents to bring her more winter clothes, so they decide to meet at a restaurant on the road
                                  between Minneapolis and Sioux Falls. Ashley and her parents both drove two hours to the
                                  restaurant. Ashley's average speed was seven miles per hour faster than her parents' average
                                  speed. Find Ashley's and her parents' average speed.

As you read the next example, think about the relationship of the distances traveled. Which of the previous two examples
is more similar to this situation?

  EXAMPLE 2.45

Two truck drivers leave a rest area on the interstate at the same time. One truck travels east and the other one travels
west. The truck traveling west travels at 70 mph and the truck traveling east has an average speed of 60 mph. How long
will they travel before they are 325 miles apart?

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Make all the words and ideas are understood.

  · Draw a diagram to illustrate what it happening.

· Create a table to organize the information.
    Label the columns rate, time, distance.
    List the two scenarios.
    Write in the information you know.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.
We are asked to find the amount of time the trucks will travel until they are 325 miles apart.
Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

  · Complete the chart.
  · Use variable expressions to represent that quantity in each row.

      We are looking for the time travelled. Both trucks will travel the same amount of time.
      Let's call the time t. Since their speeds are different, they will travel different distances.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 161

  · Multiply the rate times the time to get the distance.

Step 4. Translate into an equation.

  · Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information.
  · Then, translate the sentence into an equation.

      We need to find a relation between the distances in order to write an equation. Looking at the diagram, what is the
      relationship between the distances each of the trucks will travel?
      The distance travelled by the truck going west plus the distance travelled by the truck going east must add up to 325
      miles. So we write:

Step 5. Solve the equation using algebra techniques.

So it will take the trucks hours to be 325 miles apart.
Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
It will take the trucks 2.5 hours to be 325 miles apart.

TRY IT 2.89  Pierre and Monique leave their home in Portland at the same time. Pierre drives north on the
             turnpike at a speed of 75 miles per hour while Monique drives south at a speed of 68 miles per
             hour. How long will it take them to be 429 miles apart?

TRY IT 2.90  Thanh and Nhat leave their office in Sacramento at the same time. Thanh drives north on I-5 at
             a speed of 72 miles per hour. Nhat drives south on I-5 at a speed of 76 miles per hour. How long
             will it take them to be 330 miles apart?

It is important to make sure that the units match when we use the distance rate and time formula. For instance, if the
rate is in miles per hour, then the time must be in hours.

  EXAMPLE 2.46

When Naoko walks to school, it takes her 30 minutes. If she rides her bike, it takes her 15 minutes. Her speed is three
miles per hour faster when she rides her bike than when she walks. What is her speed walking and her speed riding her
bike?

     Solution
First, we draw a diagram that represents the situation to help us see what is happening.
162 2 · Solving Linear Equations

We are asked to find her speed walking and riding her bike. Let's call her walking speed r. Since her biking speed is three

miles per hour faster, we will call that speed  We write the speeds in the chart.

The speed is in miles per hour, so we need to express the times in hours, too, in order for the units to be the same.
Remember, 1 hour is 60 minutes. So:

We write the times in the chart.
Next, we multiply rate times time to fill in the distance column.

The equation will come from the fact that the distance from Naoko's home to her school is the same whether she is
walking or riding her bike.
So we say:

  Translate to an equation.

  Solve this equation.
  Clear the fractions by multiplying by the LCD of all the fractions in
  the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 163

Simplify.

                                                                                                                             6
Let's check if this works.

Yes, either way Naoko travels 1.5 miles to school.
Naoko's walking speed is 3 mph and her speed riding her bike is 6 mph.

TRY IT 2.91  Suzy takes 50 minutes to hike uphill from the parking lot to the lookout tower. It takes her 30
             minutes to hike back down to the parking lot. Her speed going downhill is 1.2 miles per hour
             faster than her speed going uphill. Find Suzy's uphill and downhill speeds.

TRY IT 2.92  Llewyn takes 45 minutes to drive his boat upstream from the dock to his favorite fishing spot. It
             takes him 30 minutes to drive the boat back downstream to the dock. The boat's speed going
             downstream is four miles per hour faster than its speed going upstream. Find the boat's
             upstream and downstream speeds.

In the distance, rate and time formula, time represents the actual amount of elapsed time (in hours, minutes, etc.). If a
problem gives us starting and ending times as clock times, we must find the elapsed time in order to use the formula.

  EXAMPLE 2.47

Cruz is training to compete in a triathlon. He left his house at 6:00 and ran until 7:30. Then he rode his bike until 9:45. He
covered a total distance of 51 miles. His speed when biking was 1.6 times his speed when running. Find Cruz's biking and
running speeds.

     Solution
A diagram will help us model this trip.

Next, we create a table to organize the information. We know the total distance is 51 miles. We are looking for the rate of
speed for each part of the trip. The rate while biking is 1.6 times the rate of running. If we let r = the rate running, then
the rate biking is 1.6r.

The times here are given as clock times. Cruz started from home at 6:00 a.m. and started biking at 7:30 a.m. So he spent
1.5 hours running. Then he biked from 7:30 a.m until 9:45 a.m. So he spent 2.25 hours biking.

Now, we multiply the rates by the times.
164 2 · Solving Linear Equations

By looking at the diagram, we can see that the sum of the distance running and the distance biking is 255 miles.
  Translate to an equation.
  Solve this equation.
  Check.

TRY IT 2.93                       Hamilton loves to travel to Las Vegas, 255 miles from his home in Orange County. On his last
                                  trip, he left his house at 2:00 p.m. The first part of his trip was on congested city freeways. At
                                  4:00 pm, the traffic cleared and he was able to drive through the desert at a speed 1.75 times as
                                  fast as when he drove in the congested area. He arrived in Las Vegas at 6:30 p.m. How fast was
                                  he driving during each part of his trip?

TRY IT 2.94                       Phuong left home on his bicycle at 10:00. He rode on the flat street until 11:15, then rode uphill
                                  until 11:45. He rode a total of 31 miles. His speed riding uphill was 0.6 times his speed on the
                                  flat street. Find his speed biking uphill and on the flat street.

        SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Coin Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each coin word problem.

243. Michaela has $2.05 in dimes and nickels in her        244. Liliana has $2.10 in nickels and quarters in her
        change purse. She has seven more dimes than                backpack. She has 12 more nickels than
        nickels. How many coins of each type does she              quarters. How many coins of each type does she
        have?                                                      have?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 165

245. In a cash drawer there is $125 in $5 and $10 bills.   246. Sumanta has $175 in $5 and $10 bills in his
        The number of $10 bills is twice the number of             drawer. The number of $5 bills is three times the
        $5 bills. How many of each type of bill is in the          number of $10 bills. How many of each are in the
        drawer?                                                    drawer?

247. Chi has $11.30 in dimes and quarters. The             248. Alison has $9.70 in dimes and quarters. The
        number of dimes is three more than three times             number of quarters is eight more than four
        the number of quarters. How many of each are               times the number of dimes. How many of each
        there?                                                     coin does she have?

249. Mukul has $3.75 in quarters, dimes and nickels in     250. Vina has $4.70 in quarters, dimes and nickels in
        his pocket. He has five more dimes than quarters           her purse. She has eight more dimes than
        and nine more nickels than quarters. How many              quarters and six more nickels than quarters.
        of each coin are in his pocket?                            How many of each coin are in her purse?

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each ticket or stamp word problem.

251. The first day of a water polo tournament the          252. At the movie theater, the total value of tickets
        total value of tickets sold was $17,610. One-day           sold was $2,612.50. Adult tickets sold for $10
        passes sold for $20 and tournament passes sold             each and senior/child tickets sold for $7.50 each.
        for $30. The number of tournament passes sold              The number of senior/child tickets sold was 25
        was 37 more than the number of day passes                  less than twice the number of adult tickets sold.
        sold. How many day passes and how many                     How many senior/child tickets and how many
        tournament passes were sold?                               adult tickets were sold?

253. Julie went to the post office and bought both         254. Jason went to the post office and bought both
        $0.41 stamps and $0.26 postcards. She spent                $0.41 stamps and $0.26 postcards and spent
        $51.40. The number of stamps was 20 more than              $10.28 The number of stamps was four more
        twice the number of postcards. How many of                 than twice the number of postcards. How many
        each did she buy?                                          of each did he buy?

255. Hilda has $210 worth of $10 and $12 stock             256. Mario invested $475 in $45 and $25 stock shares.
        shares. The number of $10 shares is five more              The number of $25 shares was five less than
        than twice the number of $12 shares. How many              three times the number of $45 shares. How
        of each type of share does she have?                       many of each type of share did he buy?

257. The ice rink sold 95 tickets for the afternoon        258. For the 7:30 show time, 140 movie tickets were
        skating session, for a total of $828. General              sold. Receipts from the $13 adult tickets and the
        admission tickets cost $10 each and youth tickets          $10 senior tickets totaled $1,664. How many
        cost $8 each. How many general admission                   adult tickets and how many senior tickets were
        tickets and how many youth tickets were sold?              sold?

259. The box office sold 360 tickets to a concert at the   260. Last Saturday, the museum box office sold 281
        college. The total receipts were $4,170. General           tickets for a total of $3,954. Adult tickets cost $15
        admission tickets cost $15 and student tickets             and student tickets cost $12. How many of each
        cost $10. How many of each kind of ticket was              kind of ticket was sold?
        sold?

Solve Mixture Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each mixture word problem.

261. Macario is making 12 pounds of nut mixture with       262. Carmen wants to tile the floor of his house. He
        macadamia nuts and almonds. Macadamia nuts                 will need 1,000 square feet of tile. He will do
        cost $9 per pound and almonds cost $5.25 per               most of the floor with a tile that costs $1.50 per
        pound. How many pounds of macadamia nuts                   square foot, but also wants to use an accent tile
        and how many pounds of almonds should                      that costs $9.00 per square foot. How many
        Macario use for the mixture to cost $6.50 per              square feet of each tile should he plan to use if
        pound to make?                                             he wants the overall cost to be $3 per square
                                                                   foot?
166 2 · Solving Linear Equations

263. Riley is planning to plant a lawn in his yard. He            264. Vartan was paid $25,000 for a cell phone app
        will need nine pounds of grass seed. He wants to                  that he wrote and wants to invest it to save for
        mix Bermuda seed that costs $4.80 per pound                       his son's education. He wants to put some of the
        with Fescue seed that costs $3.50 per pound.                      money into a bond that pays 4% annual interest
        How much of each seed should he buy so that                       and the rest into stocks that pay 9% annual
        the overall cost will be $4.02 per pound?                         interest. If he wants to earn 7.4% annual interest
                                                                          on the total amount, how much money should
265. Vern sold his 1964 Ford Mustang for $55,000 and                      he invest in each account?
        wants to invest the money to earn him 5.8%
        interest per year. He will put some of the money          266. Dominic pays 7% interest on his $15,000 college
        into Fund A that earns 3% per year and the rest                   loan and 12% interest on his $11,000 car loan.
        in Fund B that earns 10% per year. How much                       What average interest rate does he pay on the
        should he invest into each fund if he wants to                    total $26,000 he owes? (Round your answer to
        earn 5.8% interest per year on the total amount?                  the nearest tenth of a percent.)

267. Liam borrowed a total of $35,000 to pay for
        college. He pays his parents 3% interest on the
        $8,000 he borrowed from them and pays the
        bank 6.8% on the rest. What average interest
        rate does he pay on the total $35,000? (Round
        your answer to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

Solve Uniform Motion Applications                                 269. Kathy and Cheryl are walking in a fundraiser.
                                                                          Kathy completes the course in 4.8 hours and
In the following exercises, solve.                                        Cheryl completes the course in eight hours.
                                                                          Kathy walks two miles per hour faster than
268. Lilah is moving from Portland to Seattle. It takes                   Cheryl. Find Kathy's speed and Cheryl's speed.
        her three hours to go by train. Mason leaves the
        train station in Portland and drives to the train         271. A commercial jet and a private airplane fly from
        station in Seattle with all Lilah's boxes in his car. It          Denver to Phoenix. It takes the commercial jet
        takes him 2.4 hours to get to Seattle, driving at                 1.6 hours for the flight, and it takes the private
        15 miles per hour faster than the speed of the                    airplane 2.6 hours. The speed of the commercial
        train. Find Mason's speed and the speed of the                    jet is 210 miles per hour faster than the speed of
        train.                                                            the private airplane. Find the speed of both
                                                                          airplanes to the nearest 10 mph.
270. Two busses go from Sacramento to San Diego.
        The express bus makes the trip in 6.8 hours and           273. Charlie and Violet met for lunch at a restaurant
        the local bus takes 10.2 hours for the trip. The                  between Memphis and New Orleans. Charlie had
        speed of the express bus is 25 mph faster than                    left Memphis and drove 4.8 hours towards New
        the speed of the local bus. Find the speed of                     Orleans. Violet had left New Orleans and drove
        both busses.                                                      two hours towards Memphis, at a speed 10 miles
                                                                          per hour faster than Charlie's speed. The
272. Saul drove his truck three hours from Dallas                         distance between Memphis and New Orleans is
        towards Kansas City and stopped at a truck stop                   394 miles. Find the speed of the two drivers.
        to get dinner. At the truck stop he met Erwin,
        who had driven four hours from Kansas City                275. Ethan and Leo start riding their bikes at the
        towards Dallas. The distance between Dallas and                   opposite ends of a 65-mile bike path. After Ethan
        Kansas City is 542 miles, and Erwin's speed was                   has ridden 1.5 hours and Leo has ridden two
        eight miles per hour slower than Saul's speed.                    hours, they meet on the path. Ethan's speed is
        Find the speed of the two truckers.                               six miles per hour faster than Leo's speed. Find
                                                                          the speed of the two bikers.
274. Sisters Helen and Anne live 332 miles apart. For
        Thanksgiving, they met at their other sister's
        house partway between their homes. Helen
        drove 3.2 hours and Anne drove 2.8 hours.
        Helen's average speed was four miles per hour
        faster than Anne's. Find Helen's average speed
        and Anne's average speed.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              2.4 · Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications 167

276. Elvira and Aletheia live 3.1 miles apart on the          277. DaMarcus and Fabian live 23 miles apart and
        same street. They are in a study group that                   play soccer at a park between their homes.
        meets at a coffee shop between their houses. It               DaMarcus rode his bike for three-quarters of an
        took Elvira half an hour and Aletheia two-thirds              hour and Fabian rode his bike for half an hour to
        of an hour to walk to the coffee shop. Aletheia's             get to the park. Fabian's speed was six miles per
        speed is 0.6 miles per hour slower than Elvira's              hour faster than DaMarcus' speed. Find the
        speed. Find both women's walking speeds.                      speed of both soccer players.

278. Cindy and Richard leave their dorm in Charleston         279. Matt and Chris leave their uncle's house in
        at the same time. Cindy rides her bicycle north at            Phoenix at the same time. Matt drives west on
        a speed of 18 miles per hour. Richard rides his               I-60 at a speed of 76 miles per hour. Chris drives
        bicycle south at a speed of 14 miles per hour.                east on I-60 at a speed of 82 miles per hour. How
        How long will it take them to be 96 miles apart?              many hours will it take them to be 632 miles
                                                                      apart?
280. Two busses leave Billings at the same time. The
        Seattle bus heads west on I-90 at a speed of 73       281. Two boats leave the same dock in Cairo at the
        miles per hour while the Chicago bus heads east               same time. One heads north on the Mississippi
        at a speed of 79 miles an hour. How many hours                River while the other heads south. The
        will it take them to be 532 miles apart?                      northbound boat travels four miles per hour. The
                                                                      southbound boat goes eight miles per hour. How
282. Lorena walks the path around the park in 30                      long will it take them to be 54 miles apart?
        minutes. If she jogs, it takes her 20 minutes. Her
        jogging speed is 1.5 miles per hour faster than       283. Julian rides his bike uphill for 45 minutes, then
        her walking speed. Find Lorena's walking speed                turns around and rides back downhill. It takes
        and jogging speed.                                            him 15 minutes to get back to where he started.
                                                                      His uphill speed is 3.2 miles per hour slower than
284. Cassius drives his boat upstream for 45 minutes.                 his downhill speed. Find Julian's uphill and
        It takes him 30 minutes to return downstream.                 downhill speed.
        His speed going upstream is three miles per
        hour slower than his speed going downstream.          285. It takes Darline 20 minutes to drive to work in
        Find his upstream and downstream speeds.                      light traffic. To come home, when there is heavy
                                                                      traffic, it takes her 36 minutes. Her speed in light
286. At 1:30, Marlon left his house to go to the beach,               traffic is 24 miles per hour faster than her speed
        a distance of 7.6 miles. He rode his skateboard               in heavy traffic. Find her speed in light traffic and
        until 2:15, and then walked the rest of the way.              in heavy traffic.
        He arrived at the beach at 3:00. Marlon's speed
        on his skateboard is 2.5 times his walking speed.     287. Aaron left at 9:15 to drive to his mountain cabin
        Find his speed when skateboarding and when                    108 miles away. He drove on the freeway until
        walking.                                                      10:45 and then drove on a mountain road. He
                                                                      arrived at 11:05. His speed on the freeway was
288. Marisol left Los Angeles at 2:30 to drive to Santa               three times his speed on the mountain road.
        Barbara, a distance of 95 miles. The traffic was              Find Aaron's speed on the freeway and on the
        heavy until 3:20. She drove the rest of the way in            mountain road.
        very light traffic and arrived at 4:20. Her speed in
        heavy traffic was 40 miles per hour slower than       289. Lizette is training for a marathon. At 7:00 she left
        her speed in light traffic. Find her speed in heavy           her house and ran until 8:15 then she walked
        traffic and in light traffic.                                 until 11:15. She covered a total distance of 19
                                                                      miles. Her running speed was five miles per hour
                                                                      faster than her walking speed. Find her running
                                                                      and walking speeds.
168 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Everyday Math

290. John left his house in Irvine at 8:35 a.m. to drive    291. Sarah wants to arrive at her friend's wedding at
        to a meeting in Los Angeles, 45 miles away. He              3:00. The distance from Sarah's house to the
        arrived at the meeting at 9:50 a.m.. At 5:30 p.m.           wedding is 95 miles. Based on usual traffic
        he left the meeting and drove home. He arrived              patterns, Sarah predicts she can drive the first 15
        home at 7:18 p.m.                                           miles at 60 miles per hour, the next 10 miles at
                                                                    30 miles per hour, and the remainder of the drive
     What was his average speed on the drive                        at 70 miles per hour.

        from Irvine to Los Angeles?                              How long will it take Sarah to drive the first

     What was his average speed on the drive                        15 miles?

        from Los Angeles to Irvine?                              How long will it take Sarah to drive the next

     What was the total time he spent driving to                    10 miles?

        and from this meeting?                                   How long will it take Sarah to drive the rest

Writing Exercises                                                   of the trip?

                                                                 What time should Sarah leave her house?

292. Suppose you have six quarters, nine dimes, and         293. Do you find it helpful to use a table when solving
        four pennies. Explain how you find the total                coin problems? Why or why not?
        value of all the coins.
                                                            295. When solving a uniform motion problem, how
294. In the table used to solve coin problems, one                  does drawing a diagram of the situation help
        column is labeled "number" and another column               you?
        is labeled "value." What is the difference between
        the "number" and the "value"?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

2.5 Solve Linear Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph inequalities on the number line
           Solve linear inequalities
           Translate words to an inequality and solve
           Solve applications with linear inequalities

       BE PREPARED 2.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Translate from algebra to English:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.3.

BE PREPARED 2.14                  Translate to an algebraic expression: 15 is less than x.
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 169

Graph Inequalities on the Number Line

What number would make the inequality        true? Are you thinking, "x could be four"? That's correct, but x could be 6,

too, or 37, or even 3.001. Any number greater than three is a solution to the inequality

We show all the solutions to the inequality  on the number line by shading in all the numbers to the right of three,

to show that all numbers greater than three are solutions. Because the number three itself is not a solution, we put an

open parenthesis at three.

We can also represent inequalities using interval notation. There is no upper end to the solution to this inequality. In

interval notation, we express    as  The symbol  is read as "infinity." It is not an actual number.

Figure 2.2 shows both the number line and the interval notation.

            Figure 2.2 The inequality        is graphed on this number line and written in interval notation.

We use the left parenthesis symbol, (, to show that the endpoint of the inequality is not included. The left bracket symbol,
[, shows that the endpoint is included.

The inequality  means all numbers less than or equal to one. Here we need to show that one is a solution, too. We

do that by putting a bracket at  We then shade in all the numbers to the left of one, to show that all numbers less

than one are solutions. See Figure 2.3.

There is no lower end to those numbers. We write   in interval notation as  The symbol  is read as

"negative infinity." Figure 2.3 shows both the number line and interval notation.

            Figure 2.3 The inequality        is graphed on this number line and written in interval notation.

Inequalities, Number Lines, and Interval Notation

The notation for inequalities on a number line and in interval notation use the same symbols to express the endpoints of
intervals.

EXAMPLE 2.48

Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation.

                

  Solution


170 2 · Solving Linear Equations

  Shade to the right of and put a bracket at
  Write in interval notation.



  Shade to the left of 2.5 and put a parenthesis at 2.5.
  Write in interval notation.



Shade to the left of and put a bracket at
Write in interval notation.

  TRY IT 2.95 Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation:   
                                  

  TRY IT 2.96 Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation:   
                                  

What numbers are greater than two but less than five? Are you thinking say,  ? We can represent all the

numbers between two and five with the inequality          We can show        on the number line by shading all

the numbers between two and five. Again, we use the parentheses to show the numbers two and five are not included.

See Figure 2.4.

                                                          Figure 2.4

EXAMPLE 2.49

Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation.

                                    

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 171

  Shade between and 4.
  Put a parentheses at and 4.
  Write in interval notation.



  Shade between and -1.
  Put a bracket at and
  a parenthesis at -1.
  Write in interval notation.



  Shade between 0 and 2.5.
  Put a bracket at 0 and at 2.5.
  Write in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.97           Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation:

                                    

TRY IT 2.98           Graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation:

                                    

Solve Linear Inequalities

A linear inequality is much like a linear equation--but the equal sign is replaced with an inequality sign. A linear

inequality is an inequality in one variable that can be written in one of the forms,                                  or

Linear Inequality

A linear inequality is an inequality in one variable that can be written in one of the following forms where a, b, and c

are real numbers and    :

When we solved linear equations, we were able to use the properties of equality to add, subtract, multiply, or divide both
sides and still keep the equality. Similar properties hold true for inequalities.

We can add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an inequality and still keep the inequality. For example:
172 2 · Solving Linear Equations

      Notice that the inequality sign stayed the same.
      This leads us to the Addition and Subtraction Properties of Inequality.

         Addition and Subtraction Property of Inequality
        For any numbers a, b, and c, if
        For any numbers a, b, and c, if
         We can add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an inequality and still keep the inequality.
      What happens to an inequality when we divide or multiply both sides by a constant?
      Let's first multiply and divide both sides by a positive number.

      The inequality signs stayed the same.
      Does the inequality stay the same when we divide or multiply by a negative number?

      Notice that when we filled in the inequality signs, the inequality signs reversed their direction.
      When we divide or multiply an inequality by a positive number, the inequality sign stays the same. When we divide or
      multiply an inequality by a negative number, the inequality sign reverses.
      This gives us the Multiplication and Division Property of Inequality.

         Multiplication and Division Property of Inequality
        For any numbers a, b, and c,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 173

When we divide or multiply an inequality by a:

  · positive number, the inequality stays the same.
  · negative number, the inequality reverses.

Sometimes when solving an inequality, as in the next example, the variable ends upon the right. We can rewrite the
inequality in reverse to get the variable to the left.

Think about it as "If Xander is taller than Andy, then Andy is shorter than Xander."

EXAMPLE 2.50

Solve each inequality. Graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

                  

     Solution



  Add to both sides of the inequality.
  Simplify.
  Graph the solution on the number line.
  Write the solution in interval notation.


174 2 · Solving Linear Equations

  Divide both sides of the inequality by 9; since
  9 is positive, the inequality stays the same.
  Simplify.

  Graph the solution on the number line.

  Write the solution in interval notation.



Multiply both sides of the inequality by
Since is positive, the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.
Rewrite with the variable on the left.

Graph the solution on the number line.

Write the solution in interval notation.

  TRY IT 2.99                     Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                                  notation:

                                                   

  TRY IT 2.100                    Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                                  notation:

                                                   

Be careful when you multiply or divide by a negative number--remember to reverse the inequality sign.

EXAMPLE 2.51

Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

              

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 175

  Divide both sides of the inequality by
  Since is a negative, the inequality reverses.
  Simplify.

  Graph the solution on the number line.

  Write the solution in interval notation.



Multiply both sides of the inequality by
Since is a negative, the inequality reverses.
Simplify.

Graph the solution on the number line.

Write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.101          Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                      notation:

                        

TRY IT 2.102          Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                      notation:

                        

Most inequalities will take more than one step to solve. We follow the same steps we used in the general strategy for
solving linear equations, but make sure to pay close attention when we multiply or divide to isolate the variable.

EXAMPLE 2.52

Solve the inequality    graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
     Solution

Subtract from both sides to collect
the variables on the left.
176 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Simplify.
         Divide both sides of the inequality by
         and reverse the inequality.
         Simplify.
         Graph the solution on the number line.
         Write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.103          Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                      notation:

TRY IT 2.104          Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
                      notation:

When solving inequalities, it is usually easiest to collect the variables on the side where the coefficient of the variable is
largest. This eliminates negative coefficients and so we don't have to multiply or divide by a negative--which means we
don't have to remember to reverse the inequality sign.

EXAMPLE 2.53

Solve the inequality                               graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

     Solution

Simplify each side as much as possible.

Distribute.

Combine like terms.

Subtract from both sides to collect the
variables on the left, since

Simplify.

Add 36 to both sides to collect the
constants on the right.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 177

Divide both sides of the inequality by 

4; the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.

Graph the solution on the number line.

Write the solution in interval notation.                 

TRY IT 2.105         Solve the inequality                      , graph the solution on the number line, and write
                     the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.106         Solve the inequality                      , graph the solution on the number line, and
                     write the solution in interval notation.

Just like some equations are identities and some are contradictions, inequalities may be identities or contradictions, too.
We recognize these forms when we are left with only constants as we solve the inequality. If the result is a true
statement, we have an identity. If the result is a false statement, we have a contradiction.

EXAMPLE 2.54

Solve the inequality                       graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in
interval notation.

     Solution

  Simplify each side as much as possible.

Distribute.

Combine like terms.

Subtract 10x from both sides to collect
the variables on the left.

Simplify.

The x's are gone, and we have a true                       The inequality is an identity.
statement.                                               The solution is all real numbers.

Graph the solution on the number line.

Write the solution in interval notation.                       

TRY IT 2.107         Solve the inequality                      , graph the solution on the number line, and
                     write the solution in interval notation.
178 2 · Solving Linear Equations

TRY IT 2.108                      Solve the inequality                          , graph the solution on the number line,
                                  and write the solution in interval notation.

We can clear fractions in inequalities much as we did in equations. Again, be careful with the signs when multiplying or
dividing by a negative.

  EXAMPLE 2.55                            graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval

Solve the inequality
notation.

     Solution

Multiply both sides by the LCD, 24,
to clear the fractions.

Simplify.

Combine like terms.

Subtract from both sides to collect the
variables on the left.

Simplify.

The statement is false.                                 The inequality is a contradiction.
                                                        There is no solution.

Graph the solution on the number line.

Write the solution in interval notation.                There is no solution.

TRY IT 2.109                      Solve the inequality                         , graph the solution on the number line, and write the
                                  solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.110                      Solve the inequality                          , graph the solution on the number line, and write

                                  the solution in interval notation.

Translate to an Inequality and Solve

To translate English sentences into inequalities, we need to recognize the phrases that indicate the inequality. Some
words are easy, like "more than" and "less than." But others are not as obvious. Table 2.2 shows some common phrases

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 179

that indicate inequalities.

          is greater than is greater than or equal to is less than  is less than or equal to

          is more than        is at least     is smaller than is at most

          is larger than is no less than      has fewer than is no more than

          exceeds             is the minimum  is lower than         is the maximum

          Table 2.2

  EXAMPLE 2.56
Translate and solve. Then graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Translate.
Solve--add 27 to both sides.
Simplify.
Graph on the number line.
Write in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.111         Translate and solve. Then graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in
                     interval notation.

                     Nineteen less than p is no less than 47.

TRY IT 2.112                 Translate and solve. Then graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in
                             interval notation.

                             Four more than a is at most 15.

Solve Applications with Linear Inequalities

Many real-life situations require us to solve inequalities. The method we will use to solve applications with linear
inequalities is very much like the one we used when we solved applications with equations.

We will read the problem and make sure all the words are understood. Next, we will identify what we are looking for and
assign a variable to represent it. We will restate the problem in one sentence to make it easy to translate into an
inequality. Then, we will solve the inequality.

Sometimes an application requires the solution to be a whole number, but the algebraic solution to the inequality is not a
whole number. In that case, we must round the algebraic solution to a whole number. The context of the application will
determine whether we round up or down.
180 2 · Solving Linear Equations

  EXAMPLE 2.57

Dawn won a mini-grant of $4,000 to buy tablet computers for her classroom. The tablets she would like to buy cost
$254.12 each, including tax and delivery. What is the maximum number of tablets Dawn can buy?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                       the maximum number of
                                                                                 tablets Dawn can buy

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.

Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

Step 4. Translate. Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.       $254.12 times the number of
                                                                                 tablets is no more than $4,000.

Translate into an inequality.

Step 5. Solve the inequality.
But n must be a whole number of tablets, so round to 15.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.            Dawn can buy a maximum of
Rounding down the price to $250, 15 tablets would cost $3,750, while 16 tablets  15 tablets.
would be $4,000. So a maximum of 15 tablets at $254.12 seems reasonable.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

TRY IT 2.113                      Angie has $20 to spend on juice boxes for her son's preschool picnic. Each pack of juice boxes
                                  costs $2.63. What is the maximum number of packs she can buy?

TRY IT 2.114                      Daniel wants to surprise his girlfriend with a birthday party at her favorite restaurant. It will
                                  cost $42.75 per person for dinner, including tip and tax. His budget for the party is $500. What
                                  is the maximum number of people Daniel can have at the party?

  EXAMPLE 2.58

Taleisha's phone plan costs her $28.80 a month plus $0.20 per text message. How many text messages can she send/
receive and keep her monthly phone bill no more than $50?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.     the number of text messages Taleisha can make

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 181

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.

Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

Step 4. Translate Write a sentence that gives the   $28.80 plus $0.20 times the number of text messages is less
information to find it.                             than or equal to $50.

Translate into an inequality.

Step 5. Solve the inequality.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and         Taleisha can send/receive no more than 106 text messages to
make sure it makes sense.                           keep her bill no more than $50.

Step 7. Write a sentence that answers the
question.

TRY IT 2.115  Sergio and Lizeth have a very tight vacation budget. They plan to rent a car from a company
              that charges $75 a week plus $0.25 a mile. How many miles can they travel during the week and
              still keep within their $200 budget?

TRY IT 2.116  Rameen's heating bill is $5.42 per month plus $1.08 per therm. How many therms can Rameen
              use if he wants his heating bill to be a maximum of $87.50.

Profit is the money that remains when the costs have been subtracted from the revenue. In the next example, we will
find the number of jobs a small businesswoman needs to do every month in order to make a certain amount of profit.

  EXAMPLE 2.59

Felicity has a calligraphy business. She charges $2.50 per wedding invitation. Her monthly expenses are $650. How many
invitations must she write to earn a profit of at least $2,800 per month?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.          the number of invitations Felicity needs to write

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.
Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate. Write a sentence that gives the  $2.50 times the number of invitations minus $650 is at
information to find it.                             least $2,800.
182 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Translate into an inequality.

Step 5. Solve the inequality.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it
makes sense.

If Felicity wrote 1400 invitations, her profit would be
2.50(1400) - 650, or $2,850. This is more than $2800.

Step 7. Write a sentence that answers the question.       Felicity must write at least 1,380 invitations.

TRY IT 2.117                      Caleb has a pet sitting business. He charges $32 per hour. His monthly expenses are $2,272.
                                  How many hours must he work in order to earn a profit of at least $800 per month?

TRY IT 2.118                      Elliot has a landscape maintenance business. His monthly expenses are $1,100. If he charges
                                  $60 per job, how many jobs must he do to earn a profit of at least $4,000 a month?

There are many situations in which several quantities contribute to the total expense. We must make sure to account for
all the individual expenses when we solve problems like this.

  EXAMPLE 2.60

Malik is planning a six-day summer vacation trip. He has $840 in savings, and he earns $45 per hour for tutoring. The
trip will cost him $525 for airfare, $780 for food and sightseeing, and $95 per night for the hotel. How many hours must
he tutor to have enough money to pay for the trip?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are     the number of hours Malik must tutor
looking for.

Step 3. Name what you are
looking for.

Choose a variable to
represent that quantity.

Step 4. Translate. Write a        The expenses must be less than or equal to the income. The cost of airfare plus the
sentence that gives the           cost of food and sightseeing and the hotel bill must be less than the savings plus
information to find it.           the amount earned tutoring.

Translate into an inequality.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 183

Step 5. Solve the inequality.

Step 6. Check the answer in
the problem and make sure it
makes sense.
We substitute 23 into the
inequality.

Step 7. Write a sentence that  Malik must tutor at least 23 hours.
answers the question.

TRY IT 2.119  Brenda's best friend is having a destination wedding and the event will last three days. Brenda
              has $500 in savings and can earn $15 an hour babysitting. She expects to pay $350 airfare,
              $375 for food and entertainment and $60 a night for her share of a hotel room. How many
              hours must she babysit to have enough money to pay for the trip?

TRY IT 2.120  Josue wants to go on a 10-night road trip with friends next spring. It will cost him $180 for gas,
              $450 for food, and $49 per night to share a motel room. He has $520 in savings and can earn
              $30 per driveway shoveling snow. How many driveways must he shovel to have enough money
              to pay for the trip?

        SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph Inequalities on the Number Line

In the following exercises, graph each inequality on the number line and write in interval notation.

296.                           297.                                 298.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

299.                           300.                                 301.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

302.                           303.

                                   
                                   
                                   
184 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Solve Linear Inequalities

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

304.                              305.                              306.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

307.                              308.                              309.

                                                                        
                                                                        
    
                                  311.
310.
                                      
                                      
    

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

312.                              313.                              314.

315.                              316.                              317.

318.                              319.                              320.        

321.                                    322.                              323.

324.                                  325.                                326.

327.

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

328.                              329.                              330.

331.                                  332.                          333.

334.                              335.                              336.

337.

Translate to an Inequality and Solve

In the following exercises, translate and solve. Then graph the solution on the number line and write the solution in
interval notation.

338. Three more than h is no      339. Six more than k exceeds      340. Ten less than w is at least
        less than 25.                     25.                               39.

341. Twelve less than x is no     342. Negative five times r is no  343. Negative two times s is
        less than 21.                     more than 95.                     lower than 56.

344. Nineteen less than b is at   345. Fifteen less than a is at
        most                              least

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              2.5 · Solve Linear Inequalities 185

Solve Applications with Linear Inequalities                   347. The elevator in Yehire's apartment building has a
                                                                      sign that says the maximum weight is 2100
In the following exercises, solve.                                    pounds. If the average weight of one person is
                                                                      150 pounds, how many people can safely ride
346. Alan is loading a pallet with boxes that each                    the elevator?
        weighs 45 pounds. The pallet can safely support
        no more than 900 pounds. How many boxes can           349. Arleen got a $20 gift card for the coffee shop.
        he safely load onto the pallet?                               Her favorite iced drink costs $3.79. What is the
                                                                      maximum number of drinks she can buy with the
348. Andre is looking at apartments with three of his                 gift card?
        friends. They want the monthly rent to be no
        more than $2,360. If the roommates split the          351. Ryan charges his neighbors $17.50 to wash their
        rent evenly among the four of them, what is the               car. How many cars must he wash next summer
        maximum rent each will pay?                                   if his goal is to earn at least $1,500?

350. Teegan likes to play golf. He has budgeted $60           353. Kimuyen needs to earn $4,150 per month in
        next month for the driving range. It costs him                order to pay all her expenses. Her job pays her
        $10.55 for a bucket of balls each time he goes.               $3,475 per month plus 4% of her total sales.
        What is the maximum number of times he can                    What is the minimum Kimuyen's total sales must
        go to the driving range next month?                           be in order for her to pay all her expenses?

352. Keshad gets paid $2,400 per month plus 6% of             355. Nataly is considering two job offers. The first job
        his sales. His brother earns $3,300 per month.                would pay her $83,000 per year. The second
        For what amount of total sales will Keshad's                  would pay her $66,500 plus 15% of her total
        monthly pay be higher than his brother's                      sales. What would her total sales need to be for
        monthly pay?                                                  her salary on the second offer be higher than the
                                                                      first?
354. Andre has been offered an entry-level job. The
        company offered him $48,000 per year plus 3.5%        357. Kiyoshi's phone plan costs $17.50 per month plus
        of his total sales. Andre knows that the average              $0.15 per text message. What is the maximum
        pay for this job is $62,000. What would Andre's               number of text messages Kiyoshi can use so the
        total sales need to be for his pay to be at least as          phone bill is no more than $56.60?
        high as the average pay for this job?
                                                              359. Kellen wants to rent a banquet room in a
356. Jake's water bill is $24.80 per month plus $2.20                 restaurant for her cousin's baby shower. The
        per ccf (hundred cubic feet) of water. What is the            restaurant charges $350 for the banquet room
        maximum number of ccf Jake can use if he wants                plus $32.50 per person for lunch. How many
        his bill to be no more than $60?                              people can Kellen have at the shower if she
                                                                      wants the maximum cost to be $1,500?
358. Marlon's TV plan costs $49.99 per month plus
        $5.49 per first-run movie. How many first-run         361. Noe installs and configures software on home
        movies can he watch if he wants to keep his                   computers. He charges $125 per job. His
        monthly bill to be a maximum of $100?                         monthly expenses are $1,600. How many jobs
                                                                      must he work in order to make a profit of at least
360. Moshde runs a hairstyling business from her                      $2,400?
        house. She charges $45 for a haircut and style.
        Her monthly expenses are $960. She wants to be        363. Melissa makes necklaces and sells them online.
        able to put at least $1,200 per month into her                She charges $88 per necklace. Her monthly
        savings account order to open her own salon.                  expenses are $3,745. How many necklaces must
        How many "cut & styles" must she do to save at                she sell if she wants to make a profit of at least
        least $1,200 per month?                                       $1,650?

362. Katherine is a personal chef. She charges $115
        per four-person meal. Her monthly expenses are
        $3,150. How many four-person meals must she
        sell in order to make a profit of at least $1,900?
186 2 · Solving Linear Equations

364. Five student government officers want to go to         365. Cesar is planning a four-day trip to visit his friend
        the state convention. It will cost them $110 for            at a college in another state. It will cost him $198
        registration, $375 for transportation and food,             for airfare, $56 for local transportation, and $45
        and $42 per person for the hotel. There is $450             per day for food. He has $189 in savings and can
        budgeted for the convention in the student                  earn $35 for each lawn he mows. How many
        government savings account. They can earn the               lawns must he mow to have enough money to
        rest of the money they need by having a car                 pay for the trip?
        wash. If they charge $5 per car, how many cars
        must they wash in order to have enough money        367. Eun-Kyung works as a tutor and earns $60 per
        to pay for the trip?                                        hour. She has $792 in savings. She is planning an
                                                                    anniversary party for her parents. She would like
366. Alonzo works as a car detailer. He charges $175                to invite 40 guests. The party will cost her $1,520
        per car. He is planning to move out of his                  for food and drinks and $150 for the
        parents' house and rent his first apartment. He             photographer. She will also have a favor for each
        will need to pay $120 for application fees, $950            of the guests, and each favor will cost $7.50. How
        for security deposit, and first and last months'            many hours must she tutor to have enough
        rent at $1,140 per month. He has $1,810 in                  money for the party?
        savings. How many cars must he detail to have
        enough money to rent the apartment?                 369. Maximum weight on a boat In 2004, a water
                                                                    taxi sank in Baltimore harbor and five people
Everyday Math                                                       drowned. The water taxi had a maximum
                                                                    capacity of 3,500 pounds (25 people with
368. Maximum load on a stage In 2014, a high                        average weight 140 pounds). The average weight
        school stage collapsed in Fullerton, California,            of the 25 people on the water taxi when it sank
        when 250 students got on stage for the finale of            was 168 pounds per person. What should the
        a musical production. Two dozen students were               maximum number of people of this weight have
        injured. The stage could support a maximum of               been?
        12,750 pounds. If the average weight of a
        student is assumed to be 140 pounds, what is        371. Shower budget Penny is planning a baby
        the maximum number of students who could                    shower for her daughter-in-law. The restaurant
        safely be on the stage?                                     charges $950 for up to 25 guests, plus $31.95 for
                                                                    each additional guest. How many guests can
370. Wedding budget Adele and Walter found the                      attend if Penny wants the total cost to be no
        perfect venue for their wedding reception. The              more than $1,500?
        cost is $9850 for up to 100 guests, plus $38 for
        each additional guest. How many guests can          373. Explain why it is necessary to reverse the
        attend if Adele and Walter want the total cost to           inequality when solving
        be no more than $12,500?
                                                            375. Find out how many units you have left, after this
Writing Exercises                                                   term, to achieve your college goal and estimate
                                                                    the number of units you can take each term in
372. Explain why it is necessary to reverse the                     college. Calculate the number of terms it will
        inequality when solving                                     take you to achieve your college goal by writing
                                                                    an appropriate inequality and then solving it. Is
374. Find your last month's phone bill and the hourly               this an acceptable number of terms until you
        salary you are paid at your job. Calculate the              meet your goal? What are some ways you could
        number of hours of work it would take you to                accelerate this process?
        earn at least enough money to pay your phone
        bill by writing an appropriate inequality and then
        solving it. Do you feel this is an appropriate
        number of hours? Is this the appropriate phone
        plan for you?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             2.6 · Solve Compound Inequalities 187

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

2.6 Solve Compound Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve compound inequalities with "and"
           Solve compound inequalities with "or"
           Solve applications with compound inequalities

       BE PREPARED 2.15 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.51.

BE PREPARED 2.16  Simplify:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.54.

Solve Compound Inequalities with "and"

Now that we know how to solve linear inequalities, the next step is to look at compound inequalities. A compound
inequality is made up of two inequalities connected by the word "and" or the word "or." For example, the following are
compound inequalities.

  Compound Inequality

  A compound inequality is made up of two inequalities connected by the word "and" or the word "or."

To solve a compound inequality means to find all values of the variable that make the compound inequality a true
statement. We solve compound inequalities using the same techniques we used to solve linear inequalities. We solve
each inequality separately and then consider the two solutions.
To solve a compound inequality with the word "and," we look for all numbers that make both inequalities true. To solve a
compound inequality with the word "or," we look for all numbers that make either inequality true.
Let's start with the compound inequalities with "and." Our solution will be the numbers that are solutions to both
inequalities known as the intersection of the two inequalities. Consider the intersection of two streets--the part where
the streets overlap--belongs to both streets.
188 2 · Solving Linear Equations

To find the solution of the compound inequality, we look at the graphs of each inequality and then find the numbers that
belong to both graphs--where the graphs overlap.

For the compound inequality       and  we graph each inequality. We then look for where the graphs "overlap".

The numbers that are shaded on both graphs, will be shaded on the graph of the solution of the compound inequality.

See Figure 2.5.

                                       Figure 2.5

We can see that the numbers between    and are shaded on both of the first two graphs. They will then be shaded on
the solution graph.

The number is not shaded on the first graph and so since it is not shaded on both graphs, it is not included on the
solution graph.

The number two is shaded on both the first and second graphs. Therefore, it is be shaded on the solution graph.

This is how we will show our solution in the next examples.

EXAMPLE 2.61

Solve            and              Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
                                                                                                and
Solution

Step 1. Solve each
inequality.

                                                             and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        2.6 · Solve Compound Inequalities 189

Step 2. Graph each
solution. Then graph the
numbers that make both
inequalities true. The final
graph will show all the
numbers that make both
inequalities true--the
numbers shaded on both
of the first two graphs.

Step 3. Write the solution
in interval notation.

All the numbers that make both inequalities true are the solution to the compound inequality.

TRY IT 2.121        Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                    and

TRY IT 2.122        Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                    and

       ...

            HOW TO

Solve a compound inequality with "and."

Step 1.  Solve each inequality.
Step 2.  Graph each solution. Then graph the numbers that make both inequalities true.
         This graph shows the solution to the compound inequality.
Step 3.  Write the solution in interval notation.

EXAMPLE 2.62

Solve               and                  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
                                                                                  and
Solution

Solve each
inequality.

                                         and
190 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Graph each
solution.

Graph the numbers
that make both
inequalities true.

Write the solution 

in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.123                      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                                        and

TRY IT 2.124                      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                                        and

EXAMPLE 2.63

Solve         and                 Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
                                                                              and
Solution

Solve each inequality.

Graph each solution.                                            and

Graph the numbers that            There are no numbers that make both inequalities true.
make both inequalities            This is a contradiction so there is no solution.
true.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.6 · Solve Compound Inequalities 191

TRY IT 2.125       Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                      and

TRY IT 2.126       Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                      and

Sometimes we have a compound inequality that can be written more concisely. For example,            and  can be

written simply as  and then we call it a double inequality. The two forms are equivalent.

Double Inequality

A double inequality is a compound inequality such as  It is equivalent to           and

To solve a double inequality we perform the same operation on all three "parts" of the double inequality with the goal of
isolating the variable in the center.

EXAMPLE 2.64

Solve              Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
     Solution

Add 7 to all three parts.
Simplify.
Divide each part by three.
Simplify.
Graph the solution.
Write the solution in interval notation.

When written as a double inequality,      it is easy to see that the solutions are the numbers caught between one

and five, including one, but not five. We can then graph the solution immediately as we did above.

Another way to graph the solution of      is to graph both the solution of          and the solution of  We

would then find the numbers that make both inequalities true as we did in previous examples.

TRY IT 2.127 Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:

TRY IT 2.128 Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
192 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Solve Compound Inequalities with "or"

To solve a compound inequality with "or", we start out just as we did with the compound inequalities with "and"--we
solve the two inequalities. Then we find all the numbers that make either inequality true.

Just as the United States is the union of all of the 50 states, the solution will be the union of all the numbers that make
either inequality true. To find the solution of the compound inequality, we look at the graphs of each inequality, find the
numbers that belong to either graph and put all those numbers together.

To write the solution in interval notation, we will often use the union symbol, to show the union of the solutions shown
in the graphs.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Solve a compound inequality with "or."

  Step 1. Solve each inequality.
  Step 2. Graph each solution. Then graph the numbers that make either inequality true.
  Step 3. Write the solution in interval notation.

EXAMPLE 2.65

Solve         or                  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
                                                                                      or
Solution

Solve each inequality.

                                    or

Graph each solution.

Graph numbers that
make either inequality
true.

                                        

TRY IT 2.129                      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                                    or

TRY IT 2.130                      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                                    or

Access for free at openstax.org
EXAMPLE 2.66                                                                                                    2.6 · Solve Compound Inequalities 193

Solve         or  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
                                                            or
Solution

Solve each
inequality.

Graph each                                or
solution.
                  The solution covers all real numbers.
Graph numbers
that make either                    
inequality true.

TRY IT 2.131      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                     or

TRY IT 2.132      Solve the compound inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:
                                   or

Solve Applications with Compound Inequalities

Situations in the real world also involve compound inequalities. We will use the same problem solving strategy that we
used to solve linear equation and inequality applications.

Recall the problem solving strategies are to first read the problem and make sure all the words are understood. Then,
identify what we are looking for and assign a variable to represent it. Next, restate the problem in one sentence to make
it easy to translate into a compound inequality. Last, we will solve the compound inequality.

  EXAMPLE 2.67

Due to the drought in California, many communities have tiered water rates. There are different rates for Conservation
Usage, Normal Usage and Excessive Usage. The usage is measured in the number of hundred cubic feet (hcf) the
194 2 · Solving Linear Equations

property owner uses.

During the summer, a property owner will pay $24.72 plus $1.54 per hcf for Normal Usage. The bill for Normal Usage
would be between or equal to $57.06 and $171.02. How many hcf can the owner use if he wants his usage to stay in the
normal range?

Solution

Identify what we are looking      The number of hcf he can use and stay in the "normal usage" billing range.
for.

Name what we are looking          Let the number of hcf he can use.
for.

Translate to an inequality.       Bill is $24.72 plus $1.54 times the number of hcf he uses or

Solve the inequality.

Answer the question.              The property owner can use 21-95 hcf and still fall within the "normal usage" billing
                                  range.

TRY IT 2.133                      Due to the drought in California, many communities now have tiered water rates. There are
                                  different rates for Conservation Usage, Normal Usage and Excessive Usage. The usage is
                                  measured in the number of hundred cubic feet (hcf) the property owner uses.

                                  During the summer, a property owner will pay $24.72 plus $1.32 per hcf for Conservation
                                  Usage. The bill for Conservation Usage would be between or equal to $31.32 and $52.12. How
                                  many hcf can the owner use if she wants her usage to stay in the conservation range?

TRY IT 2.134                      Due to the drought in California, many communities have tiered water rates. There are
                                  different rates for Conservation Usage, Normal Usage and Excessive Usage. The usage is
                                  measured in the number of hundred cubic feet (hcf) the property owner uses.

                                  During the winter, a property owner will pay $24.72 plus $1.54 per hcf for Normal Usage. The
                                  bill for Normal Usage would be between or equal to $49.36 and $86.32. How many hcf will he
                                  be allowed to use if he wants his usage to stay in the normal range?

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with solving compound inequalities.
Compound inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/37compinequalit)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             2.6 · Solve Compound Inequalities 195

        SECTION 2.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Compound Inequalities with "and"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution, and write the solution in interval notation.

376.  and                377.           and                   378.  and

379.  and                380.                and              381.      and

382.            and      383.                and              384.       and

385.            and      386.                        and      387.           and

388.                and  389.                    and          390.           and

391.                and  392.                        and      393.       and

394.                and  395.                            and  396.

397.                     398.                                 399.

400.                     401.

Solve Compound Inequalities with "or"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

402.  or                 403.           or                    404.  or

405.  or                 406.                or               407.       or

408.                or   409.                        or       410.       or

411.            or       412.                or               413.       or

414.            or       415.                    or

Mixed practice

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

416.            and      417.                    and          418.       or

419.            or       420.                                 421.            and

422.            or       423.                and              424.           and
196 2 · Solving Linear Equations

425.

Solve Applications with Compound Inequalities              427. Gregory is thinking of a number and he wants
                                                                   his sister Lauren to guess the number. His first
In the following exercises, solve.                                 clue is that six less than twice his number is
                                                                   between four and forty-two. Write a compound
426. Penelope is playing a number game with her                    inequality that shows the range of numbers that
        sister June. Penelope is thinking of a number and          Gregory might be thinking of.
        wants June to guess it. Five more than three
        times her number is between 2 and 32. Write a      429. Elouise is creating a rectangular garden in her
        compound inequality that shows the range of                back yard. The length of the garden is 12 feet.
        numbers that Penelope might be thinking of.                The perimeter of the garden must be at least 36
                                                                   feet and no more than 48 feet. Use a compound
428. Andrew is creating a rectangular dog run in his               inequality to find the range of values for the
        back yard. The length of the dog run is 18 feet.           width of the garden.
        The perimeter of the dog run must be at least 42
        feet and no more than 72 feet. Use a compound
        inequality to find the range of values for the
        width of the dog run.

Everyday Math

430. Blood Pressure A person's blood pressure is           431. Body Mass Index (BMI) is a measure of body fat
        measured with two numbers. The systolic blood              is determined using your height and weight.
        pressure measures the pressure of the blood on
        the arteries as the heart beats. The diastolic          Let x be your BMI. Research and then write
        blood pressure measures the pressure while the
        heart is resting.                                          the compound inequality to show the BMI range
                                                                   for you to be considered normal weight.
     Let x be your systolic blood pressure.
                                                                Research a BMI calculator and determine
        Research and then write the compound
        inequality that shows you what a normal systolic           your BMI. Is it a solution to the inequality in part
        blood pressure should be for someone your age.             (a)?

     Let y be your diastolic blood pressure.

        Research and then write the compound
        inequality that shows you what a normal
        diastolic blood pressure should be for someone
        your age.

Writing Exercises

432. In your own words, explain the difference             433. Explain the steps for solving the compound
        between the properties of equality and the
        properties of inequality.                          inequality  or

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 197

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

2.7 Solve Absolute Value Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve absolute value equations
           Solve absolute value inequalities with "less than"
           Solve absolute value inequalities with "greater than"
           Solve applications with absolute value

       BE PREPARED 2.17 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Evaluate:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.12.

BE PREPARED 2.18  Fill in                or for each of the following pairs of numbers.

                                                                                   
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.12.

BE PREPARED 2.19  Simplify:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.13.

Solve Absolute Value Equations

As we prepare to solve absolute value equations, we review our definition of absolute value.

Absolute Value

The absolute value of a number is its distance from zero on the number line.

The absolute value of a number n is written as and               for all numbers.

Absolute values are always greater than or equal to zero.

We learned that both a number and its opposite are the same distance from zero on the number line. Since they have
the same distance from zero, they have the same absolute value. For example:

               is 5 units away from 0, so
               is 5 units away from 0, so
Figure 2.6 illustrates this idea.

                  Figure 2.6 The numbers 5 and are both five units away from zero.

For the equation  we are looking for all numbers that make this a true statement. We are looking for the

numbers whose distance from zero is 5. We just saw that both 5 and are five units from zero on the number line.

They are the solutions to the equation.

The solution can be simplified to a single statement by writing  This is read, "x is equal to positive or negative 5".

We can generalize this to the following property for absolute value equations.
198 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Absolute Value Equations
        For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

Remember that an absolute value cannot be a negative number.

EXAMPLE 2.68

Solve:                           

  Solution



Write the equivalent equations.



                       No solution
  Since an absolute value is always positive, there are no solutions to this equation.



  Write the equivalent equations.
  Since -0 = 0,
  Both equations tell us that z = 0 and so there is only one solution.

  TRY IT 2.135 Solve:                

  TRY IT 2.136 Solve:                

To solve an absolute value equation, we first isolate the absolute value expression using the same procedures we used
to solve linear equations. Once we isolate the absolute value expression we rewrite it as the two equivalent equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 199

  EXAMPLE 2.69

How to Solve Absolute Value Equations
Solve

     Solution

TRY IT 2.137 Solve:

TRY IT 2.138 Solve:

The steps for solving an absolute value equation are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve absolute value equations.

Step 1.  Isolate the absolute value expression.
Step 2.  Write the equivalent equations.
Step 3.  Solve each equation.
Step 4.  Check each solution.
200 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         EXAMPLE 2.70
       Solve

            Solution

          Isolate the absolute value expression.

Write the equivalent equations.                            or

Solve each equation.                                       or

Check:

       TRY IT 2.139 Solve:

       TRY IT 2.140 Solve:

Remember, an absolute value is always positive!
  EXAMPLE 2.71

Solve:
     Solution

Isolate the absolute value term.
An absolute value cannot be negative. No solution

TRY IT 2.141 Solve:

TRY IT 2.142 Solve:

Some of our absolute value equations could be of the form  where u and v are algebraic expressions. For
example,

How would we solve them? If two algebraic expressions are equal in absolute value, then they are either equal to each

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 201

other or negatives of each other. The property for absolute value equations says that for any algebraic expression, u, and

a positive real number, a, if    then  or

This tells us that

This leads us to the following property for equations with two absolute values.
  Equations with Two Absolute Values
  For any algebraic expressions, u and v,

When we take the opposite of a quantity, we must be careful with the signs and to add parentheses where needed.
  EXAMPLE 2.72

Solve:
     Solution

Write the equivalent equations.
Solve each equation.

Check.
We leave the check to you.

TRY IT 2.143 Solve:

TRY IT 2.144 Solve:

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "Less Than"

Let's look now at what happens when we have an absolute value inequality. Everything we've learned about solving
inequalities still holds, but we must consider how the absolute value impacts our work.

Again we will look at our definition of absolute value. The absolute value of a number is its distance from zero on the

number line. For the equation    we saw that both 5 and are five units from zero on the number line. They are

the solutions to the equation.

What about the inequality        Where are the numbers whose distance is less than or equal to 5? We know and 5

are both five units from zero. All the numbers between and 5 are less than five units from zero. See Figure 2.7.
202 2 · Solving Linear Equations

                                                 Figure 2.7

In a more general way, we can see that if  then                    See Figure 2.8.

                                                 Figure 2.8

This result is summarized here.

Absolute Value Inequalities with or

For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

After solving an inequality, it is often helpful to check some points to see if the solution makes sense. The graph of the
solution divides the number line into three sections. Choose a value in each section and substitute it in the original
inequality to see if it makes the inequality true or not. While this is not a complete check, it often helps verify the
solution.

EXAMPLE 2.73

Solve     Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Write the equivalent inequality.

Graph the solution.

Write the solution using interval
notation.

Check:                                                                                                    1, and 9.
To verify, check a value in each section of the number line showing the solution. Choose numbers such as

       TRY IT 2.145 Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 203

TRY IT 2.146 Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:

EXAMPLE 2.74

Solve         Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
It is isolated.

Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.

Step 4. Graph the solution.

Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation.
Check:
The check is left to you.

TRY IT 2.147 Solve                      Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:

TRY IT 2.148 Solve                      Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation:

           ...

              HOW TO

Solve absolute value inequalities with < or .
Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.
Step 4. Graph the solution
Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "Greater Than"

What happens for absolute value inequalities that have "greater than"? Again we will look at our definition of absolute
value. The absolute value of a number is its distance from zero on the number line.

We started with the inequality  We saw that the numbers whose distance is less than or equal to five from zero

on the number line were and 5 and all the numbers between and 5. See Figure 2.9.
204 2 · Solving Linear Equations

                                                 Figure 2.9

Now we want to look at the inequality      Where are the numbers whose distance from zero is greater than or equal
to five?

Again both and 5 are five units from zero and so are included in the solution. Numbers whose distance from zero is
greater than five units would be less than and greater than 5 on the number line. See Figure 2.10.

                                                 Figure 2.10

In a more general way, we can see that if  then  or                See Figure 2.11.

                                                 Figure 2.11

This result is summarized here.

Absolute Value Inequalities with > or 

For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

EXAMPLE 2.75

Solve     Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Write the equivalent inequality.

Graph the solution.

Write the solution using interval                                                    
notation.

Check:

To verify, check a value in each section of the number line showing the solution. Choose numbers such as 0, and 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 205

TRY IT 2.149 Solve  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
TRY IT 2.150 Solve  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

  EXAMPLE 2.76  Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.
Solve

     Solution

Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression. It is                               
isolated.
Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.

Step 4. Graph the solution.

Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation.
Check:
The check is left to you.

TRY IT 2.151 Solve                      Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 2.152 Solve                      Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

           ...

              HOW TO

Solve absolute value inequalities with > or .
Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.
Step 4. Graph the solution
206 2 · Solving Linear Equations

         Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation.

     Solve Applications with Absolute Value

       Absolute value inequalities are often used in the manufacturing process. An item must be made with near perfect
       specifications. Usually there is a certain tolerance of the difference from the specifications that is allowed. If the
       difference from the specifications exceeds the tolerance, the item is rejected.

         EXAMPLE 2.77
       The ideal diameter of a rod needed for a machine is 60 mm. The actual diameter can vary from the ideal diameter by

                mm. What range of diameters will be acceptable to the customer without causing the rod to be rejected?
            Solution

                                                                                      Let x = the actual measurement.

          Use an absolute value inequality to express this
          situation.

Rewrite as a compound inequality.  The diameter of the rod can be between 59.925 mm and
Solve the inequality.              60.075 mm.
Answer the question.

TRY IT 2.153  The ideal diameter of a rod needed for a machine is 80 mm. The actual diameter can vary from
              the ideal diameter by 0.009 mm. What range of diameters will be acceptable to the customer
              without causing the rod to be rejected?

TRY IT 2.154  The ideal diameter of a rod needed for a machine is 75 mm. The actual diameter can vary from
              the ideal diameter by 0.05 mm. What range of diameters will be acceptable to the customer
              without causing the rod to be rejected?

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with solving linear absolute value equations and
inequalities.
Solving Linear Absolute Value Equations and Inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/37solvlinabsol)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.7 · Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 207

        SECTION 2.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Absolute Value Equations

In the following exercises, solve.

434.                                435.               436.    
                                                             

437.                                438.               439.

      

440.                                441.               442.
                                                       445.
443.                                444.               448.
                                                       451.
446.                                447.               454.

449.                                450.

452.                                453.

455.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "less than"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

456.                                457.               458.

459.                                460.               461.

462.                                463.               464.

465.                                466.               467.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "greater than"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

468.                                469.               470.

471.                                472.               473.

474.                                475.               476.

477.                                478.               479.

In the following exercises, solve. For each inequality, also graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

480.                                481.               482.

483.                                484.               485.

486.                                487.               488.

489.
208 2 · Solving Linear Equations

Solve Applications with Absolute Value                         491. An organic juice bottler ideally produces 215,000
                                                                       bottle per day. But this total can vary by as much
In the following exercises, solve.                                     as 7,500 bottles. What is the maximum and
                                                                       minimum expected production at the bottling
490. A chicken farm ideally produces 200,000 eggs                      company?
        per day. But this total can vary by as much as
        25,000 eggs. What is the maximum and                   493. At Lilly's Bakery, the ideal weight of a loaf of
        minimum expected production at the farm?                       bread is 24 ounces. By law, the actual weight can
                                                                       vary from the ideal by 1.5 ounces. What range of
492. In order to insure compliance with the law,                       weight will be acceptable to the inspector
        Miguel routinely overshoots the weight of his                  without causing the bakery being fined?
        tortillas by 0.5 gram. He just received a report
        that told him that he could be losing as much as
        $100,000 per year using this practice. He now
        plans to buy new equipment that guarantees the
        thickness of the tortilla within 0.005 inches. If the
        ideal thickness of the tortilla is 0.04 inches, what
        thickness of tortillas will be guaranteed?

Writing Exercises

494. Write a graphical description of the absolute             495. In your own words, explain how to solve the
        value of a number.                                             absolute value inequality,

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          2 · Chapter Review 209

Chapter Review

Key Terms

compound inequality A compound inequality is made up of two inequalities connected by the word "and" or the word

"or."

conditional equation An equation that is true for one or more values of the variable and false for all other values of

the variable is a conditional equation.

contradiction An equation that is false for all values of the variable is called a contradiction. A contradiction has no

solution.

identity An equation that is true for any value of the variable is called an Identity. The solution of an identity is all real

numbers.

linear equation A linear equation is an equation in one variable that can be written, where a and b are real numbers

and        as

solution of an equation A solution of an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when

substituted into the equation.

Key Concepts

2.1 Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations

  · How to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation
      Step 1. Substitute the number in for the variable in the equation.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
                  If it is true, the number is a solution.
                  If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

· How to Solve Linear Equations Using a General Strategy
    Step 1. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
               Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
               Combine like terms.
    Step 2. Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equation.
               Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
    Step 3. Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the equation.
               Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
    Step 4. Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1.
               Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
               State the solution to the equation.
    Step 5. Check the solution.
               Substitute the solution into the original equation to make sure the result is a true statement.

· How to Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients
   Step 1. Find the least common denominator (LCD) of all the fractions and decimals (in fraction form) in the
               equation.
    Step 2. Multiply both sides of the equation by that LCD. This clears the fractions and decimals.
    Step 3. Solve using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.

2.2 Use a Problem Solving Strategy

  · How To Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Word Problems
      Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
      Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
                  information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using proper algebra techniques.

    Step 6. Check the answer in the problem to make sure it makes sense.
    Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

· How To Find Percent Change
210 2 · Chapter Review

      Step 1. Find the amount of change
      Step 2. Find what percent the amount of change is of the original amount.

  · Discount

  · Mark-up

  · Simple Interest
      If an amount of money, P, called the principal, is invested or borrowed for a period of t years at an annual interest
      rate r, the amount of interest, I, earned or paid is:

2.3 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

  · How To Solve Geometry Applications
      Step 1. Read the problem and make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
      Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what you are looking for by choosing a variable to represent it. Draw the figure and label it with the
                  given information.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
                  given information.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  · The Pythagorean Theorem
       In any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs, and c is the length of the hypotenuse, the sum of
           the squares of the lengths of the two legs equals the square of the length of the hypotenuse.

2.4 Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications

  · Total Value of Coins
      For the same type of coin, the total value of a number of coins is found by using the model
       number is the number of coins
       value is the value of each coin
       total value is the total value of all the coins

  · How to solve coin word problems.
      Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
                  Determine the types of coins involved.
                  Create a table to organize the information.
                        Label the columns "type," "number," "value," "total value."

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       2 · Chapter Review 211

         List the types of coins.
         Write in the value of each type of coin.
         Write in the total value of all the coins.

Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
         Use variable expressions to represent the number of each type of coin and write them in the table.
Step 4.  Multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin.
         Translate into an equation.
Step 5.  It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information. Then, translate
Step 6.  the sentence into an equation.
         Write the equation by adding the total values of all the types of coins.
         Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
         Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

    Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

· How To Solve a Uniform Motion Application
    Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
               Draw a diagram to illustrate what it happening.
               Create a table to organize the information.
                      Label the columns rate, time, distance.
                      List the two scenarios.
                      Write in the information you know.

Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
         Complete the chart.
Step 4.  Use variable expressions to represent that quantity in each row.
         Multiply the rate times the time to get the distance.
Step 5.  Translate into an equation.
Step 6.  Restate the problem in one sentence with all the important information.
Step 7.  Then, translate the sentence into an equation.
         Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
         Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
         Answer the question with a complete sentence.

2.5 Solve Linear Inequalities

  · Inequalities, Number Lines, and Interval Notation

· Linear Inequality
    A linear inequality is an inequality in one variable that can be written in one of the following forms where a, b,
        and c are real numbers and

· Addition and Subtraction Property of Inequality
212 2 · Chapter Review

       For any numbers a, b, and c, if

       We can add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an inequality and still keep the inequality.
  · Multiplication and Division Property of Inequality

       For any numbers a, b, and c,

· Phrases that indicate inequalities

is greater than is greater than or equal to is less than                     is less than or equal to

is more than                     is at least               is smaller than is at most

is larger than is no less than                             has fewer than is no more than

exceeds                          is the minimum            is lower than     is the maximum

2.6 Solve Compound Inequalities

  · How to solve a compound inequality with "and"
      Step 1. Solve each inequality.
      Step 2. Graph each solution. Then graph the numbers that make both inequalities true. This graph shows the
                  solution to the compound inequality.
      Step 3. Write the solution in interval notation.

· Double Inequality                                                . It is equivalent to   and
    A double inequality is a compound inequality such as

· How to solve a compound inequality with "or"
    Step 1. Solve each inequality.
    Step 2. Graph each solution. Then graph the numbers that make either inequality true.
    Step 3. Write the solution in interval notation.

2.7 Solve Absolute Value Inequalities

  · Absolute Value

The absolute value of a number is its distance from 0 on the number line.

The absolute value of a number n is written as and         for all numbers.

Absolute values are always greater than or equal to zero.

· Absolute Value Equations

For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2 · Exercises 213

    Remember that an absolute value cannot be a negative number.
· How to Solve Absolute Value Equations

    Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
    Step 2. Write the equivalent equations.
    Step 3. Solve each equation.
    Step 4. Check each solution.

· Equations with Two Absolute Values
   For any algebraic expressions, u and v,

· Absolute Value Inequalities with or
   For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

· How To Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with or
    Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
    Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

    Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.
    Step 4. Graph the solution
    Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation

· Absolute Value Inequalities with or
   For any algebraic expression, u, and any positive real number, a,

· How To Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with or
    Step 1. Isolate the absolute value expression.
    Step 2. Write the equivalent compound inequality.

      Step 3. Solve the compound inequality.
      Step 4. Graph the solution
      Step 5. Write the solution using interval notation

Exercises

Review Exercises

Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations

Solve Equations Using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution to the equation.

496.                                                      497.

In the following exercises, solve each linear equation.

498.                                                      499.

500.                                                      501.

502.                                                      503.

504.                                                      505.

506.                                                      507.
214 2 · Exercises

Classify Equations

In the following exercises, classify each equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then state
the solution.

508.                                                   509.

510.

Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

511.                                                   512.

513.                                                   514.

515.                                                   516.

Use a Problem-Solving Strategy

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve using the problem solving strategy for word problems.

517. Three-fourths of the            518. There are nine saxophone
        people at a concert are              players in the band. The
        children. If there are 87            number of saxophone
        children, what is the total          players is one less than
        number of people at the              twice the number of tuba
        concert?                             players. Find the number
                                             of tuba players.

Solve Number Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each number word problem.

519. The sum of a number and         520. One number is nine less        521. One number is two more
        three is forty-one. Find             than another. Their sum is          than four times another.
        the number.                          negative twenty-seven.              Their sum is negative
                                             Find the numbers.                   thirteen. Find the
                                                                                 numbers.
522. The sum of two                  523. Find three consecutive
        consecutive integers is              even integers whose sum     524. Find three consecutive
                 Find the numbers.           is 234.                             odd integers whose sum
                                                                                 is 51.
525. Koji has $5,502 in his
        savings account. This is
        $30 less than six times
        the amount in his
        checking account. How
        much money does Koji
        have in his checking
        account?

Solve Percent Applications

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

526. What number is 67% of           527. 12.5% of what number is        528. What percent of 125 is
        250?                                 20?                                 150?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 2 · Exercises 215

In the following exercises, solve.   530. Dolores bought a crib on         531. Jaden earns $2,680 per
                                             sale for $350. The sale               month. He pays $938 a
529. The bill for Dino's lunch               price was 40% of the                  month for rent. What
        was $19.45. He wanted to             original price. What was              percent of his monthly
        leave 20% of the total bill          the original price of the             pay goes to rent?
        as a tip. How much                   crib?
        should the tip be?                                                 534. Emmett bought a pair of
                                     533. Rowena's monthly                         shoes on sale at 40% off
532. Angel received a raise in               gasoline bill dropped                 from an original price of
        his annual salary from               from $83.75 last month to
        $55,400 to $56,785. Find             $56.95 this month. Find           $138. Find  the
        the percent change.                  the percent change.
                                                                                   amount of discount and
535. Lacey bought a pair of          536. Nga and Lauren bought a
        boots on sale for $95. The           chest at a flea market for         the sale price.
        original price of the boots          $50. They re-finished it
                                             and then added a 350%
    was $200. Find  the
                                         mark-up. Find  the
        amount of discount and
                                             amount of the mark-up
     the discount rate.
                                         and  the list price.
        (Round to the nearest
        tenth of a percent, if
        needed.)

Solve Simple Interest Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

537. Winston deposited $3,294        538. Moira borrowed $4,500            539. Jaime's refrigerator loan
        in a bank account with               from her grandfather to               statement said he would
        interest rate 2.6% How               pay for her first year of             pay $1,026 in interest for
        much interest was earned             college. Three years later,           a four-year loan at 13.5%.
        in five years?                       she repaid the $4,500                 How much did Jaime
                                             plus $243 interest. What              borrow to buy the
                                             was the rate of interest?             refrigerator?

Solve a formula for a Specific Variable

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

In the following exercises, solve the formula for the specified variable.

540. Solve the formula               541. Solve the formula                542. Solve the formula
                         for L.                               for                                        for a.

543. Solve the formula
                           for y.
216 2 · Exercises

Use Formulas to Solve Geometry Applications

In the following exercises, solve using a geometry formula.

544. What is the height of a          545. The measure of the             546. The perimeter of a
        triangle with area                    smallest angle in a right           triangle is 97 feet. One
        square meters and base 9              triangle is less than               side of the triangle is
        meters?                               the measure of the next             eleven feet more than the
                                              larger angle. Find the              smallest side. The third
                                              measures of all three               side is six feet more than
                                              angles.                             twice the smallest side.
                                                                                  Find the lengths of all
547. Find the length of the           548. Find the length of the                 sides.
        hypotenuse.                           missing side. Round to
                                              the nearest tenth, if       549. Sergio needs to attach a
                                              necessary.                          wire to hold the antenna
                                                                                  to the roof of his house,
                                                                                  as shown in the figure.
                                                                                  The antenna is eight feet
                                                                                  tall and Sergio has 10 feet
                                                                                  of wire. How far from the
                                                                                  base of the antenna can
                                                                                  he attach the wire?
                                                                                  Approximate to the
                                                                                  nearest tenth, if
                                                                                  necessary.

550. Seong is building shelving       551. The length of a rectangle      552. The width of a rectangle is
        in his garage. The shelves            is 12 cm more than the              three more than twice the
        are 36 inches wide and 15             width. The perimeter is 74          length. The perimeter is
        inches tall. He wants to put          cm. Find the length and             96 inches. Find the length
        a diagonal brace across the           the width.                          and the width.
        back to stabilize the
        shelves, as shown. How
        long should the brace be?

553. The perimeter of a
        triangle is 35 feet. One
        side of the triangle is five
        feet longer than the
        second side. The third
        side is three feet longer
        than the second side. Find
        the length of each side.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                2 · Exercises 217

Solve Mixture and Uniform Motion Applications

Solve Coin Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve.

554. Paulette has $140 in $5        555. Lenny has $3.69 in
        and $10 bills. The number           pennies, dimes, and
        of $10 bills is one less            quarters. The number of
        than twice the number of            pennies is three more
        $5 bills. How many of               than the number of
        each does she have?                 dimes. The number of
                                            quarters is twice the
                                            number of dimes. How
                                            many of each coin does
                                            he have?

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each ticket or stamp word problem.

556. Tickets for a basketball       557. 125 tickets were sold for          558. Yumi spent $34.15 buying
        game cost $2 for students           the jazz band concert for               stamps. The number of
        and $5 for adults. The              a total of $1,022. Student              $0.56 stamps she bought
        number of students was              tickets cost $6 each and                was 10 less than four
        three less than 10 times            general admission tickets               times the number of
        the number of adults. The           cost $10 each. How many                 $0.41 stamps. How many
        total amount of money               of each kind of ticket were             of each did she buy?
        from ticket sales was               sold?
        $619. How many of each
        ticket were sold?

Solve Mixture Word Problems         560. Amber wants to put tiles           561. Enrique borrowed
                                            on the backsplash of her                $23,500 to buy a car. He
In the following exercises, solve.          kitchen counters. She will              pays his uncle 2% interest
                                            need 36 square feet of                  on the $4,500 he
559. Marquese is making 10                  tile. She will use basic tiles          borrowed from him, and
        pounds of trail mix from            that cost $8 per square                 he pays the bank 11.5%
        raisins and nuts. Raisins           foot and decorator tiles                interest on the rest. What
        cost $3.45 per pound and            that cost $20 per square                average interest rate does
        nuts cost $7.95 per                 foot. How many square                   he pay on the total
        pound. How many                     feet of each tile should                $23,500? (Round your
        pounds of raisins and               she use so that the overall             answer to the nearest
        how many pounds of nuts             cost of the backsplash will             tenth of a percent.)
        should Marquese use for             be $10 per square foot?
        the trail mix to cost him
        $6.96 per pound?
218 2 · Exercises

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

562. When Gabe drives from           563. Louellen and Tracy met at        564. Two busses leave Amarillo
        Sacramento to Redding it             a restaurant on the road              at the same time. The
        takes him 2.2 hours. It              between Chicago and                   Albuquerque bus heads
        takes Elsa two hours to              Nashville. Louellen had               west on the I-40 at a
        drive the same distance.             left Chicago and drove 3.2            speed of 72 miles per
        Elsa's speed is seven miles          hours towards Nashville.              hour, and the Oklahoma
        per hour faster than                 Tracy had left Nashville              City bus heads east on
        Gabe's speed. Find Gabe's            and drove 4 hours                     the I-40 at a speed of 78
        speed and Elsa's speed.              towards Chicago, at a                 miles per hour. How many
                                             speed one mile per hour               hours will it take them to
                                             faster than Louellen's                be 375 miles apart?
                                             speed. The distance
                                             between Chicago and           567. Anthony drove from New
                                             Nashville is 472 miles.               York City to Baltimore,
                                             Find Louellen's speed and             which is a distance of 192
                                             Tracy's speed.                        miles. He left at 3:45 and
                                                                                   had heavy traffic until
565. Kyle rowed his boat             566. At 6:30, Devon left her                  5:30. Traffic was light for
        upstream for 50 minutes.             house and rode her bike               the rest of the drive, and
        It took him 30 minutes to            on the flat road until 7:30.          he arrived at 7:30. His
        row back downstream.                 Then she started riding               speed in light traffic was
        His speed going upstream             uphill and rode until 8:00.           four miles per hour more
        is two miles per hour                She rode a total of 15                than twice his speed in
        slower than his speed                miles. Her speed on the               heavy traffic. Find
        going downstream. Find               flat road was three miles             Anthony's driving speed
        Kyle's upstream and                  per hour faster than her              in heavy traffic and light
        downstream speeds.                   speed going uphill. Find              traffic.
                                             Devon's speed on the flat
                                             road and riding uphill.

Solve Linear Inequalities

Graph Inequalities on the Number Line

In the following exercises, graph the inequality on the number line and write in interval notation.

568.                                 569.                                  570.

571.                                 572.                                  573.

574.

Solve Linear Inequalities

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

575.                                 576.                                  577.

578.                                 579.                                  580.

581.                                       582.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                 2 · Exercises 219

Translate Words to an Inequality and Solve

In the following exercises, translate and solve. Then write the solution in interval notation and graph on the number line.

583. Five more than z is at          584. Three less than c is at         585. Nine times n exceeds 42.
        most 19.                             least 360.

586. Negative two times a is
        no more than eight.

Solve Applications with Linear Inequalities

In the following exercises, solve.

587. Julianne has a weekly           588. Rogelio paints                  589. Briana has been offered a
        food budget of $231 for              watercolors. He got a                sales job in another city.
        her family. If she plans to          $100 gift card to the art            The offer was for $42,500
        budget the same amount               supply store and wants to            plus 8% of her total sales.
        for each of the seven days           use it to buy 12 × 16                In order to make it worth
        of the week, what is the             canvases. Each canvas                the move, Briana needs to
        maximum amount she                   costs $10.99. What is the            have an annual salary of
        can spend on food each               maximum number of                    at least $66,500. What
        day?                                 canvases he can buy with             would her total sales
                                             his gift card?                       need to be for her to
                                                                                  move?
590. Renee's car costs her $195      591. Costa is an accountant.
        per month plus $0.09 per             During tax season, he        592. Jenna is planning a five-
        mile. How many miles can             charges $125 to do a                 day resort vacation with
        Renee drive so that her              simple tax return. His               three of her friends. It will
        monthly car expenses are             expenses for buying                  cost her $279 for airfare,
        no more than $250?                   software, renting an                 $300 for food and
                                             office, and advertising are          entertainment, and $65
                                             $6,000. How many tax                 per day for her share of
                                             returns must he do if he             the hotel. She has $550
                                             wants to make a profit of            saved towards her
                                             at least $8,000?                     vacation and can earn $25
                                                                                  per hour as an assistant
                                                                                  in her uncle's
                                                                                  photography studio. How
                                                                                  many hours must she
                                                                                  work in order to have
                                                                                  enough money for her
                                                                                  vacation?

Solve Compound Inequalities

Solve Compound Inequalities with "and"

In each of the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution, and write the solution in interval notation.

593.  and                            594.    and                          595.  and

596.       and                       597.    and                          598.
220 2 · Exercises

Solve Compound Inequalities with "or"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

599.               or               600.                or              601.  or

602.               or               603.            or

Solve Applications with Compound Inequalities

In the following exercises, solve.

604. Liam is playing a number       605. Elouise is creating a
        game with his sister                rectangular garden in her
        Audry. Liam is thinking of          back yard. The length of
        a number and wants                  the garden is 12 feet. The
        Audry to guess it. Five             perimeter of the garden
        more than three times               must be at least 36 feet
        her number is between 2             and no more than 48 feet.
        and 32. Write a                     Use a compound
        compound inequality that            inequality to find the
        shows the range of                  range of values for the
        numbers that Liam might             width of the garden.
        be thinking of.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities

Solve Absolute Value Equations

In the following exercises, solve.

606.                                607.                                608.

609.                                610.                                611.

612.                                613.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "less than"

In the following exercises, solve each inequality. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

614.                                615.                                616.

617.

Solve Absolute Value Inequalities with "greater than"

In the following exercises, solve. Graph the solution and write the solution in interval notation.

618.                                619.                                620.

621.                                622.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            2 · Exercises 221

Solve Applications with Absolute Value

In the following exercises, solve.

623. A craft beer brewer needs      624. At Fancy Grocery, the
        215,000 bottle per day.             ideal weight of a loaf of
        But this total can vary by          bread is 16 ounces. By
        as much as 5,000 bottles.           law, the actual weight can
        What is the maximum                 vary from the ideal by 1.5
        and minimum expected                ounces. What range of
        usage at the bottling               weight will be acceptable
        company?                            to the inspector without
                                            causing the bakery being
                                            fined?

Practice Test

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

625.                                626.                                       627.
                                                                                            632.
628.                                629.

630.                                              631.

633.                                634. Solve the formula

                                                  for y.

In the following exercises, graph the inequality on the number line and write in interval notation.

635.                                636.                                637.

In the following exercises, solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval
notation.

638.                                639.                                640.                      and

641.                 or             642.                or              643.

In the following exercises, translate to an equation or inequality and solve.

644. Four less than twice x is      645. Find the length of the         646. One number is four more
        16.                                 missing side.
                                                                               than twice another. Their

                                                                               sum is             Find the

                                                                               numbers.

647. The sum of two                 648. Marcus bought a                649. Bonita has $2.95 in dimes
                                            television on sale for              and quarters in her
      consecutive odd integers              $626.50 The original price          pocket. If she has five
                                            of the television was               more dimes than
      is  Find the                                                              quarters, how many of
                                        $895. Find  the                         each coin does she have?
      numbers.
                                            amount of discount and

                                         the discount rate.
222 2 · Exercises

650. Kim is making eight             651. The measure of one angle        652. The length of a rectangle
        gallons of punch from                of a triangle is twice the           is five feet more than four
        fruit juice and soda. The            measure of the smallest              times the width. The
        fruit juice costs $6.04 per          angle. The measure of the            perimeter is 60 feet. Find
        gallon and the soda costs            third angle is three times           the dimensions of the
        $4.28 per gallon. How                the measure of the                   rectangle.
        much fruit juice and how             smallest angle. Find the
        much soda should she                 measures of all three        655. Sara has a budget of
        use so that the punch                angles.                              $1,000 for costumes for
        costs $5.71 per gallon?                                                   the 18 members of her
                                     654. Leon drove from his                     musical theater group.
653. Two planes leave Dallas at              house in Cincinnati to his           What is the maximum she
        the same time. One heads             sister's house in                    can spend for each
        east at a speed of 428               Cleveland, a distance of             costume?
        miles per hour. The other            252 miles. It took him
        plane heads west at a                hours. For the first half
        speed of 382 miles per               hour, he had heavy traffic,
        hour. How many hours                 and the rest of the time
        will it take them to be              his speed was five miles
        2,025 miles apart?                   per hour less than twice
                                             his speed in heavy traffic.
                                             What was his speed in
                                             heavy traffic?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3 · Introduction 223

3  GRAPHS AND FUNCTIONS

Figure 3.1 This odd-looking headgear provides the user with a virtual world. (credit: fill/Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables
  3.2 Slope of a Line
  3.3 Find the Equation of a Line
  3.4 Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables
  3.5 Relations and Functions
  3.6 Graphs of Functions

      Introduction

Imagine visiting a faraway city or even outer space from the comfort of your living room. It could be possible using
virtual reality. This technology creates realistic images that make you feel as if you are truly immersed in the scene and
even enable you to interact with them. It is being developed for fun applications, such as video games, but also for
architects to plan buildings, car companies to design prototypes, the military to train, and medical students to learn.

Developing virtual reality devices requires modeling the environment using graphs and mathematical relationships. In
this chapter, you will graph different relationships and learn ways to describe and analyze graphs.

3.1 Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Plot points in a rectangular coordinate system
           Graph a linear equation by plotting points
           Graph vertical and horizontal lines
           Find the x- and y-intercepts
           Graph a line using the intercepts

   BE PREPARED 3.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    Evaluate  when

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

   BE PREPARED 3.2  Evaluate  when

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.
224 3 · Graphs and Functions

BE PREPARED 3.3                  Solve for y:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

Plot Points on a Rectangular Coordinate System

Just like maps use a grid system to identify locations, a grid system is used in algebra to show a relationship between
two variables in a rectangular coordinate system. The rectangular coordinate system is also called the xy-plane or the
"coordinate plane."

The rectangular coordinate system is formed by two intersecting number lines, one horizontal and one vertical. The
horizontal number line is called the x-axis. The vertical number line is called the y-axis. These axes divide a plane into
four regions, called quadrants. The quadrants are identified by Roman numerals, beginning on the upper right and
proceeding counterclockwise. See Figure 3.2.

                                                                              Figure 3.2

In the rectangular coordinate system, every point is represented by an ordered pair. The first number in the ordered
pair is the x-coordinate of the point, and the second number is the y-coordinate of the point. The phrase "ordered pair"
means that the order is important.

Ordered Pair

An ordered pair,              gives the coordinates of a point in a rectangular coordinate system. The first number is the

x-coordinate. The second number is the y-coordinate.

What is the ordered pair of the point where the axes cross? At that point both coordinates are zero, so its ordered pair is

The point                     has a special name. It is called the origin.

The Origin

The point     is called the origin. It is the point where the x-axis and y-axis intersect.

We use the coordinates to locate a point on the xy-plane. Let's plot the point    as an example. First, locate 1 on the

x-axis and lightly sketch a vertical line through  Then, locate 3 on the y-axis and sketch a horizontal line through

Now, find the point where these two lines meet--that is the point with coordinates          See Figure 3.3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 225

                                           Figure 3.3

Notice that the vertical line through    and the horizontal line through                are not part of the graph. We just used
them to help us locate the point

When one of the coordinate is zero, the point lies on one of the axes. In Figure 3.4 the point  is on the y-axis and the

point         is on the x-axis.

                                                                            Figure 3.4
Points on the Axes
Points with a y-coordinate equal to 0 are on the x-axis, and have coordinates
Points with an x-coordinate equal to 0 are on the y-axis, and have coordinates

EXAMPLE 3.1

Plot each point in the rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is located:

                                         

  Solution

The first number of the coordinate pair is the x-coordinate, and the second number is the y-coordinate. To plot each

point, sketch a vertical line through the x-coordinate and a horizontal line through the y-coordinate. Their intersection is

the point.

 Since           the point is to the left of the y-axis. Also, since  the point is above the x-axis. The point        is

in Quadrant II.

 Since           the point is to the left of the y-axis. Also, since  the point is below the x-axis. The point

       is in Quadrant III.

 Since           the point is to the right of the y-axis. Since       the point is below the x-axis. The point  is in

Quadrant IV.
226 3 · Graphs and Functions

 Since     the point whose coordinates are      is on the y-axis.

 Since     the point is to the right of the y-axis. Since    the point is above the x-axis. (It may be helpful to

write as a mixed number or decimal.) The point  is in Quadrant I.

TRY IT 3.1                    Plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is

                              located:

                                                                   

TRY IT 3.2                    Plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is

                              located:

                                                             

The signs of the x-coordinate and y-coordinate affect the location of the points. You may have noticed some patterns as
you graphed the points in the previous example. We can summarize sign patterns of the quadrants in this way:

Quadrants

Up to now, all the equations you have solved were equations with just one variable. In almost every case, when you

solved the equation you got exactly one solution. But equations can have more than one variable. Equations with two

variables may be of the form              An equation of this form is called a linear equation in two variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 227

Linear Equation                        where A and B are not both zero, is called a linear equation in two variables.
An equation of the form

Here is an example of a linear equation in two variables, x and y.

The equation             is also a linear equation. But it does not appear to be in the form            We can use

the Addition Property of Equality and rewrite it in         form.

By rewriting             as            we can easily see that it is a linear equation in two variables because it is of the
form
                 When an equation is in the form                    we say it is in standard form of a linear equation.

Standard Form of Linear Equation

A linear equation is in standard form when it is written

Most people prefer to have A, B, and C be integers and      when writing a linear equation in standard form, although
it is not strictly necessary.

Linear equations have infinitely many solutions. For every number that is substituted for x there is a corresponding y

value. This pair of values is a solution to the linear equation and is represented by the ordered pair  When we

substitute these values of x and y into the equation, the result is a true statement, because the value on the left side is

equal to the value on the right side.

Solution of a Linear Equation in Two Variables

An ordered pair  is a solution of the linear equation                   if the equation is a true statement when the

x- and y-values of the ordered pair are substituted into the equation.

Linear equations have infinitely many solutions. We can plot these solutions in the rectangular coordinate system. The
points will line up perfectly in a straight line. We connect the points with a straight line to get the graph of the equation.
We put arrows on the ends of each side of the line to indicate that the line continues in both directions.

A graph is a visual representation of all the solutions of the equation. It is an example of the saying, "A picture is worth a
thousand words." The line shows you all the solutions to that equation. Every point on the line is a solution of the
equation. And, every solution of this equation is on this line. This line is called the graph of the equation. Points not on
the line are not solutions!

Graph of a Linear Equation

The graph of a linear equation         is a straight line.

· Every point on the line is a solution of the equation.
· Every solution of this equation is a point on this line.
228 3 · Graphs and Functions

  EXAMPLE 3.2                 is shown.
The graph of

For each ordered pair, decide:

 Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?

 Is the point on the line?

A:  B:         C:                D:

     Solution
Substitute the x- and y-values into the equation to check if the ordered pair is a solution to the equation.



 Plot the points                         and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 229

The points     and                   are on the line  and the point  is not on the line.

The points that are solutions to     are on the line, but the point that is not a solution is not on the line.

TRY IT 3.3  Use graph of             For each ordered pair, decide:

             Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
             Is the point on the line?

            A                     B

TRY IT 3.4  Use graph of             For each ordered pair, decide:

             Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
             Is the point on the line?

            A                     B
230 3 · Graphs and Functions

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

There are several methods that can be used to graph a linear equation. The first method we will use is called plotting
points, or the Point-Plotting Method. We find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation and then plot
them in a rectangular coordinate system. By connecting these points in a line, we have the graph of the linear equation.

EXAMPLE 3.3

How to Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

Graph the equation               by plotting points.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 231

TRY IT 3.5 Graph the equation by plotting points:

TRY IT 3.6 Graph the equation by plotting points:

The steps to take when graphing a linear equation by plotting points are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph a linear equation by plotting points.

Step 1.  Find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation. Organize them in a table.
Step 2.  Plot the points in a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they do not, carefully
         check your work.
Step 3.  Draw the line through the three points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the line.

It is true that it only takes two points to determine a line, but it is a good habit to use three points. If you only plot two
points and one of them is incorrect, you can still draw a line but it will not represent the solutions to the equation. It will
be the wrong line.

If you use three points, and one is incorrect, the points will not line up. This tells you something is wrong and you need
to check your work. Look at the difference between these illustrations.
232 3 · Graphs and Functions

       When an equation includes a fraction as the coefficient of , we can still substitute any numbers for x. But the arithmetic
       is easier if we make "good" choices for the values of x. This way we will avoid fractional answers, which are hard to graph
       precisely.

         EXAMPLE 3.4
       Graph the equation:

            Solution
       Find three points that are solutions to the equation. Since this equation has the fraction as a coefficient of x, we will
       choose values of x carefully. We will use zero as one choice and multiples of 2 for the other choices. Why are multiples of
       two a good choice for values of x? By choosing multiples of 2 the multiplication by simplifies to a whole number

       The points are shown in Table 3.1.
                                                                                 xy
                                                                                  03
                                                                                  24
                                                                                  45

                                                                                Table 3.1
       Plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 233

TRY IT 3.7 Graph the equation:

TRY IT 3.8 Graph the equation:

Graph Vertical and Horizontal Lines

Some linear equations have only one variable. They may have just x and no y, or just y without an x. This changes how
we make a table of values to get the points to plot.

Let's consider the equation  This equation has only one variable, x. The equation says that x is always equal to

so its value does not depend on y. No matter what is the value of y, the value of x is always

So to make a table of values, write in for all the x-values. Then choose any values for y. Since x does not depend on y,
you can choose any numbers you like. But to fit the points on our coordinate graph, we'll use 1, 2, and 3 for the
y-coordinates. See Table 3.2.

                                                                         xy
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  2
                                                                                  3

                                                                      Table 3.2
Plot the points from the table and connect them with a straight line. Notice that we have graphed a vertical line.
234 3 · Graphs and Functions

What if the equation has y but no x? Let's graph the equation                     This time the y-value is a constant, so in this

equation, y does not depend on x. Fill in 4 for all the y's in Table 3.3 and then choose any values for x. We'll use 0, 2, and 4

for the x-coordinates.

                                                                          xy
                                                                           04
                                                                           24
                                                                           44
                                                                         Table 3.3
In this figure, we have graphed a horizontal line passing through the y-axis at 4.

  Vertical and Horizontal Lines
  A vertical line is the graph of an equation of the form

                                           The line passes through the x-axis at
  A horizontal line is the graph of an equation of the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 235

                          The line passes through the y-axis at

EXAMPLE 3.5

Graph:       

Solution

 The equation has only one variable, x, and x is always equal to 2. We create a table where x is always 2 and then put

in any values for y. The graph is a vertical line passing through the x-axis at 2.

                          xy
                          21
                          22
                          23

 Similarly, the equation  has only one variable, y. The value of y is constant. All the ordered pairs in the next

table have the same y-coordinate. The graph is a horizontal line passing through the y-axis at

                          xy
                          0
                          3
236 3 · Graphs and Functions

TRY IT 3.9 Graph the equations:               

TRY IT 3.10 Graph the equations:                   

What is the difference between the equations  and

The equation                  has both x and y. The value of y depends on the value of x, so the y -coordinate changes according

to the value of x. The equation      has only one variable. The value of y is constant, it does not depend on the value of

x, so the y-coordinate is always 4.

Notice, in the graph, the equation   gives a slanted line, while             gives a horizontal line.

EXAMPLE 3.6

Graph         and                in the same rectangular coordinate system.

     Solution
We notice that the first equation has the variable x, while the second does not. We make a table of points for each
equation and then graph the lines. The two graphs are shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                        3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 237

TRY IT 3.11 Graph the equations in the same rectangular coordinate system:  and

TRY IT 3.12 Graph the equations in the same rectangular coordinate system:  and

Find x- and y-intercepts

Every linear equation can be represented by a unique line that shows all the solutions of the equation. We have seen that
when graphing a line by plotting points, you can use any three solutions to graph. This means that two people graphing
the line might use different sets of three points.
At first glance, their two lines might not appear to be the same, since they would have different points labeled. But if all
the work was done correctly, the lines should be exactly the same. One way to recognize that they are indeed the same
line is to look at where the line crosses the x-axis and the y-axis. These points are called the intercepts of a line.

  Intercepts of a Line

  The points where a line crosses the x-axis and the y-axis are called the intercepts of the line.

Let's look at the graphs of the lines.
238 3 · Graphs and Functions

First, notice where each of these lines crosses the x-axis. See Table 3.4.
Now, let's look at the points where these lines cross the y-axis.

                     Figure      The line crosses  Ordered pair             The line crosses  Ordered pair
                                   the x-axis at:  for this point             the y-axis at:  for this point

                     Figure (a)  3                                          6

                     Figure (b)  4

                     Figure (c)  5

                     Figure (d)  0                                          0

General Figure                   a                                          b

Table 3.4

Do you see a pattern?

For each line, the y-coordinate of the point where the line crosses the x-axis is zero. The point where the line crosses the

x-axis has the form           and is called the x-intercept of the line. The x-intercept occurs when y is zero.

In each line, the x-coordinate of the point where the line crosses the y-axis is zero. The point where the line crosses the

y-axis has the form           and is called the y-intercept of the line. The y-intercept occurs when x is zero.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 239

x-intercept and y-intercept of a Line

The x-intercept is the point  where the line crosses the x-axis.
The y-intercept is the point  where the line crosses the y-axis.

  EXAMPLE 3.7
Find the x- and y-intercepts on each graph shown.

     Solution                                      The x-intercept is

 The graph crosses the x-axis at the point
240 3 · Graphs and Functions

The graph crosses the y-axis at the point   The y-intercept is

 The graph crosses the x-axis at the point      The x-intercept is
                                            The y-intercept is
The graph crosses the y-axis at the point

 The graph crosses the x-axis at the point        The x-intercept is
                                            The y-intercept is
The graph crosses the y-axis at the point

     TRY IT 3.13 Find the x- and y-intercepts on the graph.

     TRY IT 3.14 Find the x- and y-intercepts on the graph.

Recognizing that the x-intercept occurs when y is zero and that the y-intercept occurs when x is zero, gives us a method

to find the intercepts of a line from its equation. To find the x-intercept, let  and solve for x. To find the y-intercept,

let  and solve for y.

Find the x- and y-intercepts from the Equation of a Line

Use the equation of the line. To find:     and solve for x.
                                           and solve for y.
  · the x-intercept of the line, let
  · the y-intercept of the line, let

  EXAMPLE 3.8
Find the intercepts of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 241

Solution

We will let  to find the x-intercept, and let  to find the y-intercept. We will fill in a table, which reminds us of

what we need to find.

To find the x-intercept, let

Let
Simplify.

The x-intercept is:
To find the y-intercept, let

Let
Simplify.

The y-intercept is:

The intercepts are the points  and  as shown in the table.

                                               x  y

                                               4  0

                                               0  8

TRY IT 3.15 Find the intercepts:
TRY IT 3.16 Find the intercepts:
242 3 · Graphs and Functions

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

To graph a linear equation by plotting points, you need to find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the
equation. You can use the x- and y- intercepts as two of your three points. Find the intercepts, and then find a third point
to ensure accuracy. Make sure the points line up--then draw the line. This method is often the quickest way to graph a
line.

EXAMPLE 3.9

How to Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

Graph        using the intercepts.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 243

TRY IT 3.17 Graph using the intercepts:

TRY IT 3.18 Graph using the intercepts:

The steps to graph a linear equation using the intercepts are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph a linear equation using the intercepts.

Step 1. Find the x- and y-intercepts of the line.

        Let   and solve for x.

        Let   and solve for y.

Step 2. Find a third solution to the equation.
Step 3. Plot the three points and check that they line up.
Step 4. Draw the line.

EXAMPLE 3.10

Graph         using the intercepts.

     Solution
Find the intercepts and a third point.

We list the points in the table and show the graph.
244 3 · Graphs and Functions

                                 xy
                                 30
                                 0
                                 64

TRY IT 3.19 Graph using the intercepts:

TRY IT 3.20 Graph using the intercepts:

When the line passes through the origin, the x-intercept and the y-intercept are the same point.

EXAMPLE 3.11

Graph     using the intercepts.

Solution

This line has only one intercept. It is the point
To ensure accuracy, we need to plot three points. Since the x- and y-intercepts are the same point, we need two more
points to graph the line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                            3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 245

The resulting three points are summarized in the table.
                                                                      xy
                                                                        00
                                                                        15

Plot the three points, check that they line up, and draw the line.

TRY IT 3.21 Graph using the intercepts:
TRY IT 3.22 Graph the intercepts:

        SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Plot Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

In the following exercises, plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the
point is located.

1.                                               2.   
246 3 · Graphs and Functions

3.                                              4.                                    

In the following exercises, for each ordered pair, decide

 is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?  is the point on the line?

5.                                                         6.

     A:  B:                   C:      D:                       A:  B:            C:  D:

7.                                                         8.

     A:  B:                       C:      D:                   A:  B:        C:      D:

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

In the following exercises, graph by plotting points.

9.                                        10.                      11.

12.                                       13.                      14.

15.                                       16.                      17.

18.                                       19.                      20.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3.1 · Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables 247

21.                       22.                                            23.

24.

Graph Vertical and Horizontal lines

In the following exercises, graph each equation.

25.                       26.                                            27.   

28.        

In the following exercises, graph each pair of equations in the same rectangular coordinate system.

29.   and                 30.        and                                 31.   and

32.   and

Find x- and y-Intercepts

In the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts on each graph.

33.                                                 34.

35.                                                 36.

In the following exercises, find the intercepts for each equation.

37.                       38.                                            39.

40.                       41.                                            42.

43.                       44.
248 3 · Graphs and Functions

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

In the following exercises, graph using the intercepts.

45.                              46.                     47.
                                                         50.
48.                              49.                     53.
                                                         56.
51.                              52.                     59.

54.                              55.

57.                              58.

60.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, graph each equation.

61.                              62.                     63.
                                                         66.
64.                              65.

67.                              68.

Writing Exercises

69. Explain how you would choose three x-values to       70. What is the difference between the equations of a
      make a table to graph the line                           vertical and a horizontal line?

71. Do you prefer to use the method of plotting          72. Do you prefer to use the method of plotting

     points or the method using the intercepts to        points or the method using the intercepts to

     graph the equation               Why?               graph the equation  Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   3.2 · Slope of a Line 249

 If most of your checks were:

Confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so that
you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

With some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

No, I don't get it. This is a warning sign and you must address it. You should get help right away or you will quickly be
overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan to
get you the help you need.

3.2 Slope of a Line

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the slope of a line
           Graph a line given a point and the slope
           Graph a line using its slope and intercept
           Choose the most convenient method to graph a line
           Graph and interpret applications of slope-intercept
           Use slopes to identify parallel and perpendicular lines

       BE PREPARED 3.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:

                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 1.30.

BE PREPARED 3.5  Divide:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.49.

BE PREPARED 3.6  Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.30.

Find the Slope of a Line

When you graph linear equations, you may notice that some lines tilt up as they go from left to right and some lines tilt
down. Some lines are very steep and some lines are flatter.

In mathematics, the measure of the steepness of a line is called the slope of the line.

The concept of slope has many applications in the real world. In construction the pitch of a roof, the slant of the
plumbing pipes, and the steepness of the stairs are all applications of slope. and as you ski or jog down a hill, you
definitely experience slope.

We can assign a numerical value to the slope of a line by finding the ratio of the rise and run. The rise is the amount the
vertical distance changes while the run measures the horizontal change, as shown in this illustration. Slope is a rate of
change. See Figure 3.5.

                 Figure 3.5
250 3 · Graphs and Functions

Slope of a Line
The slope of a line is
The rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the horizontal change.

To find the slope of a line, we locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers. Then we sketch a right
triangle where the two points are vertices and one side is horizontal and one side is vertical.

To find the slope of the line, we measure the distance along the vertical and horizontal sides of the triangle. The vertical
distance is called the rise and the horizontal distance is called the run,

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the slope of a line from its graph using

Step 1.  Locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers.
Step 2.  Starting with one point, sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second point.
Step 3.  Count the rise and the run on the legs of the triangle.
Step 4.  Take the ratio of rise to run to find the slope:

  EXAMPLE 3.12
Find the slope of the line shown.

  Solution
Locate two points on the graph whose and
coordinates are integers.

Starting at  sketch a right triangle to

as shown in this graph.

  Count the rise-- since it goes down, it is negative. The rise is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      3.2 · Slope of a Line 251

Count the run.                              The run is 3.
Use the slope formula.
Substitute the values of the rise and run.  The slope of the line is
Simplify.                                   So y decreases by 2 units as x increases by 3 units.

TRY IT 3.23 Find the slope of the line shown.

TRY IT 3.24 Find the slope of the line shown.

How do we find the slope of horizontal and vertical lines? To find the slope of the horizontal line,  we could graph

the line, find two points on it, and count the rise and the run. Let's see what happens when we do this, as shown in the

graph below.
252 3 · Graphs and Functions

         What is the rise? The rise is 0.
         What is the run? The run is 3.
         What is the slope?

              The slope of the horizontal line

Let's also consider a vertical line, the line     as shown in the graph.

What is the rise? The rise is 2.
What is the run? The run is 0.
What is the slope?

The slope is undefined since division by zero is undefined. So we say that the slope of the vertical line      is undefined.
All horizontal lines have slope 0. When the y-coordinates are the same, the rise is 0.
The slope of any vertical line is undefined. When the x-coordinates of a line are all the same, the run is 0.

Slope of a Horizontal and Vertical Line

The slope of a horizontal line,     is 0.
The slope of a vertical line,    is undefined.

EXAMPLE 3.13

Find the slope of each line:                

Solution



This is a vertical line. Its slope is undefined.



This is a horizontal line. It has slope 0.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.2 · Slope of a Line 253

     TRY IT 3.25 Find the slope of the line:
     TRY IT 3.26 Find the slope of the line:
Quick Guide to the Slopes of Lines

Sometimes we'll need to find the slope of a line between two points when we don't have a graph to count out the rise
and the run. We could plot the points on grid paper, then count out the rise and the run, but as we'll see, there is a way
to find the slope without graphing. Before we get to it, we need to introduce some algebraic notation.

We have seen that an ordered pair   gives the coordinates of a point. But when we work with slopes, we use two
points. How can the same symbol    be used to represent two different points? Mathematicians use subscripts to
distinguish the points.

We will use         to identify the first point and  to identify the second point.

If we had more than two points, we could use                and so on.

Let's see how the rise and run relate to the coordinates of the two points by taking another look at the slope of the line

between the points  and            as shown in this graph.

Since we have two points, we will use subscript notation.

On the graph, we counted the rise of 3 and the run of 5.
Notice that the rise of 3 can be found by subtracting the
y-coordinates, 6 and 3, and the run of 5 can be found by
subtracting the x-coordinates 7 and 2.
We rewrite the rise and run by putting in the coordinates.
254 3 · Graphs and Functions

But 6 is the y-coordinate of the second point and 3 is the y-coordinate
of the first point. So we can rewrite the slope using subscript notation.

Also 7 is the x-coordinate of the second point and 2 is the x-coordinate
of the first point. So again we rewrite the slope using subscript notation.

We've shown that                 is really another version of       We can use this formula to find the slope of a line
                                                               is:
when we have two points on the line.

Slope of a line between two points

The slope of the line between two points         and

The slope is:

EXAMPLE 3.14

Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line through the points  and

Solution

We'll call        point #1 and        point #2.

Use the slope formula.

Substitute the values.
  of the second point minus of the first point

  of the second point minus of the first point

Simplify.
Let's verify this slope on the graph shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.2 · Slope of a Line 255

TRY IT 3.27 Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line through the pair of points:  and

TRY IT 3.28 Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line through the pair of points:  and

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

Up to now, in this chapter, we have graphed lines by plotting points, by using intercepts, and by recognizing horizontal
and vertical lines.

We can also graph a line when we know one point and the slope of the line. We will start by plotting the point and then
use the definition of slope to draw the graph of the line.

EXAMPLE 3.15

How to graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

Graph the line passing through the point  whose slope is

Solution
256 3 · Graphs and Functions

You can check your work by finding a third point. Since the slope is         it can also be written as  (negative

divided by negative is positive!). Go back to  and count out the rise, and the run,

TRY IT 3.29 Graph the line passing through the point                         with the slope

TRY IT 3.30 Graph the line passing through the point                         with the slope

...

     HOW TO

Graph a line given a point and the slope.

Step 1.  Plot the given point.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Use the slope formula            to identify the rise and the run.
Step 4.
         Starting at the given point, count out the rise and run to mark the second point.

         Connect the points with a line.

Graph a Line Using its Slope and Intercept

We have graphed linear equations by plotting points, using intercepts, recognizing horizontal and vertical lines, and
using one point and the slope of the line. Once we see how an equation in slope-intercept form and its graph are
related, we'll have one more method we can use to graph lines.

See Figure 3.6. Let's look at the graph of the equation  and find its slope and y-intercept.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         3.2 · Slope of a Line 257

                                                                              Figure 3.6
The red lines in the graph show us the rise is 1 and the run is 2. Substituting into the slope formula:

The y-intercept is
Look at the equation of this line.

Look at the slope and y-intercept.

When a linear equation is solved for y, the coefficient of the x term is the slope and the constant term is the y-coordinate

of the y-intercept. We say that the equation   is in slope-intercept form. Sometimes the slope-intercept form

is called the "y-form."

Slope Intercept Form of an Equation of a Line

The slope-intercept form of an equation of a line with slope m and y-intercept,  is

Let's practice finding the values of the slope and y-intercept from the equation of a line.
258 3 · Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 3.16

Identify the slope and y-intercept of the line from the equation:

              

  Solution

 We compare our equation to the slope-intercept form of the equation.

Write the slope-intercept form of the equation of the line.

Write the equation of the line.

Identify the slope.
Identify the y-intercept.

 When an equation of a line is not given in slope-intercept form, our first step will be to solve the equation for y.

  Solve for y.
  Subtract x from each side.
  Divide both sides by 3.
  Simplify.
  Write the slope-intercept form of the equation of the line.
  Write the equation of the line.
  Identify the slope.
  Identify the y-intercept.

  TRY IT 3.31                 Identify the slope and y-intercept from the equation of the line.

                                 

  TRY IT 3.32                 Identify the slope and y-intercept from the equation of the line.

                                 

We have graphed a line using the slope and a point. Now that we know how to find the slope and y-intercept of a line
from its equation, we can use the y-intercept as the point, and then count out the slope from there.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        3.2 · Slope of a Line 259

  EXAMPLE 3.17                            using its slope and y-intercept.
Graph the line of the equation

     Solution

The equation is in slope-intercept form.              y-intercept is
Identify the slope and y-intercept.                   See the graph.
Plot the y-intercept.
Identify the rise over the run.                       rise , run 1

Count out the rise and run to mark the second point.

Draw the line as shown in the graph.

TRY IT 3.33 Graph the line of the equation            using its slope and y-intercept.

TRY IT 3.34 Graph the line of the equation            using its slope and y-intercept.

Now that we have graphed lines by using the slope and y-intercept, let's summarize all the methods we have used to
graph lines.
260 3 · Graphs and Functions

     Choose the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

       Now that we have seen several methods we can use to graph lines, how do we know which method to use for a given
       equation?
       While we could plot points, use the slope-intercept form, or find the intercepts for any equation, if we recognize the
       most convenient way to graph a certain type of equation, our work will be easier.
       Generally, plotting points is not the most efficient way to graph a line. Let's look for some patterns to help determine the
       most convenient method to graph a line.
       Here are five equations we graphed in this chapter, and the method we used to graph each of them.

Equations #1 and #2 each have just one variable. Remember, in equations of this form the value of that one variable is
constant; it does not depend on the value of the other variable. Equations of this form have graphs that are vertical or
horizontal lines.

In equations #3 and #4, both x and y are on the same side of the equation. These two equations are of the form

          We substituted               to find the x- intercept and  to find the y-intercept, and then found a third

point by choosing another value for x or y.

Equation #5 is written in slope-intercept form. After identifying the slope and y-intercept from the equation we used
them to graph the line.

This leads to the following strategy.

Strategy for Choosing the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

Consider the form of the equation.

· If it only has one variable, it is a vertical or horizontal line.

          is a vertical line passing through the x-axis at a.

          is a horizontal line passing through the y-axis at b.

· If y is isolated on one side of the equation, in the form          graph by using the slope and y-intercept.
    Identify the slope and y-intercept and then graph.

· If the equation is of the form             find the intercepts.

 Find the x- and y-intercepts, a third point, and then graph.

EXAMPLE 3.18

Determine the most convenient method to graph each line:

                                       

Solution



This equation has only one variable, y. Its graph is a horizontal line crossing the y-axis at .

                                             The easiest way to graph it will be to find the intercepts and one more point.

This equation is of the form



There is only one variable, x. The graph is a vertical line crossing the x-axis at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.2 · Slope of a Line 261

                             form, it will be easiest to graph this line by using the slope and y-intercepts.

Since this equation is in

TRY IT 3.35                Determine the most convenient method to graph each line:

                                                                    

TRY IT 3.36                Determine the most convenient method to graph each line:

                                                                 

Graph and Interpret Applications of Slope-Intercept

Many real-world applications are modeled by linear equations. We will take a look at a few applications here so you can
see how equations written in slope-intercept form relate to real world situations.

Usually, when a linear equation models uses real-world data, different letters are used for the variables, instead of using
only x and y. The variable names remind us of what quantities are being measured.

Also, we often will need to extend the axes in our rectangular coordinate system to bigger positive and negative
numbers to accommodate the data in the application.

EXAMPLE 3.19

The equation                 is used to convert temperatures, C, on the Celsius scale to temperatures, F, on the
Fahrenheit scale.

 Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 0.
 Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 20.
 Interpret the slope and F-intercept of the equation.
 Graph the equation.

     Solution



Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 0.

Find when

Simplify.



  Find the Fahrenheit temperature for a Celsius temperature of 20.
  Find when
  Simplify.
  Simplify.
262 3 · Graphs and Functions

    

       Interpret the slope and F-intercept of the equation.
       Even though this equation uses F and C, it is still in slope-intercept form.

The slope, means that the temperature Fahrenheit (F) increases 9 degrees when the temperature Celsius (C) increases

5 degrees.

The F-intercept means that when the temperature is on the Celsius scale, it is on the Fahrenheit scale.

 Graph the equation.                                                                 , and then count out the rise of 9 and the

We'll need to use a larger scale than our usual. Start at the F-intercept

run of 5 to get a second point as shown in the graph.

TRY IT 3.37  The equation        is used to estimate a woman's height in inches, h, based on her shoe
             size, s.

              Estimate the height of a child who wears women's shoe size 0.
              Estimate the height of a woman with shoe size 8.
              Interpret the slope and h-intercept of the equation.
              Graph the equation.

TRY IT 3.38  The equation        is used to estimate the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit, T, based

             on the number of cricket chirps, n, in one minute.

              Estimate the temperature when there are no chirps.
              Estimate the temperature when the number of chirps in one minute is 100.
              Interpret the slope and T-intercept of the equation.
              Graph the equation.

The cost of running some types of business has two components--a fixed cost and a variable cost. The fixed cost is
always the same regardless of how many units are produced. This is the cost of rent, insurance, equipment, advertising,
and other items that must be paid regularly. The variable cost depends on the number of units produced. It is for the
material and labor needed to produce each item.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                              3.2 · Slope of a Line 263

EXAMPLE 3.20

Sam drives a delivery van. The equation             models the relation between his weekly cost, C, in dollars and
the number of miles, m, that he drives.

 Find Sam's cost for a week when he drives 0 miles.
 Find the cost for a week when he drives 250 miles.
 Interpret the slope and C-intercept of the equation.
 Graph the equation.

     Solution



Find Sam's cost for a week when he drives 0 miles.

Find when

Simplify.

                                                    Sam's costs are $60 when he drives 0 miles.



  Find the cost for a week when he drives 250 miles.
  Find when
  Simplify.

                                                                              Sam's costs are $185 when he drives 250 miles.

 Interpret the slope and C-intercept of the equation.

The slope, 0.5, means that the weekly cost, C, increases by $0.50 when the number of miles driven, n, increases by 1.

The C-intercept means that when the number of miles driven is 0, the weekly cost is $60.

 Graph the equation.
We'll need to use a larger scale than our usual. Start at the C-intercept  .

To count out the slope m = 0.5, we rewrite it as an equivalent fraction that will make our graphing easier.

Rewrite as a fraction.
Multiply numerator and denominator by 100.
Simplify.
264 3 · Graphs and Functions

       So to graph the next point go up 50 from the intercept of 60 and then to the right 100. The second point will be (100,
       110).

TRY IT 3.39  Stella has a home business selling gourmet pizzas. The equation  models the

             relation between her weekly cost, C, in dollars and the number of pizzas, p, that she sells.

              Find Stella's cost for a week when she sells no pizzas.
              Find the cost for a week when she sells 15 pizzas.
              Interpret the slope and C-intercept of the equation.
              Graph the equation.

TRY IT 3.40  Loreen has a calligraphy business. The equation           models the relation between her

             weekly cost, C, in dollars and the number of wedding invitations, n, that she writes.

              Find Loreen's cost for a week when she writes no invitations.
              Find the cost for a week when she writes 75 invitations.
              Interpret the slope and C-intercept of the equation.
              Graph the equation.

Use Slopes to Identify Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

Two lines that have the same slope are called parallel lines. Parallel lines have the same steepness and never intersect.

We say this more formally in terms of the rectangular coordinate system. Two lines that have the same slope and
different y-intercepts are called parallel lines. See Figure 3.7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          3.2 · Slope of a Line 265

Verify that both lines have the same slope,        Figure 3.7
                                             and different y-intercepts.

What about vertical lines? The slope of a vertical line is undefined, so vertical lines don't fit in the definition above. We say
that vertical lines that have different x-intercepts are parallel, like the lines shown in this graph.

                                                                              Figure 3.8

  Parallel Lines

  Parallel lines are lines in the same plane that do not intersect.
    · Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts.
    · If and are the slopes of two parallel lines then
    · Parallel vertical lines have different x-intercepts.

Since parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts, we can now just look at the slope-intercept form of
the equations of lines and decide if the lines are parallel.

  EXAMPLE 3.21
Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:
266 3 · Graphs and Functions

            and                                   and

  Solution



                                                                                                                         and

Solve the first equation for

The equation is now in slope-intercept form.

The equation of the second line is already in
slope-intercept form.

Identify the slope and -intercept of both lines.

The lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts and so they are parallel.
You may want to graph the lines to confirm whether they are parallel.



                                                                                                                    and
  The first equation is already in slope-intercept form.

  Solve the second equation for

  The second equation is now in slope-intercept form.

  Identify the slope and -intercept of both lines.

The lines have the same slope, but they also have the same y-intercepts. Their equations represent the same line and we
say the lines are coincident. They are not parallel; they are the same line.

  TRY IT 3.41                 Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:

                                   and                   and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          3.2 · Slope of a Line 267

  TRY IT 3.42    Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:

                                              and                          and

EXAMPLE 3.22

Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:

  and              and

  Solution

  and

We recognize right away from the equations that these are horizontal lines, and so we know their slopes are both 0.

Since the horizontal lines cross the y-axis at       and at          we know the y-intercepts are    and

The lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts and so they are parallel.

            and

We recognize right away from the equations that these are vertical lines, and so we know their slopes are undefined.

Since the vertical lines cross the x-axis at       and         we know the y-intercepts are          and

The lines are vertical and have different x-intercepts and so they are parallel.

  TRY IT 3.43    Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:

                   and                                       and

  TRY IT 3.44    Use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel:

                   and                                       and

Let's look at the lines whose equations are             and                shown in Figure 3.9.

                                                        Figure 3.9

These lines lie in the same plane and intersect in right angles. We call these lines perpendicular.

If we look at the slope of the first line,         and the slope of the second line,  we can see that they are

negative reciprocals of each other. If we multiply them, their product is
268 3 · Graphs and Functions

This is always true for perpendicular lines and leads us to this definition.

  Perpendicular Lines

  Perpendicular lines are lines in the same plane that form a right angle.
    · If and are the slopes of two perpendicular lines, then:
         their slopes are negative reciprocals of each other,
         the product of their slopes is ,
    · A vertical line and a horizontal line are always perpendicular to each other.

We were able to look at the slope-intercept form of linear equations and determine whether or not the lines were
parallel. We can do the same thing for perpendicular lines.

We find the slope-intercept form of the equation, and then see if the slopes are opposite reciprocals. If the product of
the slopes is the lines are perpendicular.

EXAMPLE 3.23

Use slopes to determine if the lines are perpendicular:

              and                               and

  Solution



The first equation is in slope-intercept form.

Solve the second equation for

Identify the slope of each line.

The slopes are negative reciprocals of each other, so the lines are perpendicular. We check by multiplying the slopes,

Since         it checks.



Solve the equations for

  Identify the slope of each line.
The slopes are reciprocals of each other, but they have the same sign. Since they are not negative reciprocals, the lines

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   3.2 · Slope of a Line 269

are not perpendicular.

     TRY IT 3.45          Use slopes to determine if the lines are perpendicular:
     TRY IT 3.46
                            and                                 and

                          Use slopes to determine if the lines are perpendicular:

                            and                                 and

        SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Slope of a Line

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line shown.

73.                              74.

75.                              76.
270 3 · Graphs and Functions

77.                                                       78.

79.                                                       80.

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line.

81.                              82.                           83.

84.

In the following exercises, use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between each pair of points.

85.                              86.                           87.

88.                              89.                           90.

91.                              92.

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

In the following exercises, graph each line with the given point and slope.

93.                              94.      ;                    95.           ;

96.     ;                        97. y-intercept 3;            98. x-intercept ;

99.  ;                           100.        ;

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         3.2 · Slope of a Line 271

Graph a Line Using Its Slope and Intercept

In the following exercises, identify the slope and y-intercept of each line.

101.                                    102.                                    103.

104.                                    105.                                    106.

107.                                    108.

In the following exercises, graph the line of each equation using its slope and y-intercept.

109.                                    110.                                    111.

112.                                    113.                                    114.

115.                                    116.

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

In the following exercises, determine the most convenient method to graph each line.

117.                                    118.                                    119.

120.                                    121.                                    122.

123.                                    124.

Graph and Interpret Applications of Slope-Intercept

125. The equation                       126. The equation                       127. Bruce drives his car for
                                models                                  models          his job. The equation
                                                                                                                 models
        the relation between the                the relation between the                the relation between the
        amount of Tuyet's                       amount of R and y's                     amount in dollars, R, that
        monthly water bill                      monthly water bill                      he is reimbursed and the
        payment, P, in dollars,                 payment, P, in dollars,                 number of miles, m, he
        and the number of units                 and the number of units                 drives in one day.
        of water, w, used.                      of water, w, used.
                                                                                     Find the amount
     Find Tuyet's payment                    Find the payment for
                                                                                        Bruce is reimbursed on a
        for a month when 0 units                a month when R and y                    day when he drives 0
        of water are used.                      used 0 units of water.                  miles.

     Find Tuyet's payment                    Find the payment for                    Find the amount

        for a month when 12                     a month when R and y                    Bruce is reimbursed on a
        units of water are used.                used 15 units of water.                 day when he drives 220
                                                                                        miles.
     Interpret the slope                     Interpret the slope
                                                                                     Interpret the slope
        and P-intercept of the                  and P-intercept of the
        equation.                               equation.                               and R-intercept of the
                                                                                        equation.
     Graph the equation.                     Graph the equation.
                                                                                     Graph the equation.
272 3 · Graphs and Functions

128. Janelle is planning to rent        129. Cherie works in retail and     130. Patel's weekly salary
        a car while on vacation.                her weekly salary includes          includes a base pay plus
        The equation                            commission for the                  commission on his sales.
                                models          amount she sells. The               The equation
        the relation between the                equation                                                    models
        cost in dollars, C, per day             models the relation                 the relation between his
        and the number of miles,                between her weekly                  weekly salary, S, in dollars
        m, she drives in one day.               salary, S, in dollars and           and the amount of his
                                                the amount of her sales,            sales, c, in dollars.
     Find the cost if Janelle                   c, in dollars.
                                                                                 Find Patel's salary for
        drives the car 0 miles one           Find Cherie's salary
        day.                                                                        a week when his sales
                                                for a week when her sales           were 0.
     Find the cost on a day                     were $0.
                                                                                 Find Patel's salary for
        when Janelle drives the              Find Cherie's salary
        car 400 miles.                                                              a week when his sales
                                                for a week when her sales           were 18,540.
     Interpret the slope                        were $3,600.
                                                                                 Interpret the slope
        and C-intercept of the               Interpret the slope
        equation.                                                                   and S-intercept of the
                                                and S-intercept of the              equation.
     Graph the equation.                        equation.
                                                                                 Graph the equation.
131. Costa is planning a lunch               Graph the equation.
        banquet. The equation
                              models    132. Margie is planning a
        the relation between the                dinner banquet. The
        cost in dollars, C, of the              equation
        banquet and the number                  models the relation
        of guests, g.                           between the cost in
                                                dollars, C of the banquet
     Find the cost if the                       and the number of
                                                guests, g.
        number of guests is 40.
                                             Find the cost if the
     Find the cost if the
                                                number of guests is 50.
        number of guests is 80.
                                             Find the cost if the
     Interpret the slope
                                                number of guests is 100.
        and C-intercept of the
        equation.                            Interpret the slope

     Graph the equation.                        and C-intercept of the
                                                equation.

                                             Graph the equation.

Use Slopes to Identify Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

In the following exercises, use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.

133.                                    134.                                135.

136.                                    137.                                138.

139.                                    140.                                141.

142.                                    143.                                      144.

145.                                    146.                                147.

148.                                    149.                                150.

Writing Exercises

151. How does the graph of a line with slope             152. Why is the slope of a vertical line "undefined"?
        differ from the graph of a line with slope

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 273

153. Explain how you can graph a line given a point  154. Explain in your own words how to decide which
        and its slope.                                       method to use to graph a line.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

3.3 Find the Equation of a Line

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find an equation of the line given the slope and
           Find an equation of the line given the slope and a point
           Find an equation of the line given two points
           Find an equation of a line parallel to a given line
           Find an equation of a line perpendicular to a given line

       BE PREPARED 3.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Solve:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.50.

BE PREPARED 3.8  Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.53.

BE PREPARED 3.9  Solve for y:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.31.

How do online companies know that "you may also like" a particular item based on something you just ordered? How can
economists know how a rise in the minimum wage will affect the unemployment rate? How do medical researchers
create drugs to target cancer cells? How can traffic engineers predict the effect on your commuting time of an increase
or decrease in gas prices? It's all mathematics.

The physical sciences, social sciences, and the business world are full of situations that can be modeled with linear
equations relating two variables. To create a mathematical model of a linear relation between two variables, we must be
able to find the equation of the line. In this section, we will look at several ways to write the equation of a line. The
specific method we use will be determined by what information we are given.

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and y-Intercept

We can easily determine the slope and intercept of a line if the equation is written in slope-intercept form,
Now we will do the reverse--we will start with the slope and y-intercept and use them to find the equation of the line.
274 3 · Graphs and Functions

         EXAMPLE 3.24
       Find the equation of a line with slope and y-intercept

            Solution
       Since we are given the slope and y-intercept of the line, we can substitute the needed values into the slope-intercept
       form,

         Name the slope.
         Name the y-intercept.
         Substitute the values into

              TRY IT 3.47 Find the equation of a line with slope and y-intercept
              TRY IT 3.48 Find the equation of a line with slope and y-intercept
       Sometimes, the slope and intercept need to be determined from the graph.
         EXAMPLE 3.25
       Find the equation of the line shown in the graph.

     Solution
We need to find the slope and y-intercept of the line from the graph so we can substitute the needed values into the
slope-intercept form,

To find the slope, we choose two points on the graph.

The y-intercept is  and the graph passes through

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 275

Find the slope, by counting the rise and run.
Find the y-intercept.
Substitute the values into

    TRY IT 3.49 Find the equation of the line shown in the graph.

TRY IT 3.50 Find the equation of the line shown in the graph.

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and a Point

Finding an equation of a line using the slope-intercept form of the equation works well when you are given the slope and
276 3 · Graphs and Functions

y-intercept or when you read them off a graph. But what happens when you have another point instead of the
y-intercept?

We are going to use the slope formula to derive another form of an equation of the line.

Suppose we have a line that has slope m and that contains some specific point        and some other point, which we

will just call  We can write the slope of this line and then change it to a different form.

Multiply both sides of the equation by
Simplify.
Rewrite the equation with the terms on the left.

This format is called the point-slope form of an equation of a line.

Point-slope Form of an Equation of a Line

The point-slope form of an equation of a line with slope m and containing the point          is:

We can use the point-slope form of an equation to find an equation of a line when we know the slope and at least one
point. Then, we will rewrite the equation in slope-intercept form. Most applications of linear equations use the the slope-
intercept form.

EXAMPLE 3.26

How to Find an Equation of a Line Given a Point and the Slope

Find an equation of a line with slope      that contains the point    Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

Solution

       TRY IT 3.51 Find the equation of a line with slope             and containing the point
       TRY IT 3.52 Find the equation of a line with slope              and containing the point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 277

We list the steps for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

To find an equation of a line given the slope and a point.

Step 1.  Identify the slope.
Step 2.  Identify the point.
Step 3.  Substitute the values into the point-slope form,
Step 4.  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

EXAMPLE 3.27

Find an equation of a horizontal line that contains the point  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

     Solution
Every horizontal line has slope 0. We can substitute the slope and points into the point-slope form,

Identify the slope.

Identify the point.

Substitute the values into

Simplify.

Write in slope-intercept form.                     It is in y-form, but could be written

Did we end up with the form of a horizontal line,

       TRY IT 3.53 Find the equation of a horizontal line containing the point

       TRY IT 3.54 Find the equation of a horizontal line containing the point

Find an Equation of the Line Given Two Points

When real-world data is collected, a linear model can be created from two data points. In the next example we'll see how
to find an equation of a line when just two points are given.
So far, we have two options for finding an equation of a line: slope-intercept or point-slope. When we start with two
points, it makes more sense to use the point-slope form.
But then we need the slope. Can we find the slope with just two points? Yes. Then, once we have the slope, we can use it
and one of the given points to find the equation.
278 3 · Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 3.28

How to Find the Equation of a Line Given Two Points

Find an equation of a line that contains the points         and  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

Solution

TRY IT 3.55 Find the equation of a line containing the points    and

TRY IT 3.56 Find the equation of a line containing the points    and

The steps are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  To find an equation of a line given two points.

  Step 1. Find the slope using the given points.
  Step 2. Choose one point.
  Step 3. Substitute the values into the point-slope form:
  Step 4. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

EXAMPLE 3.29

Find an equation of a line that contains the points         and  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

     Solution
Again, the first step will be to find the slope.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 279

Find the slope of the line through      and

                                                   The slope is undefined.

This tells us it is a vertical line. Both of our points have an x-coordinate of  So our equation of the line is  Since
there is no y, we cannot write it in slope-intercept form.

You may want to sketch a graph using the two given points. Does your graph agree with our conclusion that this is a
vertical line?

TRY IT 3.57 Find the equation of a line containing the points                    and

TRY IT 3.58 Find the equation of a line containing the points                    and

We have seen that we can use either the slope-intercept form or the point-slope form to find an equation of a line. Which
form we use will depend on the information we are given.

                                        To Write an Equation of a Line

                  If given:                  Use:         Form:

                  Slope and y-intercept slope-intercept

                  Slope and a point          point-slope

                  Two points                 point-slope

Find an Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line

Suppose we need to find an equation of a line that passes through a specific point and is parallel to a given line. We can
use the fact that parallel lines have the same slope. So we will have a point and the slope--just what we need to use the
point-slope equation.

First, let's look at this graphically.

This graph shows  We want to graph a line parallel to this line and passing through the point
280 3 · Graphs and Functions

We know that parallel lines have the same slope. So the second line will have the same slope as                   That slope is

       We'll use the notation to represent the slope of a line parallel to a line with slope m. (Notice that the

subscript || looks like two parallel lines.)

The second line will pass through             and have

To graph the line, we start at          and count out the rise and run.

With   (or                    ), we count out the rise 2 and the run 1. We draw the line, as shown in the graph.

Do the lines appear parallel? Does the second line pass through

We were asked to graph the line, now let's see how to do this algebraically.

We can use either the slope-intercept form or the point-slope form to find an equation of a line. Here we know one point
and can find the slope. So we will use the point-slope form.

EXAMPLE 3.30

How to Find the Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line and a Point

Find an equation of a line parallel to        that contains the point    Write the equation in slope-intercept

form.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 281

Look at graph with the parallel lines shown previously. Does this equation make sense? What is the y-intercept of the
line? What is the slope?

TRY IT 3.59       Find an equation of a line parallel to the line            that contains the point  Write the
                  equation in slope-intercept form.

TRY IT 3.60       Find an equation of a line parallel to the line            that contains the point
                  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

...

     HOW TO

Find an equation of a line parallel to a given line.

Step 1.  Find the slope of the given line.
Step 2.  Find the slope of the parallel line.
Step 3.  Identify the point.
Step 4.  Substitute the values into the point-slope form:
Step 5.  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

Find an Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line

Now, let's consider perpendicular lines. Suppose we need to find a line passing through a specific point and which is
perpendicular to a given line. We can use the fact that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals. We
will again use the point-slope equation, like we did with parallel lines.

This graph shows  Now, we want to graph a line perpendicular to this line and passing through

We know that perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals.
282 3 · Graphs and Functions

       We'll use the notation to represent the slope of a line perpendicular to a line with slope m. (Notice that the subscript
          looks like the right angles made by two perpendicular lines.)

We now know the perpendicular line will pass through  with

To graph the line, we will start at  and count out the rise and the run 2. Then we draw the line.

Do the lines appear perpendicular? Does the second line pass through

We were asked to graph the line, now, let's see how to do this algebraically.

We can use either the slope-intercept form or the point-slope form to find an equation of a line. In this example we know
one point, and can find the slope, so we will use the point-slope form.

EXAMPLE 3.31

How to Find the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line and a Point

Find an equation of a line perpendicular to           that contains the point  Write the equation in slope-

intercept form.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 283

TRY IT 3.61          Find an equation of a line perpendicular to the line      that contains the point
                     Write the equation in slope-intercept form.                that contains the point

TRY IT 3.62          Find an equation of a line perpendicular to the line
                     Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

...

     HOW TO

Find an equation of a line perpendicular to a given line.

Step 1.  Find the slope of the given line.
Step 2.  Find the slope of the perpendicular line.
Step 3.  Identify the point.
Step 4.  Substitute the values into the point-slope form,
Step 5.  Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

EXAMPLE 3.32

Find an equation of a line perpendicular to          that contains the point   Write the equation in slope-intercept
form.

Solution

Again, since we know one point, the point-slope option seems more promising than the slope-intercept option. We need

the slope to use this form, and we know the new line will be perpendicular to  This line is vertical, so its

perpendicular will be horizontal. This tells us the

Identify the point.

Identify the slope of the perpendicular line.

Substitute the values into

Simplify.

Sketch the graph of both lines. On your graph, do the lines appear to be perpendicular?

TRY IT 3.63 Find an equation of a line that is perpendicular to the line                 that contains the point      .

                     Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

TRY IT 3.64 Find an equation of a line that is perpendicular to the line                 that contains the point
284 3 · Graphs and Functions

                              Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

In Example 3.32, we used the point-slope form to find the equation. We could have looked at this in a different way.

We want to find a line that is perpendicular to      that contains the point  This graph shows us the line
and the point

We know every line perpendicular to a vertical line is horizontal, so we will sketch the horizontal line through

Do the lines appear perpendicular?

If we look at a few points on this horizontal line, we notice they all have y-coordinates of    So, the equation of the line

perpendicular to the vertical line  is

EXAMPLE 3.33

Find an equation of a line that is perpendicular to  that contains the point                  Write the equation in slope-
intercept form.

Solution

The line      is a horizontal line. Any line perpendicular to it must be vertical, in the form  Since the
                                                                                                   The equation of
perpendicular line is vertical and passes through    every point on it has an x-coordinate of

the perpendicular line is

You may want to sketch the lines. Do they appear perpendicular?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 285

      TRY IT 3.65    Find an equation of a line that is perpendicular to the line  that contains the point
                     Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

      TRY IT 3.66    Find an equation of a line that is perpendicular to the line  that contains the point
                                   Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with finding the equation of a line.

      Write an Equation of Line Given its slope and Y-Intercept (https://openstax.org/l/37slopeycept)
      Using Point Slope Form to Write the Equation of a Line, Find the equation given slope and point
      (https://openstax.org/l/37slopepoint)
      Find the equation given two points (https://openstax.org/l/37twoptspline)
      Find the equation of perpendicular and parallel lines (https://openstax.org/l/37perpenpara)

        SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and y-Intercept

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line with given slope and y-intercept. Write the equation in slope-
intercept form.

155. slope 3 and     156. slope 8 and                         157. slope and
         -intercept          y-intercept                               -intercept

158. slope and       159. slope and                           160. slope and
         -intercept           -intercept                               -intercept

161. slope 0 and     162. slope and
         -intercept           -intercept

In the following exercises, find the equation of the line shown in each graph. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

163.                                      164.
286 3 · Graphs and Functions     166.

       165.

167.                             168.

169.                             170.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.3 · Find the Equation of a Line 287

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and a Point

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line with given slope and containing the given point. Write the equation
in slope-intercept form.

171.           point       172.                point      173.                point

174.                point  175.                point      176.                point

177.           point       178.                point      179. Horizontal line containing

180. Horizontal line containing 181. Horizontal line containing 182. Horizontal line containing

Find an Equation of the Line Given Two Points

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line containing the given points. Write the equation in slope-intercept
form.

183.           and         184.           and             185.           and

186.           and         187.                and        188.           and

189.           and         190.                and        191.           and

192.           and         193.                and        194.           and

Find an Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line

In the following exercises, find an equation of a line parallel to the given line and contains the given point. Write the
equation in slope-intercept form.

195. line                  196. line                      197. line
        point                      point                          point

198. line                  199. line                      200. line
        point                      point                          point

201. line                  202. line
        point                      point

Find an Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line

In the following exercises, find an equation of a line perpendicular to the given line and contains the given point. Write
the equation in slope-intercept form.

203. line                  204. line                      205. line
        point                      point                          point

206. line                  207. line                      208. line
        point                      point                          point

209. line                  210. line                      211. line
        point                      point                          point

212. line                  213. line                      214. line
        point                      point                          point

215. line                  216. line                      217. line y-axis,
        point                      point                          point

218. line y-axis,
        point
288 3 · Graphs and Functions

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, find the equation of each line. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

219. Containing the points        220. Containing the points            221.         containing point

      and                                       and

222.        containing point      223. Parallel to the line             224. Parallel to the line

                                                     containing                      containing

                                         point                                point

225.        containing point 226.               containing point 227. Perpendicular to the line

                                                                                     point

228. Perpendicular to the line    229. Parallel to the line             230. Parallel to the line
        y-axis, point                                 containing point                      containing point

231. Containing the points        232. Containing the points            233. Perpendicular to the line
                     and                               and                                       point

234. Perpendicular to the line
                           point

Writing Exercises

235. Why are all horizontal lines parallel?          236. Explain in your own words why the slopes of two
                                                             perpendicular lines must have opposite signs.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

3.4 Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Verify solutions to an inequality in two variables.
           Recognize the relation between the solutions of an inequality and its graph.
           Graph linear inequalities in two variables
           Solve applications using linear inequalities in two variables

      BE PREPARED 3.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                  Graph      on a number line.

                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.48.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 289

  BE PREPARED 3.11  Solve:                    .

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 2.52.

  BE PREPARED 3.12  Translate:                   .

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 2.56.

Verify Solutions to an Inequality in Two Variables

Previously we learned to solve inequalities with only one variable. We will now learn about inequalities containing two
variables. In particular we will look at linear inequalities in two variables which are very similar to linear equations in
two variables.
Linear inequalities in two variables have many applications. If you ran a business, for example, you would want your
revenue to be greater than your costs--so that your business made a profit.

  Linear Inequality

  A linear inequality is an inequality that can be written in one of the following forms:

Where A and B are not both zero.

Recall that an inequality with one variable had many solutions. For example, the solution to the inequality  is any

number greater than 3. We showed this on the number line by shading in the number line to the right of 3, and putting

an open parenthesis at 3. See Figure 3.10.

                                                                             Figure 3.10  that makes an inequality true

Similarly, linear inequalities in two variables have many solutions. Any ordered pair
when we substitute in the values is a solution to a linear inequality.

Solution to a Linear Inequality

An ordered pair  is a solution to a linear inequality if the inequality is true when we substitute the values of x
and y.

EXAMPLE 3.34

Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality

                                            

  Solution


290 3 · Graphs and Functions     So,  is not a solution to

          Simplify.

    

  Simplify.                      So,  is a solution to



  Simplify.                      So,  is not a solution to



  Simplify.                      So,  is not a solution to



Simplify.

                                 So,  is a solution to

TRY IT 3.67 Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 291

                                                                        

       TRY IT 3.68      Determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the inequality

                                                

Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Inequality and its Graph

Now, we will look at how the solutions of an inequality relate to its graph.

Let's think about the number line in shown previously again. The point        separated that number line into two parts.

On one side of 3 are all the numbers less than 3. On the other side of 3 all the numbers are greater than 3. See Figure

3.11.

       Figure 3.11 The solution to              is the shaded part of the number line to the right of

Similarly, the line     separates the plane into two regions. On one side of the line are points with  On

the other side of the line are the points with  We call the line              a boundary line.

Boundary Line

The line with equation  is the boundary line that separates the region where                           from the
region where

For an inequality in one variable, the endpoint is shown with a parenthesis or a bracket depending on whether or not a is
included in the solution:

Similarly, for an inequality in two variables, the boundary line is shown with a solid or dashed line to show whether or
not it the line is included in the solution.

Now, let's take a look at what we found in Example 3.34. We'll start by graphing the line    and then we'll plot the
five points we tested, as shown in the graph. See Figure 3.12.
292 3 · Graphs and Functions

                                                          Figure 3.12

In Example 3.34 we found that some of the points were solutions to the inequality               and some were not.

Which of the points we plotted are solutions to the inequality

The points       and               are solutions to the inequality       Notice that they are both on the same side of the

boundary line

The two points                and  are on the other side of the boundary line                   and they are not solutions to
the inequality
                                   For those two points,

What about the point                    Because        the point is a solution to the equation         but not a solution to
the inequality                     So the point  is on the boundary line.

Let's take another point above the boundary line and test whether or not it is a solution to the inequality         The

point       clearly looks to above the boundary line, doesn't it? Is it a solution to the inequality?

So,         is a solution to

Any point you choose above the boundary line is a solution to the inequality                    All points above the boundary
line are solutions.

Similarly, all points below the boundary line, the side with        and        are not solutions to          as shown

in Figure 3.13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 293

                                              Figure 3.13

The graph of the inequality  is shown in below.

The line  divides the plane into two regions. The shaded side shows the solutions to the inequality

The points on the boundary line, those where     are not solutions to the inequality    so the line itself is

not part of the solution. We show that by making the line dashed, not solid.

  EXAMPLE 3.35                                Write the inequality shown by the graph.
The boundary line shown in this graph is
294 3 · Graphs and Functions

    Solution

The line              is the boundary line. On one side of the line are the points with        and on the other side of

the line are the points with

Let's test the point          and see which inequality describes its position relative to the boundary line.

At        which inequality is true:  or

Since,        is true, the side of the line with  is the solution. The shaded region shows the solution of the
inequality

Since the boundary line is graphed with a solid line, the inequality includes the equal sign.

The graph shows the inequality

We could use any point as a test point, provided it is not on the line. Why did we choose      Because it's the easiest to

evaluate. You may want to pick a point on the other side of the boundary line and check that

    TRY IT 3.69 Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 295

    TRY IT 3.70 Write the inequality shown by the graph with the boundary line

  EXAMPLE 3.36                                Write the inequality shown by the graph.
The boundary line shown in this graph is

    Solution

The line              is the boundary line. On one side of the line are the points with     and on the other side

of the line are the points with

Let's test the point  and see which inequality describes its side of the boundary line.

At        which inequality is true:       or

So the side with      is the side where

(You may want to pick a point on the other side of the boundary line and check that      )

Since the boundary line is graphed as a dashed line, the inequality does not include an equal sign.

The shaded region shows the solution to the inequality
296 3 · Graphs and Functions

              TRY IT 3.71 Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line

              TRY IT 3.72 Write the inequality shown by the shaded region in the graph with the boundary line

     Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

       Now that we know what the graph of a linear inequality looks like and how it relates to a boundary equation we can use
       this knowledge to graph a given linear inequality.

         EXAMPLE 3.37
       How to Graph a Linear Equation in Two Variables
       Graph the linear inequality

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 297

Solution

       TRY IT 3.73 Graph the linear inequality

       TRY IT 3.74 Graph the linear inequality

The steps we take to graph a linear inequality are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Graph a linear inequality in two variables.
  Step 1. Identify and graph the boundary line.
298 3 · Graphs and Functions

            If the inequality is   the boundary line is solid.
            If the inequality is   the boundary line is dashed.

Step 2.    Test a point that is not on the boundary line. Is it a solution of the inequality?
Step 3.
           Shade in one side of the boundary line.
             If the test point is a solution, shade in the side that includes the point.
             If the test point is not a solution, shade in the opposite side.

  EXAMPLE 3.38                     The inequality is so we draw a dashed line.

Graph the linear inequality
     Solution

First, we graph the boundary line

Then, we test a point. We'll use   again because it is easy to evaluate and it is not on the boundary line.

Is  a solution of

The point  is a solution of        so we shade in that side of the boundary line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 299

All points in the shaded region, but not those on the boundary line, represent the solutions to

    TRY IT 3.75 Graph the linear inequality:

    TRY IT 3.76 Graph the linear inequality:

What if the boundary line goes through the origin? Then, we won't be able to use   as a test point. No problem--we'll
just choose some other point that is not on the boundary line.

  EXAMPLE 3.39

Graph the linear inequality: 

     Solution                      It is in slope-intercept form, with            and            The inequality is so
First, we graph the boundary line
we draw a solid line.

Now we need a test point. We can see that the point  is not on the boundary line.

Is  a solution of
300 3 · Graphs and Functions

The point  is not a solution to             so we shade in the opposite side of the boundary line.

All points in the shaded region and on the boundary line represent the solutions to 

       TRY IT 3.77 Graph the linear inequality:
       TRY IT 3.78 Graph the linear inequality:
Some linear inequalities have only one variable. They may have an x but no y, or a y but no x. In these cases, the
boundary line will be either a vertical or a horizontal line.
Recall that:

  EXAMPLE 3.40                     It is a horizontal line. The inequality is so we draw a dashed line.

Graph the linear inequality:
     Solution

First, we graph the boundary line
We test the point

So,  is not a solution to

So we shade the side that does not include  as shown in this graph.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 301

All points in the shaded region, but not those on the boundary line, represent the solutions to

TRY IT 3.79 Graph the linear inequality:

TRY IT 3.80 Graph the linear inequality:

Solve Applications using Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Many fields use linear inequalities to model a problem. While our examples may be about simple situations, they give us
an opportunity to build our skills and to get a feel for how they might be used.

EXAMPLE 3.41

Hilaria works two part time jobs in order to earn enough money to meet her obligations of at least $240 a week. Her job
in food service pays $10 an hour and her tutoring job on campus pays $15 an hour. How many hours does Hilaria need
to work at each job to earn at least $240?

 Let be the number of hours she works at the job in food service and let y be the number of hours she works

tutoring. Write an inequality that would model this situation.

 Graph the inequality.

 Find three ordered pairs  that would be solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what that means for Hilaria.

Solution

 We let x be the number of hours she works at the job in food service and let y be the number of hours she works

tutoring.

She earns $10 per hour at the job in food service and $15 an hour tutoring. At each job, the number of hours multiplied
by the hourly wage will gives the amount earned at that job.

 To graph the inequality, we put it in slope-intercept form.
302 3 · Graphs and Functions

 From the graph, we see that the ordered pairs  represent three of infinitely many solutions.

Check the values in the inequality.

For Hilaria, it means that to earn at least $240, she can work 15 hours tutoring and 10 hours at her fast-food job, earn all
her money tutoring for 16 hours, or earn all her money while working 24 hours at the job in food service.

TRY IT 3.81                   Hugh works two part time jobs. One at a grocery store that pays $10 an hour and the other is
                              babysitting for $13 hour. Between the two jobs, Hugh wants to earn at least $260 a week. How
                              many hours does Hugh need to work at each job to earn at least $260?

                               Let x be the number of hours he works at the grocery store and let y be the number of

                              hours he works babysitting. Write an inequality that would model this situation.

                               Graph the inequality.
                               Find three ordered pairs (x, y) that would be solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what

                              that means for Hugh.

TRY IT 3.82                   Veronica works two part time jobs in order to earn enough money to meet her obligations of at
                              least $280 a week. Her job at the day spa pays $10 an hour and her administrative assistant job
                              on campus pays $17.50 an hour. How many hours does Veronica need to work at each job to
                              earn at least $280?

                               Let x be the number of hours she works at the day spa and let y be the number of hours

                              she works as administrative assistant. Write an inequality that would model this situation.

                               Graph the inequality.
                               Find three ordered pairs (x, y) that would be solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what

                              that means for Veronica

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 303

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphing linear inequalities in two variables.
Graphing Linear Inequalities in Two Variables (https://openstax.org/l/37linineqgraphs)

        SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Verify Solutions to an Inequality in Two Variables

In the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the given inequality.

237. Determine whether each         238. Determine whether each         239. Determine whether each
        ordered pair is a solution          ordered pair is a solution          ordered pair is a solution
        to the inequality                   to the inequality                   to the inequality

                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            

240. Determine whether each         241. Determine whether each         242. Determine whether each
        ordered pair is a solution          ordered pair is a solution          ordered pair is a solution
        to the inequality                   to the inequality                   to the inequality

                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              

Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Inequality and its Graph

In the following exercises, write the inequality shown by the shaded region.

243. Write the inequality shown     244. Write the inequality shown     245. Write the inequality shown
        by the graph with the               by the graph with the               by the graph with the
        boundary line                       boundary line                       boundary line
304 3 · Graphs and Functions

246. Write the inequality shown  247. Write the inequality shown  248. Write the inequality shown
        by the graph with the            by the shaded region in          by the shaded region in
        boundary line                    the graph with the               the graph with the
                                         boundary line                    boundary line

249. Write the inequality shown  250. Write the inequality shown
        by the shaded region in          by the shaded region in
        the graph with the               the graph with the
        boundary line                    boundary line

Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

In the following exercises, graph each linear inequality.

251. Graph the linear            252. Graph the linear            253. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

254. Graph the linear            255. Graph the linear            256. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

257. Graph the linear            258. Graph the linear            259. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

260. Graph the linear            261. Graph the linear            262. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

263. Graph the linear            264. Graph the linear            265. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

266. Graph the linear            267. Graph the linear            268. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

269. Graph the linear            270. Graph the linear            271. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

272. Graph the linear            273. Graph the linear            274. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:                      inequality:

275. Graph the linear            276. Graph the linear
        inequality:                      inequality:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               3.4 · Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables 305

Solve Applications using Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

277. Harrison works two part time jobs. One at a gas       278. Elena needs to earn at least $450 a week during

station that pays $11 an hour and the other is IT              her summer break to pay for college. She works

troubleshooting for          an hour. Between the              two jobs. One as a swimming instructor that

two jobs, Harrison wants to earn at least $330 a               pays $9 an hour and the other as an intern in a

week. How many hours does Harrison need to                     genetics lab for $22.50 per hour. How many

work at each job to earn at least $330?                        hours does Elena need to work at each job to

 Let x be the number of hours he works at the                  earn at least $450 per week?

gas station and let y be the number of (hours he                Let x be the number of hours she works

works troubleshooting. Write an inequality that                teaching swimming and let y be the number of

would model this situation.                                    hours she works as an intern. Write an inequality

 Graph the inequality.                                         that would model this situation.

 Find three ordered pairs    that would be                      Graph the inequality.

solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what                 Find three ordered pairs         that would be

that means for Harrison.                                       solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what

                                                               that means for Elena.

279. The doctor tells Laura she needs to exercise          280. Armando's workouts consist of kickboxing and
        enough to burn 500 calories each day. She                  swimming. While kickboxing, he burns 10
        prefers to either run or bike and burns 15                 calories per minute and he burns 7 calories a
        calories per minute while running and 10                   minute while swimming. He wants to burn 600
        calories a minute while biking.                            calories each day.

     If x is the number of minutes that Laura runs              If x is the number of minutes that Armando

        and y is the number minutes she bikes, find the            will kickbox and y is the number minutes he will
        inequality that models the situation.                      swim, find the inequality that will help Armando
                                                                   create a workout for today.
     Graph the inequality.
     List three solutions to the inequality. What               Graph the inequality.
                                                                List three solutions to the inequality. What
        options do the solutions provide Laura?
                                                                   options do the solutions provide Armando?

Writing Exercises

281. Lester thinks that the solution of any inequality     282. Explain why, in some graphs of linear
        with a sign is the region above the line and the           inequalities, the boundary line is solid but in
        solution of any inequality with a sign is the              other graphs it is dashed.
        region below the line. Is Lester correct? Explain
        why or why not.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
306 3 · Graphs and Functions

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

3.5 Relations and Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the domain and range of a relation
           Determine if a relation is a function
           Find the value of a function

BE PREPARED 3.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Evaluate  when          .

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

BE PREPARED 3.14                 Evaluate  when

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

BE PREPARED 3.15                 Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.7.

Find the Domain and Range of a Relation

As we go about our daily lives, we have many data items or quantities that are paired to our names. Our social security
number, student ID number, email address, phone number and our birthday are matched to our name. There is a
relationship between our name and each of those items.

When your professor gets her class roster, the names of all the students in the class are listed in one column and then
the student ID number is likely to be in the next column. If we think of the correspondence as a set of ordered pairs,
where the first element is a student name and the second element is that student's ID number, we call this a relation.

The set of all the names of the students in the class is called the domain of the relation and the set of all student ID
numbers paired with these students is the range of the relation.

There are many similar situations where one variable is paired or matched with another. The set of ordered pairs that
records this matching is a relation.

Relation

A relation is any set of ordered pairs,    All the x-values in the ordered pairs together make up the domain. All

the y-values in the ordered pairs together make up the range.

  EXAMPLE 3.42

For the relation

 Find the domain of the relation.
 Find the range of the relation.

     Solution

 The domain is the set of all x-values of the relation.
 The range is the set of all y-values of the relation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3.5 · Relations and Functions 307

TRY IT 3.83   For the relation
TRY IT 3.84
               Find the domain of the relation.
               Find the range of the relation.

              For the relation

               Find the domain of the relation.
               Find the range of the relation.

Mapping

A mapping is sometimes used to show a relation. The arrows show the pairing of the elements of the domain with
the elements of the range.

EXAMPLE 3.43

Use the mapping of the relation shown to   list the ordered pairs of the relation,   find the domain of the relation,
and  find the range of the relation.

     Solution

 The arrow shows the matching of the person to their birthday. We create ordered pairs with the person's name as

the x-value and their birthday as the y-value.

{(Alison, April 25), (Penelope, May 23), (June, August 2), (Gregory, September 15), (Geoffrey, January 12), (Lauren, May 10),
(Stephen, July 24), (Alice, February 3), (Liz, August 2), (Danny, July 24)}

 The domain is the set of all x-values of the relation.

{Alison, Penelope, June, Gregory, Geoffrey, Lauren, Stephen, Alice, Liz, Danny}

 The range is the set of all y-values of the relation.

{January 12, February 3, April 25, May 10, May 23, July 24, August 2, September 15}

TRY IT 3.85   Use the mapping of the relation shown to  list the ordered pairs of the relation   find the
              domain of the relation  find the range of the relation.
308 3 · Graphs and Functions

TRY IT 3.86                   Use the mapping of the relation shown to  list the ordered pairs of the relation   find the
                              domain of the relation  find the range of the relation.

A graph is yet another way that a relation can be represented. The set of ordered pairs of all the points plotted is the
relation. The set of all x-coordinates is the domain of the relation and the set of all y-coordinates is the range. Generally
we write the numbers in ascending order for both the domain and range.

  EXAMPLE 3.44

Use the graph of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation  find the domain of the relation  find the

range of the relation.

     Solution

 The ordered pairs of the relation are:
 The domain is the set of all x-values of the relation:

Notice that while repeats, it is only listed once.

 The range is the set of all y-values of the relation:

Notice that while repeats, it is only listed once.

TRY IT 3.87                   Use the graph of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation   find the domain of
                              the relation  find the range of the relation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.5 · Relations and Functions 309

TRY IT 3.88   Use the graph of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation   find the domain of
              the relation  find the range of the relation.

Determine if a Relation is a Function

A special type of relation, called a function, occurs extensively in mathematics. A function is a relation that assigns to
each element in its domain exactly one element in the range. For each ordered pair in the relation, each x-value is
matched with only one y-value.

  Function

  A function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain exactly one element in the range.

The birthday example from Example 3.43 helps us understand this definition. Every person has a birthday but no one
has two birthdays. It is okay for two people to share a birthday. It is okay that Danny and Stephen share July 24th as their
birthday and that June and Liz share August 2nd. Since each person has exactly one birthday, the relation in Example 3.43

is a function.

The relation shown by the graph in Example 3.44 includes the ordered pairs  and  Is that okay in a
function? No, as this is like one person having two different birthdays.

EXAMPLE 3.45

Use the set of ordered pairs to (i) determine whether the relation is a function (ii) find the domain of the relation (iii) find
the range of the relation.



310 3 · Graphs and Functions

     Solution



(i) Each x-value is matched with only one y-value. So this relation is a function.

(ii) The domain is the set of all x-values in the relation.
The domain is:

(iii) The range is the set of all y-values in the relation. Notice we do not list range values twice.
The range is:

                                                             So this relation is not a function.

(i) The x-value 9 is matched with two y-values, both 3 and

(ii) The domain is the set of all x-values in the relation. Notice we do not list domain values twice.
The domain is:

(iii) The range is the set of all y-values in the relation.
The range is:

TRY IT 3.89                   Use the set of ordered pairs to (i) determine whether the relation is a function (ii) find the
TRY IT 3.90                   domain of the relation (iii) find the range of the function.

                              
                              

                              Use the set of ordered pairs to (i) determine whether the relation is a function (ii) find the
                              domain of the relation (iii) find the range of the relation.

                              
                              

  EXAMPLE 3.46

Use the mapping to  determine whether the relation is a function  find the domain of the relation  find the

range of the relation.

     Solution

 Both Lydia and Marty have two phone numbers. So each x-value is not matched with only one y-value. So this

relation is not a function.

 The domain is the set of all x-values in the relation. The domain is: {Lydia, Eugene, Janet, Rick, Marty}
 The range is the set of all y-values in the relation. The range is:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.5 · Relations and Functions 311

  TRY IT 3.91      Use the mapping to  determine whether the relation is a function   find the domain of
                   the relation  find the range of the relation.

  TRY IT 3.92      Use the mapping to  determine whether the relation is a function   find the domain of
                   the relation  find the range of the relation.

In algebra, more often than not, functions will be represented by an equation. It is easiest to see if the equation is a
function when it is solved for y. If each value of x results in only one value of y, then the equation defines a function.

EXAMPLE 3.47

Determine whether each equation is a function. Assume is the independent variable.

                         

  Solution



For each value of x, we multiply it by  and then add 7 to get the y-value

For example, if

We have that when  then                 It would work similarly for any value of x. Since each value of x, corresponds to

only one value of y the equation defines a function.



For each value of x, we square it and then add 1 to get the y-value.
312 3 · Graphs and Functions

For example, if

We have that when                then        It would work similarly for any value of x. Since each value of x, corresponds to

only one value of y the equation defines a function.



Isolate the y term.
Let's substitute

This give us two values for y.

We have shown that when                then    and    It would work similarly for any value of x. Since each value of x

does not corresponds to only one value of y the equation does not define a function.

  TRY IT 3.93                 Determine whether each equation is a function.

                                                      

  TRY IT 3.94                 Determine whether each equation is a function.

                                                      

Find the Value of a Function

It is very convenient to name a function and most often we name it f, g, h, F, G, or H. In any function, for each x-value
from the domain we get a corresponding y-value in the range. For the function f, we write this range value y as
This is called function notation and is read f of x or the value of f at x. In this case the parentheses does not indicate
multiplication.

Function Notation

For the function

We read  as f of x or the value of f at x.

We call x the independent variable as it can be any value in the domain. We call y the dependent variable as its value
depends on x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.5 · Relations and Functions 313

Independent and Dependent Variables
For the function

Much as when you first encountered the variable x, function notation may be rather unsettling. It seems strange
because it is new. You will feel more comfortable with the notation as you use it.

Let's look at the equation            To find the value of y when  we know to substitute         into the equation
and then simplify.

Let

The value of the function at  is 3.

We do the same thing using function notation, the equation         can be written as             To find the

value when    we write:

Let

The value of the function at  is 3.

This process of finding the value of  for a given value of x is called evaluating the function.

EXAMPLE 3.48

For the function                      evaluate the function.

 

     Solution



To evaluate   substitute 3 for x.
Simplify.


314 3 · Graphs and Functions

Simplify.



To evaluate       substitute a for x.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 3.95 For the function                                  evaluate the function.

                  

  TRY IT 3.96 For the function                                  evaluate the function.

                   

In the last example, we found             for a constant value of x. In the next example, we are asked to find  with values

of x that are variables. We still follow the same procedure and substitute the variables in for the x.

  EXAMPLE 3.49                          evaluate the function.

For the function              



     Solution



To evaluate                   substitute for x.

                              substitute  for x.

  To evaluate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.5 · Relations and Functions 315

  Simplify.    first find



  To evaluate

Simplify.

Notice the difference between part  and  . We get         and                     So we see that

TRY IT 3.97    For the function                           evaluate the function.

                                                

TRY IT 3.98    For the function                           evaluate the function.

                                                

Many everyday situations can be modeled using functions.

EXAMPLE 3.50

The number of unread emails in Sylvia's account is 75. This number grows by 10 unread emails a day. The function
                       represents the relation between the number of emails, N, and the time, t, measured in days.

 Determine the independent and dependent variable.

 Find          Explain what this result means.

Solution

 The number of unread emails is a function of the number of days. The number of unread emails, N, depends on the

number of days, t. Therefore, the variable N, is the dependent variable and the variable is the independent variable.

 Find          Explain what this result means.

Substitute in
316 3 · Graphs and Functions

         Simplify.

Since 5 is the number of days,       is the number of unread emails after 5 days. After 5 days, there are 125 unread
emails in the account.

      TRY IT 3.99             The number of unread emails in Bryan's account is 100. This number grows by 15 unread emails

                              a day. The function                 represents the relation between the number of emails, N,

                              and the time, t, measured in days.

                               Determine the independent and dependent variable.

                               Find  Explain what this result means.

      TRY IT 3.100            The number of unread emails in Anthony's account is 110. This number grows by 25 unread

                              emails a day. The function                     represents the relation between the number of

                              emails, N, and the time, t, measured in days.

                               Determine the independent and dependent variable.

                               Find  Explain what this result means.

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with relations and functions.
      Introduction to Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37introfunction)

        SECTION 3.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Domain and Range of a Relation

In the following exercises, for each relation  find the domain of the relation  find the range of the relation.

283.                                                      284.

285.                                                      286.

In the following exercises, use the mapping of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation,  find the domain of
the relation, and  find the range of the relation.

287.                                                      288.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                3.5 · Relations and Functions 317

289. For a woman of height  the mapping below         290. For a man of height  the mapping below

      shows the corresponding Body Mass Index               shows the corresponding Body Mass Index

      (BMI). The body mass index is a measurement of        (BMI). The body mass index is a measurement of

      body fat based on height and weight. A BMI of         body fat based on height and weight. A BMI of

      is considered healthy.                                is considered healthy.

In the following exercises, use the graph of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation  find the domain of the
relation  find the range of the relation.

291.                                                  292.

293.                                                  294.

Determine if a Relation is a Function

In the following exercises, use the set of ordered pairs to  determine whether the relation is a function,  find the
domain of the relation, and  find the range of the relation.

295.                                                  296.
318 3 · Graphs and Functions

297.                                                   298.

In the following exercises, use the mapping to  determine whether the relation is a function,  find the domain of the
function, and  find the range of the function.

299.                                                   300.

301.                                                   302.

In the following exercises, determine whether each equation is a function.

303.                             304.                          305.

                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   

306.

    
    
    

Find the Value of a Function

In the following exercises, evaluate the function:           

307.                             308.                          309.

310.                             311.                          312.

313.                             314.

In the following exercises, evaluate the function:             
                                                                    317.
315.                             316.                               320.

318.                             319.

In the following exercises, evaluate the function.

321.                             322.                          323.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.6 · Graphs of Functions 319

324.                                325.                       326.

327.                                328.

In the following exercises, solve.

329. The number of unwatched shows in Sylvia's DVR      330. Every day a new puzzle is downloaded into Ken's

      is 85. This number grows by 20 unwatched          account. Right now he has 43 puzzles in his

      shows per week. The function                      account. The function               represents

      represents the relation between the number of     the relation between the number of puzzles, N,

      unwatched shows, N, and the time, t, measured     and the time, t, measured in days.

      in weeks.                                          Determine the independent and dependent

       Determine the independent and dependent          variable.

      variable.                                          Find        Explain what this result means.

       Find      Explain what this result means

331. The daily cost to the printing company to print a  332. The daily cost to the manufacturing company is

      book is modeled by the function                   modeled by the function

                   where C is the total daily           where        is the total daily cost and x is the

      cost in dollars and x is the number of books      number of items manufactured.

      printed.                                           Determine the independent and dependent

       Determine the independent and dependent          variable.

      variable.                                          Find        Explain what this result means.
                                                         Find             Explain what this result
       Find      Explain what this result means.
       Find           Explain what this result          means.

      means.

Writing Exercises

333. In your own words, explain the difference          334. In your own words, explain what is meant by
        between a relation and a function.                      domain and range.

335. Is every relation a function? Is every function a  336. How do you find the value of a function?
        relation?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

3.6 Graphs of Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the vertical line test
           Identify graphs of basic functions
           Read information from a graph of a function

       BE PREPARED 3.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                          Evaluate:  

                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.5.
320 3 · Graphs and Functions

BE PREPARED 3.17                 Evaluate:  

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.14.

BE PREPARED 3.18                 Evaluate:   

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.41.

Use the Vertical Line Test

In the last section we learned how to determine if a relation is a function. The relations we looked at were expressed as a
set of ordered pairs, a mapping or an equation. We will now look at how to tell if a graph is that of a function.

An ordered pair               is a solution of a linear equation, if the equation is a true statement when the x- and y-values of

the ordered pair are substituted into the equation.

The graph of a linear equation is a straight line where every point on the line is a solution of the equation and every
solution of this equation is a point on this line.

In Figure 3.14, we can see that, in graph of the equation         for every x-value there is only one y-value, as shown
in the accompanying table.

                                                     Figure 3.14

A relation is a function if every element of the domain has exactly one value in the range. So the relation defined by the

equation            is a function.

If we look at the graph, each vertical dashed line only intersects the line at one point. This makes sense as in a function,
for every x-value there is only one y-value.

If the vertical line hit the graph twice, the x-value would be mapped to two y-values, and so the graph would not
represent a function.

This leads us to the vertical line test. A set of points in a rectangular coordinate system is the graph of a function if every
vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point. If any vertical line intersects the graph in more than one point, the
graph does not represent a function.

Vertical Line Test

A set of points in a rectangular coordinate system is the graph of a function if every vertical line intersects the graph
in at most one point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          3.6 · Graphs of Functions 321

  If any vertical line intersects the graph in more than one point, the graph does not represent a function.
  EXAMPLE 3.51
Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function.

     Solution

 Since any vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point, the graph is the graph of a function.

 One of the vertical lines shown on the graph, intersects it in two points. This graph does not represent a function.
322 3 · Graphs and Functions

              TRY IT 3.101 Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function.

TRY IT 3.102 Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function.

Identify Graphs of Basic Functions

We used the equation                     and its graph as we developed the vertical line test. We said that the relation defined
by the equation                  is a function.

We can write this as in function notation as  It still means the same thing. The graph of the function is the

graph of all ordered pairs       where        So we can write the ordered pairs as   It looks different but

the graph will be the same.

Compare the graph of             previously shown in Figure 3.14 with the graph of   shown in Figure 3.15.

Nothing has changed but the notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3.6 · Graphs of Functions 323

                     Figure 3.15

Graph of a Function

The graph of a function is the graph of all its ordered pairs,     or using function notation,  where

As we move forward in our study, it is helpful to be familiar with the graphs of several basic functions and be able to
identify them.

Through our earlier work, we are familiar with the graphs of linear equations. The process we used to decide if
                is a function would apply to all linear equations. All non-vertical linear equations are functions. Vertical lines

are not functions as the x-value has infinitely many y-values.

We wrote linear equations in several forms, but it will be most helpful for us here to use the slope-intercept form of the

linear equation. The slope-intercept form of a linear equation is  In function notation, this linear function

becomes              where m is the slope of the line and b is the y-intercept.

The domain is the set of all real numbers, and the range is also the set of all real numbers.
324 3 · Graphs and Functions

         Linear Function

       We will use the graphing techniques we used earlier, to graph the basic functions.
         EXAMPLE 3.52

       Graph:
            Solution

         We recognize this as a linear function.
         Find the slope and y-intercept.

         Graph using the slope intercept.

              TRY IT 3.103 Graph:
              TRY IT 3.104 Graph:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               3.6 · Graphs of Functions 325

The next function whose graph we will look at is called the constant function and its equation is of the form

where b is any real number. If we replace the  with y, we get  We recognize this as the horizontal line whose

y-intercept is b. The graph of the function    is also the horizontal line whose y-intercept is b.

Notice that for any real number we put in the function, the function value will be b. This tells us the range has only one
value, b.

Constant Function

  EXAMPLE 3.53
Graph:

     Solution
  We recognize this as a constant function.

  The graph will be a horizontal line through

TRY IT 3.105 Graph:

TRY IT 3.106 Graph:

The identity function,  is a special case of the linear function. If we write it in linear function form,

we see the slope is 1 and the y-intercept is 0.
326 3 · Graphs and Functions

         Identity Function

       The next function we will look at is not a linear function. So the graph will not be a line. The only method we have to
       graph this function is point plotting. Because this is an unfamiliar function, we make sure to choose several positive and
       negative values as well as 0 for our x-values.

         EXAMPLE 3.54
       Graph:

            Solution
       We choose x-values. We substitute them in and then create a chart as shown.

              TRY IT 3.107 Graph:
              TRY IT 3.108
       Looking at the result in Example 3.54, we can summarize the features of the square function. We call this graph a
       parabola. As we consider the domain, notice any real number can be used as an x-value. The domain is all real numbers.
       The range is not all real numbers. Notice the graph consists of values of y never go below zero. This makes sense as the
       square of any number cannot be negative. So, the range of the square function is all non-negative real numbers.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                 3.6 · Graphs of Functions 327

Square Function

The next function we will look at is also not a linear function so the graph will not be a line. Again we will use point
plotting, and make sure to choose several positive and negative values as well as 0 for our x-values.

  EXAMPLE 3.55

Graph:
     Solution

We choose x-values. We substitute them in and then create a chart.

       TRY IT 3.109 Graph:

       TRY IT 3.110 Graph:

Looking at the result in Example 3.55, we can summarize the features of the cube function. As we consider the domain,
notice any real number can be used as an x-value. The domain is all real numbers.
The range is all real numbers. This makes sense as the cube of any non-zero number can be positive or negative. So, the
range of the cube function is all real numbers.
328 3 · Graphs and Functions

         Cube Function

The next function we will look at does not square or cube the input values, but rather takes the square root of those
values.

Let's graph the function         and then summarize the features of the function. Remember, we can only take the

square root of non-negative real numbers, so our domain will be the non-negative real numbers.

EXAMPLE 3.56

     Solution
We choose x-values. Since we will be taking the square root, we choose numbers that are perfect squares, to make our
work easier. We substitute them in and then create a chart.

TRY IT 3.111 Graph:
TRY IT 3.112 Graph:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    3.6 · Graphs of Functions 329

Square Root Function

Our last basic function is the absolute value function,  Keep in mind that the absolute value of a number is its

distance from zero. Since we never measure distance as a negative number, we will never get a negative number in the

range.

EXAMPLE 3.57

Graph:

     Solution
We choose x-values. We substitute them in and then create a chart.

       TRY IT 3.113 Graph:
       TRY IT 3.114 Graph:
  Absolute Value Function

Read Information from a Graph of a Function

In the sciences and business, data is often collected and then graphed. The graph is analyzed, information is obtained
from the graph and then often predictions are made from the data.
330 3 · Graphs and Functions

       We will start by reading the domain and range of a function from its graph.
       Remember the domain is the set of all the x-values in the ordered pairs in the function. To find the domain we look at the
       graph and find all the values of x that have a corresponding value on the graph. Follow the value x up or down vertically.
       If you hit the graph of the function then x is in the domain.
       Remember the range is the set of all the y-values in the ordered pairs in the function. To find the range we look at the
       graph and find all the values of y that have a corresponding value on the graph. Follow the value y left or right
       horizontally. If you hit the graph of the function then y is in the range.

         EXAMPLE 3.58

       Use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in interval notation.

     Solution
To find the domain we look at the graph and find all the values of x that correspond to a point on the graph. The domain
is highlighted in red on the graph. The domain is

To find the range we look at the graph and find all the values of y that correspond to a point on the graph. The range is
highlighted in blue on the graph. The range is

TRY IT 3.115  Use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in
              interval notation.

TRY IT 3.116  Use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in
              interval notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          3.6 · Graphs of Functions 331

We are now going to read information from the graph that you may see in future math classes.
  EXAMPLE 3.59

Use the graph of the function to find the indicated values.

 Find:
 Find:
 Find:
 Find the values for x when
 Find the x-intercepts.
 Find the y-intercepts.
 Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
 Find the range. Write it in interval notation.

Solution

 When     the function crosses the y-axis at 0. So,

 When     the y-value of the function is So,

 When     the y-value of the function is So,

 The function is 0 at the points,                                  The x-values when     are

 The x-intercepts occur when       So the x-intercepts occur when  The x-intercepts are
332 3 · Graphs and Functions

 The y-intercepts occur when          So the y-intercepts occur at             The y-intercept is

 This function has a value for all values of x. Therefore, the domain in interval notation is      

 This function values, or y-values go from to 1. Therefore, the range, in interval notation, is

TRY IT 3.117 Use the graph of the function to find the indicated values.

                               Find:
                               Find:
                               Find:
                               Find the values for x in [  ] when

                               Find the x-intercepts.
                               Find the y-intercepts.
                               Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
                               Find the range. Write it in interval notation.

TRY IT 3.118                  Use the graph of the function to find the indicated values.

                               Find:
                               Find:
                               Find:
                               Find the values for x in [  ] when

                               Find the x-intercepts.
                               Find the y-intercepts.
                               Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
                               Find the range. Write it in interval notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.6 · Graphs of Functions 333

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphs of functions.
Find Domain and Range (https://openstax.org/l/37domainrange)

        SECTION 3.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Vertical Line Test

In the following exercises, determine whether each graph is the graph of a function.

337.                           338. 

                               
334 3 · Graphs and Functions           340. 

    339. 

                                       

Identify Graphs of Basic Functions

In the following exercises,  graph each function  state its domain and range. Write the domain and range in interval
notation.

341.                             342.         343.

344.                             345.         346.

347.                             348.         349.

350.                             351.         352.

353.                             354.         355.

356.                             357.         358.

359.                             360.         361.

362.                             363.         364.

365.                             366.         367.

368.                             369.         370.

371.                             372.         373.

374.                             375.         376.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3.6 · Graphs of Functions 335

Read Information from a Graph of a Function

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in
interval notation.

377.  378.                                                    379.

380.  381.                                                    382.

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function to find the indicated values.

383.                                                    384.

       Find:                                                   Find:
       Find:                                                   Find:
       Find:                                                   Find:
       Find the values for x when                              Find the values for x when
       Find the x-intercepts.                                  Find the x-intercepts.
       Find the y-intercepts.                                  Find the y-intercepts.
       Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.         Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
       Find the range. Write it in interval notation.          Find the range. Write it in interval notation
336 3 · Graphs and Functions                          386.

       385.

     Find:                                                   Find:
     Find:                                                   Find the values for x when
     Find:                                                   Find the x-intercepts.
     Find the values for x when                              Find the y-intercepts.
     Find the x-intercepts.                                  Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
     Find the y-intercepts.                                  Find the range. Write it in interval notation
     Find the domain. Write it in interval notation.
     Find the range. Write it in interval notation.

Writing Exercises

387. Explain in your own words how to find the        388. Explain in your own words how to find the range
        domain from a graph.                                  from a graph.

389. Explain in your own words how to use the         390. Draw a sketch of the square and cube functions.
        vertical line test.                                   What are the similarities and differences in the
                                                              graphs?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       3 · Chapter Review 337

Chapter Review

Key Terms

boundary line The line with equation                  is the boundary line that separates the region where

from the region where

domain of a relation The domain of a relation is all the x-values in the ordered pairs of the relation.

function A function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain exactly one element in the range.

horizontal line A horizontal line is the graph of an equation of the form         The line passes through the y-axis at

intercepts of a line The points where a line crosses the x-axis and the y-axis are called the intercepts of the line.

linear equation An equation of the form               where A and B are not both zero, is called a linear equation in

two variables.

linear inequality A linear inequality is an inequality that can be written in one of the following forms:

                                                  or            where A and B are not both zero.

mapping A mapping is sometimes used to show a relation. The arrows show the pairing of the elements of the domain

with the elements of the range.

ordered pair An ordered pair,    gives the coordinates of a point in a rectangular coordinate system. The first

number is the x-coordinate. The second number is the y-coordinate.

origin The point  is called the origin. It is the point where the x-axis and y-axis intersect.

parallel lines Parallel lines are lines in the same plane that do not intersect.

perpendicular lines Perpendicular lines are lines in the same plane that form a right angle.

point-slope form The point-slope form of an equation of a line with slope m and containing the point              is

range of a relation The range of a relation is all the y-values in the ordered pairs of the relation.

relation A relation is any set of ordered pairs,      All the x-values in the ordered pairs together make up the domain.

All the y-values in the ordered pairs together make up the range.

solution of a linear equation in two variables An ordered pair         is a solution of the linear equation

if the equation is a true statement when the x- and y-values of the ordered pair are substituted into the equation.

solution to a linear inequality An ordered pair       is a solution to a linear inequality if the inequality is true when

we substitute the values of x and y.

standard form of a linear equation A linear equation is in standard form when it is written

vertical line A vertical line is the graph of an equation of the form      The line passes through the x-axis at

Key Concepts

3.1 Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables

  · Points on the Axes
       Points with a y-coordinate equal to 0 are on the x-axis, and have coordinates
       Points with an x-coordinate equal to are on the y-axis, and have coordinates

· Quadrant
338 3 · Chapter Review

· Graph of a Linear Equation: The graph of a linear equation                  is a straight line.

Every point on the line is a solution of the equation.

Every solution of this equation is a point on this line.

· How to graph a linear equation by plotting points.

Step 1. Find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation. Organize them in a table.

Step 2. Plot the points in a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they do not, carefully

check your work.

Step 3. Draw the line through the three points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the

line.

· x-intercept and y-intercept of a Line

 The x-intercept is the point             where the line crosses the x-axis.

 The y-intercept is the point             where the line crosses the y-axis.

· Find the x- and y-intercepts from the Equation of a Line
    Use the equation of the line. To find:

the x-intercept of the line, let          and solve for x.

the y-intercept of the line, let          and solve for y.

· How to graph a linear equation using the intercepts.

Step 1. Find the x- and y-intercepts of the line.

Let                     and solve for x.

Let                     and solve for y.

Step 2. Find a third solution to the equation.

Step 3. Plot the three points and check that they line up.

Step 4. Draw the line

3.2 Slope of a Line

  · Slope of a Line
       The slope of a line is

       The rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the horizontal change.

· How to find the slope of a line from its graph using

    Step 1. Locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers.
    Step 2. Starting with one point, sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second point.
    Step 3. Count the rise and the run on the legs of the triangle.
    Step 4. Take the ratio of rise to run to find the slope:

· Slope of a line between two points.

 The slope of the line between two points                 and  is:

· How to graph a line given a point and the slope.

Step 1. Plot the given point.

Step 2. Use the slope formula             to identify the rise and the run.

Step 3. Starting at the given point, count out the rise and run to mark the second point.

Step 4. Connect the points with a line.

· Slope Intercept Form of an Equation of a Line

 The slope-intercept form of an equation of a line with slope m and y-intercept,          is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      3 · Chapter Review 339

  · Parallel Lines
       Parallel lines are lines in the same plane that do not intersect.
          Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts.
           If and are the slopes of two parallel lines then
          Parallel vertical lines have different x-intercepts.

  · Perpendicular Lines
       Perpendicular lines are lines in the same plane that form a right angle.
       If and are the slopes of two perpendicular lines, then:
           their slopes are negative reciprocals of each other,

           the product of their slopes is
       A vertical line and a horizontal line are always perpendicular to each other.

3.3 Find the Equation of a Line

  · How to find an equation of a line given the slope and a point.
      Step 1. Identify the slope.
      Step 2. Identify the point.
      Step 3. Substitute the values into the point-slope form,
      Step 4. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

· How to find an equation of a line given two points.
    Step 1. Find the slope using the given points.

    Step 2. Choose one point.
    Step 3. Substitute the values into the point-slope form:
    Step 4. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

                                         To Write an Equation of a Line

If given:          Use:                Form:

Slope and y-intercept slope-intercept

Slope and a point  point-slope

Two points         point-slope

· How to find an equation of a line parallel to a given line.
    Step 1. Find the slope of the given line.
    Step 2. Find the slope of the parallel line.
    Step 3. Identify the point.
340 3 · Chapter Review

Step 4. Substitute the values into the point-slope form:
Step 5. Write the equation in slope-intercept form

· How to find an equation of a line perpendicular to a given line.
    Step 1. Find the slope of the given line.
    Step 2. Find the slope of the perpendicular line.
    Step 3. Identify the point.
    Step 4. Substitute the values into the point-slope form,
    Step 5. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

3.4 Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

  · How to graph a linear inequality in two variables.

Step 1. Identify and graph the boundary line.

  If the inequality is           the boundary line is solid.

  If the inequality is           the boundary line is dashed.

Step 2. Test a point that is not on the boundary line. Is it a solution of the inequality?

Step 3. Shade in one side of the boundary line.

  If the test point is a solution, shade in the side that includes the point.

  If the test point is not a solution, shade in the opposite side.

3.5 Relations and Functions

  · Function Notation: For the function

 f is the name of the function

 x is the domain value

  is the range value y corresponding to the value x

  We read               as f of x or the value of f at x.

· Independent and Dependent Variables: For the function
    x is the independent variable as it can be any value in the domain
    y is the dependent variable as its value depends on x

3.6 Graphs of Functions

  · Vertical Line Test
       A set of points in a rectangular coordinate system is the graph of a function if every vertical line intersects the

           graph in at most one point.
       If any vertical line intersects the graph in more than one point, the graph does not represent a function.

· Graph of a Function                                               or using function notation,  where
    The graph of a function is the graph of all its ordered pairs,

· Linear Function

  · Constant Function

Access for free at openstax.org
                        3 · Chapter Review 341

· Identity Function
· Square Function
· Cube Function
· Square Root Function
342 3 · Exercises

· Absolute Value Function

Exercises

Review Exercises

Graph Linear Equations in Two Variables

Plot Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

In the following exercises, plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system.

391.                             392.

                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     

In the following exercises, determine which ordered pairs are solutions to the given equations.

393.                             394.

                                     
                                     
                                     

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

In the following exercises, graph by plotting points.

395.                             396.                  397.

398.                             399.                  400.

401.

Graph Vertical and Horizontal lines

In the following exercises, graph each equation.

402.                             403.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3 · Exercises 343

In the following exercises, graph each pair of equations in the same rectangular coordinate system.

404.  and                 405.     and

Find x- and y-Intercepts

In the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts.

406.                                                       407.

In the following exercises, find the intercepts of each equation.

408.                      409.                                     410.

411.                      412.

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

In the following exercises, graph using the intercepts.

413.                      414.                                     415.

416.                      417.
344 3 · Exercises

Slope of a Line

Find the Slope of a Line

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line shown.

418.                                                      419.

420.                                                      421.

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line.

422.                             423.                           424.

425.

Use the Slope Formula to find the Slope of a Line between Two Points

In the following exercises, use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between each pair of points.

426.                             427.                           428.

429.

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

In the following exercises, graph each line with the given point and slope.

430.                             431.                           432. x-intercept

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3 · Exercises 345

433. y-intercept 1;

Graph a Line Using Its Slope and Intercept

In the following exercises, identify the slope and y-intercept of each line.

434.                         435.                              436.

437.

In the following exercises, graph the line of each equation using its slope and y-intercept.

438.                         439.                              440.

441.

In the following exercises, determine the most convenient method to graph each line.

442.                         443.                              444.

445.                         446.                              447.

Graph and Interpret Applications of Slope-Intercept

448. Katherine is a private chef. The equation                 449. Marjorie teaches piano. The equation
                              models the relation between her                                models the relation between her

        weekly cost, C, in dollars and the number of                   weekly profit, P, in dollars and the number of
        meals, m, that she serves.                                     student lessons, s, that she teaches.

     Find Katherine's cost for a week when she                      Find Marjorie's profit for a week when she

        serves no meals.                                               teaches no student lessons.

     Find the cost for a week when she serves 14                    Find the profit for a week when she teaches

        meals.                                                         20 student lessons.

     Interpret the slope and C-intercept of the                     Interpret the slope and P-intercept of the

        equation.                                                      equation.

     Graph the equation.                                            Graph the equation.

Use Slopes to Identify Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

In the following exercises, use slopes and y-intercepts to determine if the lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.

450.                         451.                              452.

453.

Find the Equation of a Line

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and y-Intercept

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line with given slope and y-intercept. Write the equation in
slope-intercept form.

454. slope and -intercept    455. slope and -intercept 456. slope 0 and -intercept

457. slope and -intercept
346 3 · Exercises

In the following exercises, find the equation of the line shown in each graph. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

458.                                                 459.

460.                                                 461.

Find an Equation of the Line Given the Slope and a Point

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line with given slope and containing the given point. Write the equation
in slope-intercept form.

462.            point                                463.       point

464. Horizontal line containing                      465.       point

Find an Equation of the Line Given Two Points

In the following exercises, find the equation of a line containing the given points. Write the equation in slope-intercept
form.

466.       and                                       467.       and

468.       and                                       469.       and

Find an Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line

In the following exercises, find an equation of a line parallel to the given line and contains the given point. Write the
equation in slope-intercept form.

470. line                 point                      471. line              point

472. line          point                             473. line       point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        3 · Exercises 347

Find an Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line

In the following exercises, find an equation of a line perpendicular to the given line and contains the given point. Write
the equation in slope-intercept form.

474. line              point                               475. line                 point

476. line  point                                           477. line          point

Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

Verify Solutions to an Inequality in Two Variables

In the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the given inequality.

478. Determine whether each ordered pair is a              479. Determine whether each ordered pair is a

solution to the inequality                                 solution to the inequality

                                                                                                          


Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Inequality and its Graph

In the following exercises, write the inequality shown by the shaded region.

480. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the      481. Write the inequality shown by the graph with the
        boundary line                                              boundary line

482. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region       483. Write the inequality shown by the shaded region
        in the graph with the boundary line                        in the graph with the boundary line

Graph Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

In the following exercises, graph each linear inequality.

484. Graph the linear         485. Graph the linear                   486. Graph the linear
        inequality                    inequality                              inequality

487. Graph the linear         488. Graph the linear                   489. Graph the linear
        inequality                    inequality                              inequality
348 3 · Exercises

Solve Applications using Linear Inequalities in Two Variables

490. Shanthie needs to earn at least $500 a week         491. Atsushi he needs to exercise enough to burn 600
                                                                 calories each day. He prefers to either run or
      during her summer break to pay for college. She            bike and burns 20 calories per minute while
                                                                 running and 15 calories a minute while biking.
      works two jobs. One as a swimming instructor
                                                              If x is the number of minutes that Atsushi
      that pays $10 an hour and the other as an intern
                                                                 runs and y is the number minutes he bikes, find
      in a law office for $25 hour. How many hours               the inequality that models the situation.

      does Shanthie need to work at each job to earn          Graph the inequality.
                                                              List three solutions to the inequality. What
      at least $500 per week?
                                                                 options do the solutions provide Atsushi?
       Let x be the number of hours she works

      teaching swimming and let y be the number of

      hours she works as an intern. Write an inequality

      that would model this situation.

       Graph the inequality.
       Find three ordered pairs         that would be

      solutions to the inequality. Then, explain what

      that means for Shanthie.

Relations and Functions

Find the Domain and Range of a Relation

In the following exercises, for each relation,  find the domain of the relation  find the range of the relation.

492.                                                     493.

In the following exercise, use the mapping of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation  find the domain of
the relation  find the range of the relation.

494. The mapping below shows
        the average weight of a
        child according to age.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                   3 · Exercises 349

In the following exercise, use the graph of the relation to  list the ordered pairs of the relation  find the domain of the
relation  find the range of the relation.
495.

Determine if a Relation is a Function

In the following exercises, use the set of ordered pairs to  determine whether the relation is a function  find the
domain of the relation  find the range of the relation.

496.                                                497.

In the following exercises, use the mapping to  determine whether the relation is a function  find the domain of the
function  find the range of the function.

498.                                                499.

In the following exercises, determine whether each equation is a function.

500.                          501.                        502.

503.                          504.

Find the Value of a Function

In the following exercises, evaluate the function:

        

505.                          506.                        507.

508.

In the following exercises, evaluate the function.

509.                          510.                        511.

512.
350 3 · Exercises

Graphs of Functions

Use the Vertical line Test

In the following exercises, determine whether each graph is the graph of a function.

513.                             514.  515.

516.                             517.  518.

519.

Identify Graphs of Basic Functions

In the following exercises,  graph each function  state its domain and range. Write the domain and range in interval
notation.

520.                             521.  522.

523.                             524.  525.

526.                             527.  528.

529.                             530.  531.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         3 · Exercises 351

Read Information from a Graph of a Function

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function to find its domain and range. Write the domain and range in
interval notation

532.                             533.                               534.

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function to find the indicated values.

535.                             536.

       Find                             Find
       Find                             Find the values for x
       Find
       Find the values for x           when

      when                              Find the -intercepts.
                                        Find the -intercepts.
       Find the -intercepts.            Find the domain. Write
       Find the -intercepts.
       Find the domain. Write          it in interval notation.

      it in interval notation.          Find the range. Write it

       Find the range. Write it        in interval notation.

      in interval notation.

Practice Test                    538. Which of the given
                                         ordered pairs are
537. Plot each point in a                solutions to the equation
        rectangular coordinate
        system.                      

    
    
    
    
    
352 3 · Exercises                             540. Find the slope of the line  541. Graph the line with slope
                                                      between the points                  containing the point
Find the slope of each line shown.                    and

539. 

      

542. Find the intercepts of
                            and graph.

Graph the line for each of the following equations.

543.                                    544.         545.

Find the equation of each line. Write the equation in slope-intercept form.

546. slope and -intercept 547.                point  548. containing           and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     3 · Exercises 353

549. perpendicular to the line        550. Write the inequality shown
                          containing          by the graph with the
                                              boundary line
        the point

Graph each linear inequality.                       552.
551.
553.                                                554. Hiro works two part time jobs in order to earn

555. Use the set of ordered pairs to  determine           enough money to meet her obligations of at
    whether the relation is a function,  find the
    domain of the relation, and  find the range of        least $450 a week. Her job at the mall pays $10

        the relation.                                     an hour and her administrative assistant job on

                                                          campus pays $15 an hour. How many hours does

                                                          Hiro need to work at each job to earn at least

                                                          $450?

                                                           Let x be the number of hours she works at

                                                          the mall and let y be the number of hours she

                                                          works as administrative assistant. Write an

                                                          inequality that would model this situation.

                                                           Graph the inequality .
                                                           Find three ordered pairs  that would be

                                                          solutions to the inequality. Then explain what

                                                          that means for Hiro.

                                                    556. Evaluate the function:      

557. For                              evaluate      558. Determine whether the graph is the graph of a
                                                            function. Explain your answer.
354 3 · Exercises

In the following exercises,  graph each function  state its domain and range.
Write the domain and range in interval notation.

559.                             560.

561.

       Find the -intercepts.
       Find the -intercepts.
       Find
       Find
       Find the domain. Write

      it in interval notation.

       Find the range. Write it

      in interval notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      4 · Introduction 355

4  SYSTEMS OF LINEAR EQUATIONS

Figure 4.1 In the future, car drivers may become passengers because cars will be able to drive themselves. (credit:
jingoba/Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables
  4.2 Solve Applications with Systems of Equations
  4.3 Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations
  4.4 Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables
  4.5 Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices
  4.6 Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants
  4.7 Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities

      Introduction

Climb into your car. Put on your seatbelt. Choose your destination and then...relax. That's right. You don't have to do
anything else because you are in an autonomous car, or one that navigates its way to your destination! No cars are fully
autonomous at the moment and so you theoretically still need to have your hands on the wheel. Self-driving cars may
help ease traffic congestion, prevent accidents, and lower pollution. The technology is thanks to computer programmers
who are developing software to control the navigation of the car. These programmers rely on their understanding of
mathematics, including relationships between equations. In this chapter, you will learn how to solve systems of linear
equations in different ways and use them to analyze real-world situations.

4.1 Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a system of equations
           Solve a system of linear equations by graphing
           Solve a system of equations by substitution
           Solve a system of equations by elimination
           Choose the most convenient method to solve a system of linear equations

   BE PREPARED 4.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

   For the equation

    Is  a solution?  Is  a solution?

   If you missed this problem, review Example 3.2.
356 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

  BE PREPARED 4.2                    Find the slope and y-intercept of the line
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 3.16.

  BE PREPARED 4.3                    Find the x- and y-intercepts of the line
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 3.8.

Determine Whether an Ordered Pair is a Solution of a System of Equations

In Solving Linear Equations, we learned how to solve linear equations with one variable. Now we will work with two or
more linear equations grouped together, which is known as a system of linear equations.

  System of Linear Equations

  When two or more linear equations are grouped together, they form a system of linear equations.

In this section, we will focus our work on systems of two linear equations in two unknowns. We will solve larger systems
of equations later in this chapter.

An example of a system of two linear equations is shown below. We use a brace to show the two equations are grouped
together to form a system of equations.

A linear equation in two variables, such as  has an infinite number of solutions. Its graph is a line. Remember,

every point on the line is a solution to the equation and every solution to the equation is a point on the line.

To solve a system of two linear equations, we want to find the values of the variables that are solutions to both

equations. In other words, we are looking for the ordered pairs  that make both equations true. These are called

the solutions of a system of equations.

Solutions of a System of Equations

The solutions of a system of equations are the values of the variables that make all the equations true. A solution of
a system of two linear equations is represented by an ordered pair

To determine if an ordered pair is a solution to a system of two equations, we substitute the values of the variables into
each equation. If the ordered pair makes both equations true, it is a solution to the system.

  EXAMPLE 4.1

Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system

            

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
      4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 357



  TRY IT 4.1 Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system

    

  TRY IT 4.2 Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system

    

Solve a System of Linear Equations by Graphing

In this section, we will use three methods to solve a system of linear equations. The first method we'll use is graphing.

The graph of a linear equation is a line. Each point on the line is a solution to the equation. For a system of two
equations, we will graph two lines. Then we can see all the points that are solutions to each equation. And, by finding
what the lines have in common, we'll find the solution to the system.

Most linear equations in one variable have one solution, but we saw that some equations, called contradictions, have no
solutions and for other equations, called identities, all numbers are solutions.

Similarly, when we solve a system of two linear equations represented by a graph of two lines in the same plane, there
are three possible cases, as shown.
358 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

                                                                                     Figure 4.2
       Each time we demonstrate a new method, we will use it on the same system of linear equations. At the end of the
       section you'll decide which method was the most convenient way to solve this system.

         EXAMPLE 4.2
       How to Solve a System of Equations by Graphing
       Solve the system by graphing

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 359

TRY IT 4.3 Solve the system by graphing:

TRY IT 4.4 Solve the system by graphing:

The steps to use to solve a system of linear equations by graphing are shown here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of linear equations by graphing.

Step 1.  Graph the first equation.
Step 2.  Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.
Step 3.  Determine whether the lines intersect, are parallel, or are the same line.
Step 4.  Identify the solution to the system.

           If the lines intersect, identify the point of intersection. This is the solution to the system.
360 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

                        If the lines are parallel, the system has no solution.
                        If the lines are the same, the system has an infinite number of solutions.
         Step 5. Check the solution in both equations.
       In the next example, we'll first re-write the equations into slope-intercept form as this will make it easy for us to quickly
       graph the lines.
         EXAMPLE 4.3
       Solve the system by graphing:
            Solution
       We'll solve both of these equations for so that we can easily graph them using their slopes and y-intercepts.

         Solve the first equation for y.
         Find the slope and y-intercept.
         Solve the second equation for y.
         Find the slope and y-intercept.

         Graph the lines.

         Determine the point of intersection. The lines intersect at

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                              4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 361

Check the solution in both equations.

                                                            The solution is

       TRY IT 4.5 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 4.6 Solve the system by graphing:

In all the systems of linear equations so far, the lines intersected and the solution was one point. In the next two
examples, we'll look at a system of equations that has no solution and at a system of equations that has an infinite
number of solutions.

  EXAMPLE 4.4
Solve the system by graphing:

     Solution

To graph the first equation, we will use its
slope and y-intercept.

To graph the second equation, we will use
the intercepts.
362 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Graph the lines.

Determine the points of intersection.  The lines are parallel.
                                       Since no point is on both lines, there is no
                                       ordered pair that makes both equations
                                       true. There is no solution to this system.

       TRY IT 4.7 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 4.8 Solve the system by graphing:

Sometimes the equations in a system represent the same line. Since every point on the line makes both equations true,
there are infinitely many ordered pairs that make both equations true. There are infinitely many solutions to the system.

  EXAMPLE 4.5
Solve the system by graphing:

     Solution

Find the slope and y-intercept of the first equation.
Find the intercepts of the second equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 363

  Graph the lines.

                                                                               The lines are the same!
                                                                               Since every point on the line makes both
                                                                               equations true, there are infinitely many
                                                                               ordered pairs that make both equations true.
                                                                               There are infinitely many solutions to this system.
If you write the second equation in slope-intercept form, you may recognize that the equations have the same slope and
same y-intercept.

       TRY IT 4.9 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 4.10 Solve the system by graphing:

When we graphed the second line in the last example, we drew it right over the first line. We say the two lines are
coincident. Coincident lines have the same slope and same y-intercept.

  Coincident Lines
  Coincident lines have the same slope and same y-intercept.
The systems of equations in Example 4.2 and Example 4.3 each had two intersecting lines. Each system had one solution.
In Example 4.5, the equations gave coincident lines, and so the system had infinitely many solutions.
The systems in those three examples had at least one solution. A system of equations that has at least one solution is
called a consistent system.
A system with parallel lines, like Example 4.4, has no solution. We call a system of equations like this inconsistent. It has
no solution.
  Consistent and Inconsistent Systems
  A consistent system of equations is a system of equations with at least one solution.
364 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

         An inconsistent system of equations is a system of equations with no solution.

       We also categorize the equations in a system of equations by calling the equations independent or dependent. If two
       equations are independent, they each have their own set of solutions. Intersecting lines and parallel lines are
       independent.
       If two equations are dependent, all the solutions of one equation are also solutions of the other equation. When we
       graph two dependent equations, we get coincident lines.
       Let's sum this up by looking at the graphs of the three types of systems. See below and Table 4.1.

                                 Lines   Intersecting         Parallel  Coincident

             Number of solutions         1 point              No solution Infinitely many

             Consistent/inconsistent Consistent               Inconsistent Consistent

             Dependent/ independent Independent Independent Dependent

             Table 4.1

EXAMPLE 4.6

Without graphing, determine the number of solutions and then classify the system of equations.

             

     Solution

 We will compare the slopes and intercepts of the two lines.

The first equation is already in slope-
intercept form.

Write the second equation in slope-
intercept form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                         4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 365

  Find the slope and intercept of each line.

                                                                    Since the slopes are the same and y-intercepts are different, the lines
                                                                      are parallel.
A system of equations whose graphs are parallel lines has no solution and is inconsistent and independent.

 We will compare the slope and intercepts of the two lines.

Write both equations in slope-intercept form.

Find the slope and intercept of each line.

                                                                        Since the slopes are different, the lines intersect.
A system of equations whose graphs are intersect has 1 solution and is consistent and independent.

TRY IT 4.11  Without graphing, determine the number of solutions and then classify the system of equations.

                                            

TRY IT 4.12  Without graphing, determine the number of solutions and then classify the system of equations.

                                            

Solving systems of linear equations by graphing is a good way to visualize the types of solutions that may result.
However, there are many cases where solving a system by graphing is inconvenient or imprecise. If the graphs extend
beyond the small grid with x and y both between and 10, graphing the lines may be cumbersome. And if the
solutions to the system are not integers, it can be hard to read their values precisely from a graph.

Solve a System of Equations by Substitution

We will now solve systems of linear equations by the substitution method.

We will use the same system we used first for graphing.

We will first solve one of the equations for either x or y. We can choose either equation and solve for either variable--but
we'll try to make a choice that will keep the work easy.
366 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

       Then we substitute that expression into the other equation. The result is an equation with just one variable--and we
       know how to solve those!
       After we find the value of one variable, we will substitute that value into one of the original equations and solve for the
       other variable. Finally, we check our solution and make sure it makes both equations true.

         EXAMPLE 4.7
       How to Solve a System of Equations by Substitution
       Solve the system by substitution:

            Solution

              TRY IT 4.13 Solve the system by substitution:
              TRY IT 4.14 Solve the system by substitution:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 367

...

     HOW TO

Solve a system of equations by substitution.

Step 1.  Solve one of the equations for either variable.
Step 2.  Substitute the expression from Step 1 into the other equation.
Step 3.  Solve the resulting equation.
Step 4.  Substitute the solution in Step 3 into either of the original equations to find the other variable.
Step 5.  Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Step 6.  Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

Be very careful with the signs in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 4.8

Solve the system by substitution:

     Solution
We need to solve one equation for one variable. We will solve the first equation for y.

Solve the first equation for y.

Substitute          for y in the second equation.

Replace the y with

Solve the equation for x.

Substitute  into                 to find y.
                                                        The ordered pair is
368 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

         Check the ordered pair in both equations.

                                                                                   The solution is

              TRY IT 4.15 Solve the system by substitution:

              TRY IT 4.16 Solve the system by substitution:

     Solve a System of Equations by Elimination

       We have solved systems of linear equations by graphing and by substitution. Graphing works well when the variable
       coefficients are small and the solution has integer values. Substitution works well when we can easily solve one equation
       for one of the variables and not have too many fractions in the resulting expression.
       The third method of solving systems of linear equations is called the Elimination Method. When we solved a system by
       substitution, we started with two equations and two variables and reduced it to one equation with one variable. This is
       what we'll do with the elimination method, too, but we'll have a different way to get there.
       The Elimination Method is based on the Addition Property of Equality. The Addition Property of Equality says that when
       you add the same quantity to both sides of an equation, you still have equality. We will extend the Addition Property of
       Equality to say that when you add equal quantities to both sides of an equation, the results are equal.
       For any expressions a, b, c, and d.

       To solve a system of equations by elimination, we start with both equations in standard form. Then we decide which
       variable will be easiest to eliminate. How do we decide? We want to have the coefficients of one variable be opposites, so
       that we can add the equations together and eliminate that variable.
       Notice how that works when we add these two equations together:

       The y's add to zero and we have one equation with one variable.
       Let's try another one:

       This time we don't see a variable that can be immediately eliminated if we add the equations.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                          4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 369

But if we multiply the first equation by  we will make the coefficients of x opposites. We must multiply every term on
both sides of the equation by

Then rewrite the system of equations.

Now we see that the coefficients of the x terms are opposites, so x will be eliminated when we add these two equations.

Once we get an equation with just one variable, we solve it. Then we substitute that value into one of the original
equations to solve for the remaining variable. And, as always, we check our answer to make sure it is a solution to both
of the original equations.
Now we'll see how to use elimination to solve the same system of equations we solved by graphing and by substitution.

  EXAMPLE 4.9

How to Solve a System of Equations by Elimination
Solve the system by elimination:

     Solution
370 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

TRY IT 4.17 Solve the system by elimination:

TRY IT 4.18 Solve the system by elimination:

The steps are listed here for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of equations by elimination.

Step 1.  Write both equations in standard form. If any coefficients are fractions, clear them.
Step 2.
         Make the coefficients of one variable opposites.
           Decide which variable you will eliminate.
           Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.

Step 3.  Add the equations resulting from Step 2 to eliminate one variable.
Step 4.  Solve for the remaining variable.
Step 5.  Substitute the solution from Step 4 into one of the original equations. Then solve for the other variable.
Step 6.  Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Step 7.  Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

Now we'll do an example where we need to multiply both equations by constants in order to make the coefficients of one
variable opposites.

  EXAMPLE 4.10

Solve the system by elimination:

     Solution
In this example, we cannot multiply just one equation by any constant to get opposite coefficients. So we will
strategically multiply both equations by different constants to get the opposites.

Both equations are in standard form.
To get opposite coefficients of y, we will
multiply the first equation by 2 and the
second equation by 3.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 371

Add the two equations to eliminate y.

Solve for x.

Substitute    into one of the original equations.

Solve for y.

Write the solution as an ordered pair.             The ordered pair is

Check that the ordered pair is a solution to
both original equations.

                                                                               The solution is

       TRY IT 4.19 Solve the system by elimination:

       TRY IT 4.20 Solve each system by elimination:

When the system of equations contains fractions, we will first clear the fractions by multiplying each equation by the LCD
of all the fractions in the equation.

  EXAMPLE 4.11
Solve the system by elimination:

     Solution
In this example, both equations have fractions. Our first step will be to multiply each equation by the LCD of all the
fractions in the equation to clear the fractions.

To clear the fractions, multiply each
equation by its LCD.
372 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Simplify.

Now we are ready to eliminate one
of the variables. Notice that both equations are in
standard form.

We can eliminate by multiplying the top equation by

Simplify and add.

Substitute  into one of the original equations.

Solve for .                                          The ordered pair is

Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Check that the ordered pair is a solution to
both original equations.

                                                                                         The solution is

       TRY IT 4.21 Solve each system by elimination:

       TRY IT 4.22 Solve each system by elimination:

When we solved the system by graphing, we saw that not all systems of linear equations have a single ordered pair as a
solution. When the two equations were really the same line, there were infinitely many solutions. We called that a
consistent system. When the two equations described parallel lines, there was no solution. We called that an inconsistent
system.
The same is true using substitution or elimination. If the equation at the end of substitution or elimination is a true
statement, we have a consistent but dependent system and the system of equations has infinitely many solutions. If the
equation at the end of substitution or elimination is a false statement, we have an inconsistent system and the system of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 373

equations has no solution.
  EXAMPLE 4.12

Solve the system by elimination:
     Solution

  Write the second equation in standard form.

  Clear the fractions by multiplying the second equation by 4.

  Simplify.

  To eliminate a variable, we multiply the second equation by -1. Simplify and add.

This is a true statement. The equations are consistent but dependent. Their graphs would be the same line. The system
has infinitely many solutions.
After we cleared the fractions in the second equation, did you notice that the two equations were the same? That means
we have coincident lines.

       TRY IT 4.23 Solve the system by elimination:

       TRY IT 4.24 Solve the system by elimination:

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Solve a System of Linear Equations

When you solve a system of linear equations in in an application, you will not be told which method to use. You will need
to make that decision yourself. So you'll want to choose the method that is easiest to do and minimizes your chance of
making mistakes.
374 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

  EXAMPLE 4.13

For each system of linear equations, decide whether it would be more convenient to solve it by substitution or
elimination. Explain your answer.

                 

     Solution



Since both equations are in standard form, using elimination will be most convenient.



Since one equation is already solved for y, using substitution will be most convenient.

    TRY IT 4.25  For each system of linear equations decide whether it would be more convenient to solve it by
                 substitution or elimination. Explain your answer.

                                           

    TRY IT 4.26  For each system of linear equations decide whether it would be more convenient to solve it by
                 substitution or elimination. Explain your answer.

                                           

        SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether an Ordered Pair is a Solution of a System of Equations
In the following exercises, determine if the following points are solutions to the given system of equations.

1.                                   2.        3.

                                                                                         

4.

  

Solve a System of Linear Equations by Graphing
In the following exercises, solve the following systems of equations by graphing.

5.                                   6.        7.

Access for free at openstax.org
          4.1 · Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables 375

8.   9.   10.

11.  12.  13.

14.  15.  16.

17.  18.  19.

20.  21.  22.

23.  24.

Without graphing, determine the number of solutions and then classify the system of equations.

25.  26.  27.

28.  29.

Solve a System of Equations by Substitution
In the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by substitution.

30.  31.  32.

33.  34.  35.

36.  37.  38.

39.  40.  41.

42.  43.  44.

45.

Solve a System of Equations by Elimination
In the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by elimination.

46.  47.  48.

49.  50.  51.
376 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

52.                                  53.                       54.

55.                                  56.                       57.

58.                                  59.                       60.

61.                                  62.                       63.

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Solve a System of Linear Equations

In the following exercises, decide whether it would be more convenient to solve the system of equations by substitution
or elimination.

64.                                                     65.

                                                             

                                                             

66.                                                     67.

                                                             

                                                             

Writing Exercises                                       69. Solve the system of equations by substitution and
                                                              explain all your steps in words:
68. In a system of linear equations, the two equations
      have the same intercepts. Describe the possible
      solutions to the system.

70. Solve the system of equations by elimination and    71. Solve the system of equations
      explain all your steps in words:
                                                            by graphing  by substitution
Self Check                                                  Which method do you prefer? Why?

After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 377

If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

4.2 Solve Applications with Systems of Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve direct translation applications
           Solve geometry applications
           Solve uniform motion applications

       BE PREPARED 4.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            The sum of twice a number and nine is 31. Find the number.
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.15.

BE PREPARED 4.5  Twins Jon and Ron together earned $96,000 last year. Ron earned $8000 more than three
                 times what Jon earned. How much did each of the twins earn?
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.19.

BE PREPARED 4.6  An express train and a local train leave Pittsburgh to travel to Washington, D.C. The
                 express train can make the trip in four hours and the local train takes five hours for the
                 trip. The speed of the express train is 12 miles per hour faster than the speed of the local
                 train. Find the speed of both trains.
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.43.

Solve Direct Translation Applications

Systems of linear equations are very useful for solving applications. Some people find setting up word problems with two
variables easier than setting them up with just one variable. To solve an application, we'll first translate the words into a
system of linear equations. Then we will decide the most convenient method to use, and then solve the system.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve applications with systems of equations.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what we are looking for. Choose variables to represent those quantities.
Step 4.  Translate into a system of equations.
Step 5.  Solve the system of equations using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

We solved number problems with one variable earlier. Let's see how differently it works using two variables.
378 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

  EXAMPLE 4.14
The sum of two numbers is zero. One number is nine less than the other. Find the numbers.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      We are looking for two numbers.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.          Let the first number.
                                                          the second number

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations. The sum of two numbers is zero.

                                               One number is nine less than the other.

The system is:

Step 5. Solve the system of
equations. We will use substitution
since the second equation is solved
for n.

Substitute m - 9 for n in the first equation.

Solve for m.

Substitute  into the second equation

and then solve for n.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 379

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.       Do these numbers make sense in
Step 7. Answer the question.                   the problem? We will leave this to
                                               you!

                                               The numbers are and

TRY IT 4.27 The sum of two numbers is 10. One number is 4 less than the other. Find the numbers.
TRY IT 4.28 The sum of two numbers is One number is 10 less than the other. Find the numbers.

EXAMPLE 4.15

Heather has been offered two options for her salary as a trainer at the gym. Option A would pay her $25,000 plus $15 for

each training session. Option B would pay her  for each training session. How many training sessions

would make the salary options equal?

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      We are looking for the number of
                                               training sessions that would make
                                               the pay equal.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.          Let Heather's salary.
                                                          the number of training sessions

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.  Option A would pay her $25,000
                                               plus $15 for each training
                                               session.

                                               Option B would pay her $10,000
                                               + $40 for each training session.

The system is shown.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations.
We will use substitution.

Substitute 25,000 +15n for s in the second
equation.
380 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Solve for n.                                   Are 600 training sessions a year reasonable?
Step 6. Check the answer.                      Are the two options equal when n = 600?
Step 7. Answer the question.
                                               The salary options would be equal for 600 training
                                               sessions.

TRY IT 4.29  Geraldine has been offered positions by two insurance companies. The first company pays a
             salary of $12,000 plus a commission of $100 for each policy sold. The second pays a salary of
             $20,000 plus a commission of $50 for each policy sold. How many policies would need to be sold
             to make the total pay the same?

TRY IT 4.30  Kenneth currently sells suits for company A at a salary of $22,000 plus a $10 commission for
             each suit sold. Company B offers him a position with a salary of $28,000 plus a $4 commission
             for each suit sold. How many suits would Kenneth need to sell for the options to be equal?

As you solve each application, remember to analyze which method of solving the system of equations would be most
convenient.

  EXAMPLE 4.16

Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
When Jenna spent 10 minutes on the elliptical trainer and then did circuit training for 20 minutes, her fitness app says
she burned 278 calories. When she spent 20 minutes on the elliptical trainer and 30 minutes circuit training she burned
473 calories. How many calories does she burn for each minute on the elliptical trainer? How many calories for each
minute of circuit training?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      We are looking for the number of
                                               calories burned each minute on the
                                               elliptical trainer and each minute of
                                               circuit training.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.          Let number of calories burned per
                                               minute on the elliptical trainer.

                                                         number of calories burned per
                                               minute while circuit training

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.  10 minutes on the elliptical and circuit
                                               training for 20 minutes, burned
                                               278 calories

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 381

                                          20 minutes on the elliptical and
                                          30 minutes of circuit training burned
                                          473 calories

The system is:

Step 5. Solve the system of equations.
Multiply the first equation by -2 to get
opposite coefficients of e.

Simplify and add the equations.
Solve for c.

Substitute c = 8.3 into one of the
original equations to solve for e.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.  Check the math on your own.

Step 7. Answer the question.              Jenna burns 8.3 calories per minute
                                          circuit training and 11.2 calories per
                                          minute while on the elliptical trainer.

TRY IT 4.31  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Mark went to the gym and did 40 minutes of Bikram hot yoga and 10 minutes of jumping jacks.
             He burned 510 calories. The next time he went to the gym, he did 30 minutes of Bikram hot
             yoga and 20 minutes of jumping jacks burning 470 calories. How many calories were burned for
             each minute of yoga? How many calories were burned for each minute of jumping jacks?

TRY IT 4.32  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Erin spent 30 minutes on the rowing machine and 20 minutes lifting weights at the gym and
             burned 430 calories. During her next visit to the gym she spent 50 minutes on the rowing
             machine and 10 minutes lifting weights and burned 600 calories. How many calories did she
             burn for each minutes on the rowing machine? How many calories did she burn for each minute
             of weight lifting?

Solve Geometry Applications

We will now solve geometry applications using systems of linear equations. We will need to add complementary angles
and supplementary angles to our list some properties of angles.
382 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

The measures of two complementary angles add to 90 degrees. The measures of two supplementary angles add to
180 degrees.

  Complementary and Supplementary Angles

  Two angles are complementary if the sum of the measures of their angles is 90 degrees.
  Two angles are supplementary if the sum of the measures of their angles is 180 degrees.

If two angles are complementary, we say that one angle is the complement of the other.
If two angles are supplementary, we say that one angle is the supplement of the other.

  EXAMPLE 4.17
Translate to a system of equations and then solve.
The difference of two complementary angles is 26 degrees. Find the measures of the angles.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.              We are looking for the measure of each angle.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                  
Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.
                                                       The angles are complementary.

                                                       The difference of the two angles is 26 degrees.

The system is shown.
Step 5. Solve the system of equations by elimination.

Substitute  into the first equation.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 383

Step 7. Answer the question.                         The angle measures are 58 and 32 degrees.

TRY IT 4.33  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
             The difference of two complementary angles is 20 degrees. Find the measures of the angles.

TRY IT 4.34  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
             The difference of two complementary angles is 80 degrees. Find the measures of the angles.

In the next example, we remember that the measures of supplementary angles add to 180.

  EXAMPLE 4.18

Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
Two angles are supplementary. The measure of the larger angle is twelve degrees less than five times the measure of
the smaller angle. Find the measures of both angles.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.            We are looking for measure of each
                                                     angle.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                Let the measure of the first angle.
                                                                the measure of the second angle

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.        The angles are supplementary.

                                                     The larger angle is twelve less than five
                                                     times the smaller angle.

The system is shown:
Step 5. Solve the system of equations substitution.

Substitute 5x - 12 for y in the first equation.
Solve for x.
384 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Substitute 32 for x in the second              The angle measures are 148 and 32 degrees.
equation, then solve for y.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.35  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Two angles are supplementary. The measure of the larger angle is 12 degrees more than three
             times the smaller angle. Find the measures of the angles.

TRY IT 4.36  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Two angles are supplementary. The measure of the larger angle is 18 less than twice the
             measure of the smaller angle. Find the measures of the angles.

Recall that the angles of a triangle add up to 180 degrees. A right triangle has one angle that is 90 degrees. What does
that tell us about the other two angles? In the next example we will be finding the measures of the other two angles.

  EXAMPLE 4.19

The measure of one of the small angles of a right triangle is ten more than three times the measure of the other small
angle. Find the measures of both angles.

     Solution
We will draw and label a figure.

Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.     We are looking for the measures of the angles.
Step 3. Name what we are looking for.
Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.  Let the measure of the first angle.
                                                          the measure of the second angle

                                               The measure of one of the small angles of a right triangle is
                                               ten more than three times the measure of the other small
                                               angle.

                                               The sum of the measures of the angles of a triangle is 180.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 385

The system is shown.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations. We will use
substitution since the first equation is solved for a.

Substitute    for a in the second equation.

Solve for b.

Substitute    into the first equation and then
solve for a.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.                We will leave this to you!
                                                        The measures of the small angles are 20 and 70 degrees.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.37           The measure of one of the small angles of a right triangle is 2 more than 3 times the measure of
                      the other small angle. Find the measure of both angles.

TRY IT 4.38           The measure of one of the small angles of a right triangle is 18 less than twice the measure of
                      the other small angle. Find the measure of both angles.

Often it is helpful when solving geometry applications to draw a picture to visualize the situation.

  EXAMPLE 4.20

Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
Randall has 125 feet of fencing to enclose the part of his backyard adjacent to his house. He will only need to fence
around three sides, because the fourth side will be the wall of the house. He wants the length of the fenced yard (parallel
to the house wall) to be 5 feet more than four times as long as the width. Find the length and the width.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.   We are looking for the length and width.
386 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.  Let the length of the fenced yard.
                                                   the width of the fenced yard

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations. One length and two widths equal 125.

                                       The length will be 5 feet more than
                                       four times the width.

The system is shown.

Step 5. Solve The system of equations
by substitution.

Substitute L = 4W + 5 into the first
equation, then solve for W.

Substitute 20 for W in the second      The length is 85 feet and the width is 20 feet.
equation, then solve for L.

Step 6. Check the answer in the
problem.

Step 7. Answer the equation.

TRY IT 4.39  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Mario wants to put a fence around the pool in his backyard. Since one side is adjacent to the
             house, he will only need to fence three sides. There are two long sides and the one shorter side
             is parallel to the house. He needs 155 feet of fencing to enclose the pool. The length of the long
             side is 10 feet less than twice the width. Find the length and width of the pool area to be
             enclosed.

TRY IT 4.40  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:
             Alexis wants to build a rectangular dog run in her yard adjacent to her neighbor's fence. She will

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 387

              use 136 feet of fencing to completely enclose the rectangular dog run. The length of the dog
              run along the neighbor's fence will be 16 feet less than twice the width. Find the length and
              width of the dog run.

Solve uniform motion applications

We used a table to organize the information in uniform motion problems when we introduced them earlier. We'll

continue using the table here. The basic equation was  where D is the distance traveled, r is the rate, and t is the

time.

Our first example of a uniform motion application will be for a situation similar to some we have already seen, but now
we can use two variables and two equations.

EXAMPLE 4.21

Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

Joni left St. Louis on the interstate, driving west towards Denver at a speed of 65 miles per hour. Half an hour later, Kelly
left St. Louis on the same route as Joni, driving 78 miles per hour. How long will it take Kelly to catch up to Joni?

     Solution
A diagram is useful in helping us visualize the situation.

Identify and name what we are looking for. A chart will help us organize the data. We know the rates of both Joni and
Kelly, and so we enter them in the chart. We are looking for the length of time Kelly, k, and Joni, j, will each drive.

Since        we can fill in the Distance column.

Translate into a system of equations.

To make the system of equations, we must recognize that Kelly and Joni will drive the same distance. So,

Also, since Kelly left later, her time will be hour less than Joni's time. So,

Now we have the system.

Solve the system of equations by substitution.

Substitute    into the second equation, then
solve for .
388 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

To find Kelly's time, substitute     into the first
equation, then solve for .

Check the answer in the problem.                     Kelly will catch up to Joni in  hours. By then, Joni will
Joni                                                 have traveled 3 hours.
Kelly
Yes, they will have traveled the same distance when
they meet.

Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.41  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Mitchell left Detroit on the interstate driving south towards Orlando at a speed of 60 miles per
             hour. Clark left Detroit 1 hour later traveling at a speed of 75 miles per hour, following the same
             route as Mitchell. How long will it take Clark to catch Mitchell?

TRY IT 4.42  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             Charlie left his mother's house traveling at an average speed of 36 miles per hour. His sister

             Sally left 15 minutes                   later traveling the same route at an average speed of 42 miles per

             hour. How long before Sally catches up to Charlie?

Many real-world applications of uniform motion arise because of the effects of currents--of water or air--on the actual
speed of a vehicle. Cross-country airplane flights in the United States generally take longer going west than going east
because of the prevailing wind currents.

Let's take a look at a boat travelling on a river. Depending on which way the boat is going, the current of the water is
either slowing it down or speeding it up.

The images below show how a river current affects the speed at which a boat is actually travelling. We'll call the speed of
the boat in still water b and the speed of the river current c.

The boat is going downstream, in the same direction as the river current. The current helps push the boat, so the boat's
actual speed is faster than its speed in still water. The actual speed at which the boat is moving is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 389

Now, the boat is going upstream, opposite to the river current. The current is going against the boat, so the boat's actual
speed is slower than its speed in still water. The actual speed of the boat is

We'll put some numbers to this situation in the next example.

EXAMPLE 4.22

Translate to a system of equations and then solve.

A river cruise ship sailed 60 miles downstream for 4 hours and then took 5 hours sailing upstream to return to the dock.
Find the speed of the ship in still water and the speed of the river current.

Solution

Read the problem.                  This is a uniform motion problem and a
                                   picture will help us visualize the situation.

Identify what we are looking for.  We are looking for the speed of the ship
                                   in still water and the speed of the current.
390 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Name what we are looking for. Let               the rate of the ship in still water.
                                                the rate of the current
A chart will help us organize the information.
The ship goes downstream and then upstream.
Going downstream, the current helps the
ship and so the ship's actual rate is s + c.
Going upstream, the current slows the ship
and so the actual rate is s - c.

Downstream it takes 4 hours.
Upstream it takes 5 hours.
Each way the distance is 60 miles.

Translate into a system of equations.
Since rate times time is distance, we can
write the system of equations.

Solve the system of equations.
Distribute to put both equations in standard
form, then solve by elimination.

Multiply the top equation by 5 and the
bottom equation by 4.
Add the equations, then solve for s.

Substitute s = 13.5 into of the original  The rate of the ship is 13.5 mph and
equations.                                the rate of the current is 1.5 mph.

Check the answer in the problem.
The downstream rate would be

                          mph.
In 4 hours the ship would travel

                      miles.
The upstream rate would be

                          mph.
In 5 hours the ship would travel

                      miles.

Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.43  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             A Mississippi river boat cruise sailed 120 miles upstream for 12 hours and then took 10 hours to
             return to the dock. Find the speed of the river boat in still water and the speed of the river
             current.

TRY IT 4.44 Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 391

                   Jason paddled his canoe 24 miles upstream for 4 hours. It took him 3 hours to paddle back. Find
                   the speed of the canoe in still water and the speed of the river current.

Wind currents affect airplane speeds in the same way as water currents affect boat speeds. We'll see this in the next
example. A wind current in the same direction as the plane is flying is called a tailwind. A wind current blowing against
the direction of the plane is called a headwind.

EXAMPLE 4.23

Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

A private jet can fly 1,095 miles in three hours with a tailwind but only 987 miles in three hours into a headwind. Find the
speed of the jet in still air and the speed of the wind.

Solution

Read the problem.                               This is a uniform motion problem and a
                                                picture will help us visualize.

Identify what we are looking for.               We are looking for the speed of the jet
                                                in still air and the speed of the wind.

Name what we are looking for.                   Let the speed of the jet in still air.
                                                           the speed of the wind.

A chart will help us organize the information.
The jet makes two trips--one in a tailwind
and one in a headwind.
In a tailwind, the wind helps the jet and so
the rate is j + w.
In a headwind, the wind slows the jet and
so the rate is j  w.

Each trip takes 3 hours.
In a tailwind the jet flies 1,095 miles.
In a headwind the jet flies 987 miles.

Translate into a system of equations.
Since rate times time is distance, we get the
system of equations.

Solve the system of equations.
Distribute, then solve by elimination.
Add, and solve for j.
392 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Substitute j = 347 into one of the original  The rate of the jet is 347 mph and the
equations, then solve for w.                 rate of the wind is 18 mph.

Check the answer in the problem.
With the tailwind, the actual rate of the
jet would be

                          mph.
In 3 hours the jet would travel

                            miles
Going into the headwind, the jet's actual
rate would be

                          mph.
In 3 hours the jet would travel

                         miles.

Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.45  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             A small jet can fly 1,325 miles in 5 hours with a tailwind but only 1,035 miles in 5 hours into a
             headwind. Find the speed of the jet in still air and the speed of the wind.

TRY IT 4.46  Translate to a system of equations and then solve:

             A commercial jet can fly 1,728 miles in 4 hours with a tailwind but only 1,536 miles in 4 hours
             into a headwind. Find the speed of the jet in still air and the speed of the wind.

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with systems of equations.
Systems of Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37sysequations)

        SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Direct Translation Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

72. The sum of two number is         73. The sum of two number is          74. The sum of two number is
      15. One number is 3 less             30. One number is 4 less              -16. One number is 20 less
      than the other. Find the             than the other. Find the              than the other. Find the
      numbers.                             numbers.                              numbers.

75. The sum of two number is         76. The sum of two numbers is         77. The sum of two numbers is
              One number is 12             65. Their difference is 25.           37. Their difference is 9.
                                           Find the numbers.                     Find the numbers.
      less than the other. Find
      the numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 393

78. The sum of two numbers is         79. The sum of two numbers is        80. Maxim has been offered
              Their difference is                   Their difference is          positions by two car
              Find the numbers.                     Find the numbers.            companies. The first
                                                                                 company pays a salary of
81. Jackie has been offered           82. Amara currently sells                  $10,000 plus a commission
      positions by two cable                televisions for company A            of $1000 for each car sold.
      companies. The first                  at a salary of $17,000 plus          The second pays a salary of
      company pays a salary of              a $100 commission for                $20,000 plus a commission
      $14,000 plus a commission             each television she sells.           of $500 for each car sold.
      of $100 for each cable                Company B offers her a               How many cars would
      package sold. The second              position with a salary of            need to be sold to make
      pays a salary of $20,000              $29,000 plus a $20                   the total pay the same?
      plus a commission of $25              commission for each
      for each cable package                television she sells. How      83. Mitchell currently sells
      sold. How many cable                  many televisions would               stoves for company A at a
      packages would need to be             Amara need to sell for the           salary of $12,000 plus a
      sold to make the total pay            options to be equal?                 $150 commission for each
      the same?                                                                  stove he sells. Company B
                                      85. June needs 48 gallons of               offers him a position with a
84. Two containers of gasoline              punch for a party and has            salary of $24,000 plus a
      hold a total of fifty gallons.        two different coolers to             $50 commission for each
      The big container can hold            carry it in. The bigger              stove he sells. How many
      ten gallons less than twice           cooler is five times as large        stoves would Mitchell need
      the small container. How              as the smaller cooler. How           to sell for the options to be
      many gallons does each                many gallons can each                equal?
      container hold?                       cooler hold?
                                                                           86. Shelly spent 10 minutes
87. Drew burned 1800 calories         88. Troy and Lisa were                     jogging and 20 minutes
      Friday playing one hour of            shopping for school                  cycling and burned 300
      basketball and canoeing               supplies. Each purchased             calories. The next day,
      for two hours. Saturday he            different quantities of the          Shelly swapped times,
      spent two hours playing               same notebook and thumb              doing 20 minutes of
      basketball and three hours            drive. Troy bought four              jogging and 10 minutes of
      canoeing and burned 3200              notebooks and five thumb             cycling and burned the
      calories. How many                    drives for $116. Lisa                same number of calories.
      calories did he burn per              bought two notebooks and             How many calories were
      hour when playing                     three thumb dives for $68.           burned for each minute of
      basketball? How many                  Find the cost of each                jogging and how many for
      calories did he burn per              notebook and each thumb              each minute of cycling?
      hour when canoeing?                   drive.
                                                                           89. Nancy bought seven
                                                                                 pounds of oranges and
                                                                                 three pounds of bananas
                                                                                 for $17. Her husband later
                                                                                 bought three pounds of
                                                                                 oranges and six pounds of
                                                                                 bananas for $12. What was
                                                                                 the cost per pound of the
                                                                                 oranges and the bananas?
394 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

90. Andrea is buying some            91. Peter is buying office            92. The total amount of
      new shirts and sweaters.             supplies. He is able to buy           sodium in 2 hot dogs and 3
      She is able to buy 3 shirts          3 packages of paper and 4             cups of cottage cheese is
      and 2 sweaters for $114 or           staplers for $40 or he is             4720 mg. The total amount
      she is able to buy 2 shirts          able to buy 5 packages of             of sodium in 5 hot dogs
      and 4 sweaters for $164.             paper and 6 staplers for              and 2 cups of cottage
      How much does a shirt                $62. How much does a                  cheese is 6300 mg. How
      cost? How much does a                package of paper cost?                much sodium is in a hot
      sweater cost?                        How much does a stapler               dog? How much sodium is
                                           cost?                                 in a cup of cottage cheese?
93. The total number of
      calories in 2 hot dogs and 3   94. Molly is making strawberry        95. Owen is making lemonade
      cups of cottage cheese is            infused water. For each               from concentrate. The
      960 calories. The total              ounce of strawberry juice,            number of quarts of water
      number of calories in 5 hot          she uses three times as               he needs is 4 times the
      dogs and 2 cups of cottage           many ounces of water as               number of quarts of
      cheese is 1190 calories.             juice. How many ounces of             concentrate. How many
      How many calories are in a           strawberry juice and how              quarts of water and how
      hot dog? How many                    many ounces of water                  many quarts of
      calories are in a cup of             does she need to make 64              concentrate does Owen
      cottage cheese?                      ounces of strawberry                  need to make 100 quarts
                                           infused water?                        of lemonade?

Solve Geometry Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

96. The difference of two            97. The difference of two             98. Two angles are
      complementary angles is              complementary angles is               complementary. The
      55 degrees. Find the                 17 degrees. Find the                  measure of the larger
      measures of the angles.              measures of the angles.               angle is twelve less than
                                                                                 twice the measure of the
                                                                                 smaller angle. Find the
                                                                                 measures of both angles.

99. Two angles are                   100. The difference of two            101. The difference of two
      complementary. The                     supplementary angles is 8             supplementary angles is
      measure of the larger                  degrees. Find the                     88 degrees. Find the
      angle is ten more than four            measures of the angles.               measures of the angles.
      times the measure of the
      smaller angle. Find the
      measures of both angles.

102. Two angles are                  103. Two angles are                   104. The measure of one of
        supplementary. The                   supplementary. The                    the small angles of a right
        measure of the larger                measure of the larger                 triangle is 14 more than 3
        angle is four more than              angle is five less than four          times the measure of the
        three times the measure              times the measure of the              other small angle. Find
        of the smaller angle. Find           smaller angle. Find the               the measure of both
        the measures of both                 measures of both angles.              angles.
        angles.

105. The measure of one of           106. The measure of one of            107. The measure of one of
        the small angles of a right          the small angles of a right           the small angles of a right
        triangle is 26 more than 3           triangle is 15 less than              triangle is 45 less than
        times the measure of the             twice the measure of the              twice the measure of the
        other small angle. Find              other small angle. Find               other small angle. Find
        the measure of both                  the measure of both                   the measure of both
        angles.                              angles.                               angles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.2 · Solve Applications with Systems of Equations 395

108. Wayne is hanging a string       109. Darrin is hanging 200 feet       110. A frame around a family
        of lights 45 feet long               of Christmas garland on               portrait has a perimeter
        around the three sides of            the three sides of fencing            of 90 inches. The length is
        his patio, which is                  that enclose his front                fifteen less than twice the
        adjacent to his house. The           yard. The length is five              width. Find the length and
        length of his patio, the             feet less than three times            width of the frame.
        side along the house, is             the width. Find the length
        five feet longer than twice          and width of the fencing.
        its width. Find the length
        and width of the patio.

111. The perimeter of a
        toddler play area is 100
        feet. The length is ten
        more than three times the
        width. Find the length and
        width of the play area.

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

112. Sarah left Minneapolis          113. College roommates John           114. At the end of spring
        heading east on the                  and David were driving                break, Lucy left the beach
        interstate at a speed of 60          home to the same town                 and drove back towards
        mph. Her sister followed             for the holidays. John                home, driving at a rate of
        her on the same route,               drove 55 mph, and David,              40 mph. Lucy's friend left
        leaving two hours later              who left an hour later,               the beach for home 30
        and driving at a rate of 70          drove 60 mph. How long                minutes (half an hour)
        mph. How long will it take           will it take for David to             later, and drove 50 mph.
        for Sarah's sister to catch          catch up to John?                     How long did it take
        up to Sarah?                                                               Lucy's friend to catch up
                                                                                   to Lucy?

115. Felecia left her home to        116. The Jones family took a          117. A motor boat travels 60
        visit her daughter driving           12-mile canoe ride down               miles down a river in
        45 mph. Her husband                  the Indian River in two               three hours but takes five
        waited for the dog sitter            hours. After lunch, the               hours to return upstream.
        to arrive and left home              return trip back up the               Find the rate of the boat
        twenty minutes (1/3 hour)            river took three hours.               in still water and the rate
        later. He drove 55 mph to            Find the rate of the canoe            of the current.
        catch up to Felecia. How             in still water and the rate
        long before he reaches               of the current.
        her?

118. A motor boat traveled 18        119. A river cruise boat sailed       120. A small jet can fly 1072
        miles down a river in two            80 miles down the                     miles in 4 hours with a
        hours but going back                 Mississippi River for four            tailwind but only 848
        upstream, it took                    hours. It took five hours             miles in 4 hours into a
        hours due to the current.            to return. Find the rate of           headwind. Find the speed
        Find the rate of the motor           the cruise boat in still              of the jet in still air and
        boat in still water and the          water and the rate of the             the speed of the wind.
        rate of the current.                 current.
396 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

121. A small jet can fly 1435        122. A commercial jet can fly        123. A commercial jet can fly
        miles in 5 hours with a              868 miles in 2 hours with            1,320 miles in 3 hours
        tailwind but only 1,215              a tailwind but only 792              with a tailwind but only
        miles in 5 hours into a              miles in 2 hours into a              1170 miles in 3 hours into
        headwind. Find the speed             headwind. Find the speed             a headwind. Find the
        of the jet in still air and          of the jet in still air and          speed of the jet in still air
        the speed of the wind.               the speed of the wind.               and the speed of the
                                                                                  wind.

Writing Exercises

124. Write an application problem similar to Example   125. Write a uniform motion problem similar to
        4.14. Then translate to a system of equations          Example 4.15 that relates to where you live with
        and solve it.                                          your friends or family members. Then translate
                                                               to a system of equations and solve it.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

4.3 Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve mixture applications
           Solve interest applications
           Solve applications of cost and revenue functions

       BE PREPARED 4.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Multiply:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 1.36.

BE PREPARED 4.8                      Write 8.2% as a decimal.
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 1.40.

BE PREPARED 4.9                      Earl's dinner bill came to $32.50 and he wanted to leave an 18% tip. How much should the
                                     tip be?
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 2.20.

Solve Mixture Applications

Mixture application involve combining two or more quantities. When we solved mixture applications with coins and
tickets earlier, we started by creating a table so we could organize the information. For a coin example with nickels and
dimes, the table looked like this:

Using one variable meant that we had to relate the number of nickels and the number of dimes. We had to decide if we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 397

were going to let n be the number of nickels and then write the number of dimes in terms of n, or if we would let d be
the number of dimes and write the number of nickels in terms of d.

Now that we know how to solve systems of equations with two variables, we'll just let n be the number of nickels and d
be the number of dimes. We'll write one equation based on the total value column, like we did before, and the other
equation will come from the number column.

For the first example, we'll do a ticket problem where the ticket prices are in whole dollars, so we won't need to use
decimals just yet.

EXAMPLE 4.24

Translate to a system of equations and solve:

A science center sold 1,363 tickets on a busy weekend. The receipts totaled $12,146. How many $12 adult tickets and
how many $7 child tickets were sold?

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.                               We will create a table to organize the information.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.               We are looking for the number of adult tickets
                                                        and the number of child tickets sold.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                   Let the number of adult tickets.
                                                                  the number of child tickets

A table will help us organize the data.                 Write in a and c for the number of tickets.
We have two types of tickets, adult and child.

Write the total number of tickets sold at the bottom    Altogether 1,363 were sold.
of the Number column.

Write the value of each type of ticket in the           The value of each adult ticket is $12.
Value column.                                           The value of each child tickets is $7.

The number times the value gives the total value,       Fill in the Total Value column.
so the total value of adult tickets is
and the total value of child tickets is

Altogether the total value of the tickets was $12,146.

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.

The Number column and the Total value column
give us the system of equations.

We will use the elimination method to solve
this system. Multiply the first equation by
398 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Simplify and add, then solve for a.

Substitute    into the first equation, then
solve for c.

Step 6. Check the answer in the
problem.
521 adult at $12 per ticket makes $ 6,252

   842 child at $7 per ticket makes $5,894
                  The total receipts are $12,146

Step 7. Answer the question.                      The science center sold 521 adult tickets and
                                                  842 child tickets.

TRY IT 4.47   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              The ticket office at the zoo sold 553 tickets one day. The receipts totaled $3,936. How many $9
              adult tickets and how many $6 child tickets were sold?

TRY IT 4.48   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              The box office at a movie theater sold 147 tickets for the evening show, and receipts totaled
              $1,302. How many $11 adult and how many $8 child tickets were sold?

In the next example, we'll solve a coin problem. Now that we know how to work with systems of two variables, naming
the variables in the `number' column will be easy.

  EXAMPLE 4.25

Translate to a system of equations and solve:
Juan has a pocketful of nickels and dimes. The total value of the coins is $8.10. The number of dimes is 9 less than twice
the number of nickels. How many nickels and how many dimes does Juan have?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  We will create a table to organize the information.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.         We are looking for the number of
                                                  nickels and the number of dimes.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.             Let the number of nickels.
                                                              the number of dimes

A table will help us organize the data.           Write n and d for the number of
We have two types of coins, nickels and dimes.    each type of coin.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 399

Fill in the Value column with the value of each         The value of each nickel is $0.05.
type of coin.                                           The value of each dime is $0.10.

The number times the value gives the total
value, so, the total value of the nickels is

                       and the total value of dimes is

Altogether the total value of the coins is $8.10.

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.

The Total Value column gives one equation.

We also know the number of dimes is 9 less than
twice the number of nickels.

Translate to get the second equation.

Now we have the system to solve.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations
We will use the substitution method.

Substitute   into the first equation.

Simplify and solve for n.

To find the number of dimes, substitute                 Juan has 36 nickels and 63 dimes.
          into the second equation.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem
   63 dimes at
   36 nickels at
                     Total

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 4.49  Translate to a system of equations and solve:

             Matilda has a handful of quarters and dimes, with a total value of $8.55. The number of
             quarters is 3 more than twice the number of dimes. How many dimes and how many quarters
             does she have?

TRY IT 4.50  Translate to a system of equations and solve:

             Priam has a collection of nickels and quarters, with a total value of $7.30. The number of nickels
             is six less than three times the number of quarters. How many nickels and how many quarters
400 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

                   does he have?

Some mixture applications involve combining foods or drinks. Example situations might include combining raisins and
nuts to make a trail mix or using two types of coffee beans to make a blend.

  EXAMPLE 4.26

Translate to a system of equations and solve:
Carson wants to make 20 pounds of trail mix using nuts and chocolate chips. His budget requires that the trail mix costs
him $7.60. per pound. Nuts cost $9.00 per pound and chocolate chips cost $2.00 per pound. How many pounds of nuts
and how many pounds of chocolate chips should he use?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  We will create a table to organize the information.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                  We are looking for the number of pounds of
                                                           nuts and the number of pounds of chocolate
                                                           chips.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                      Let the number of pound of nuts.
                                                                      the number of pounds of chips

Carson will mix nuts and chocolate chips to get
trail mix.
Write in n and c for the number of pounds of
nuts and chocolate chips.

There will be 20 pounds of trail mix.
Put the price per pound of each item in
the Value column.
Fill in the last column using

Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.
We get the equations from the Number
and Total Value columns.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations
We will use elimination to solve the system.
Multiply the first equation by to eliminate c.

Simplify and add.
Solve for n.

To find the number of pounds of chocolate

chips, substitute                into the first equation,

then solve for c.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 401

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.

Step 7. Answer the question.               Carson should mix 16 pounds of nuts with 4
                                           pounds of chocolate chips to create the trail
                                           mix.

TRY IT 4.51   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              Greta wants to make 5 pounds of a nut mix using peanuts and cashews. Her budget requires
              the mixture to cost her $6 per pound. Peanuts are $4 per pound and cashews are $9 per pound.
              How many pounds of peanuts and how many pounds of cashews should she use?

TRY IT 4.52   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              Sammy has most of the ingredients he needs to make a large batch of chili. The only items he
              lacks are beans and ground beef. He needs a total of 20 pounds combined of beans and ground
              beef and has a budget of $3 per pound. The price of beans is $1 per pound and the price of
              ground beef is $5 per pound. How many pounds of beans and how many pounds of ground
              beef should he purchase?

Another application of mixture problems relates to concentrated cleaning supplies, other chemicals, and mixed drinks.
The concentration is given as a percent. For example, a 20% concentrated household cleanser means that 20% of the
total amount is cleanser, and the rest is water. To make 35 ounces of a 20% concentration, you mix 7 ounces (20% of 35)
of the cleanser with 28 ounces of water.

For these kinds of mixture problems, we'll use "percent" instead of "value" for one of the columns in our table.

EXAMPLE 4.27

Translate to a system of equations and solve:

Sasheena is lab assistant at her community college. She needs to make 200 milliliters of a 40% solution of sulfuric acid
for a lab experiment. The lab has only 25% and 50% solutions in the storeroom. How much should she mix of the 25%
and the 50% solutions to make the 40% solution?

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.                  Sasheena must mix some of the 25% solution and
A figure may help us visualize the         some of the 50% solution together to get 200 ml of
situation, then we will create a table to  the 40% solution.
organize the information.
402 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.            We are looking for how much of each solution she
                                                     needs.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                Let number of ml of 25% solution.
                                                                number of ml of 50% solution

A table will help us organize the data. She will
mix x ml of 25% with y ml of 50% to get 200 ml
of 40% solution. We write the percents as decimals
in the chart.
We multiply the number of units times the
concentration to get the total amount of
sulfuric acid in each solution.

Step 4. Translate into a system of
equations.
We get the equations from the Number
column and the Amount column.
Now we have the system.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations

We will solve the system by elimination.

Multiply the first equation by       to

eliminate y.

Simplify and add to solve for x.

To solve for y, substitute           into the first
equation.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.

Step 7. Answer the question.                         Sasheena should mix 80 ml of the 25% solution with
                                                     120 ml of the 50% solution to get the 200 ml of the
                                                     40% solution.

TRY IT 4.53   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              LeBron needs 150 milliliters of a 30% solution of sulfuric acid for a lab experiment but only has
              access to a 25% and a 50% solution. How much of the 25% and how much of the 50% solution
              should he mix to make the 30% solution?

TRY IT 4.54   Translate to a system of equations and solve:

              Anatole needs to make 250 milliliters of a 25% solution of hydrochloric acid for a lab
              experiment. The lab only has a 10% solution and a 40% solution in the storeroom. How much of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 403

              the 10% and how much of the 40% solutions should he mix to make the 25% solution?

Solve Interest Applications

The formula to model simple interest applications is  Interest, I, is the product of the principal, P, the rate, r, and

the time, t. In our work here, we will calculate the interest earned in one year, so t will be 1.

We modify the column titles in the mixture table to show the formula for interest, as you'll see in the next example.

EXAMPLE 4.28

Translate to a system of equations and solve:

Adnan has $40,000 to invest and hopes to earn         interest per year. He will put some of the money into a stock fund

that earns 8% per year and the rest into bonds that earns 3% per year. How much money should he put into each fund?

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.                      A chart will help us organize the information.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for. We are looking for the amount to invest in each fund.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.          Let the amount invested in stocks.
                                                          the amount invested in stocks

Write the interest rate as a decimal for
each fund.
Multiply: Principal · Rate · Time

Step 4. Translate into a system of
equations.
We get our system of equations from
the Principal column and the
Interest column.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations
by elimination.
Multiply the top equation by -0.03.

Simplify and add to solve for s.

To find b, substitute s = 32,800 into          We leave the check to you.
the first equation.
                                               Adnan should invest $32,800 in stock and
Step 6. Check the answer in the                $7,200 in bonds.
problem.

Step 7. Answer the question.

Did you notice that the Principal column represents the total amount of money invested while the Interest column
404 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

represents only the interest earned? Likewise, the first equation in our system,                represents the total
amount of money invested and the second equation,                                   represents the interest earned.

TRY IT 4.55      Translate to a system of equations and solve:

                 Leon had $50,000 to invest and hopes to earn         interest per year. He will put some of the

                 money into a stock fund that earns 7% per year and the rest in to a savings account that earns

                 2% per year. How much money should he put into each fund?

TRY IT 4.56      Translate to a system of equations and solve:

                 Julius invested $7000 into two stock investments. One stock paid 11% interest and the other

                 stock paid 13% interest. He earned  interest on the total investment. How much money

                 did he put in each stock?

The next example requires that we find the principal given the amount of interest earned.

EXAMPLE 4.29

Translate to a system of equations and solve:

Rosie owes $21,540 on her two student loans. The interest rate on her bank loan is         and the interest rate on the

federal loan is  The total amount of interest she paid last year was                What was the principal for each loan?

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.                      A chart will help us organize the information.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      We are looking for the principal of each loan.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.          Let the principal for the bank loan.
                                                         the principal on the federal loan

The total loans are $21,540.

Record the interest rates as decimals
in the chart.
Multiply using the formula I = Prt to
get the Interest.

Step 4. Translate into a system of
equations.
The system of equations comes from
the Principal column and the Interest
column.

Step 5. Solve the system of equations
We will use substitution to solve.
Solve the first equation for b.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 405

Substitute b = -f + 21.540 into
the second equation.

Simplify and solve for f.

To find b, substitute f = 12,870 into the first equation.

Step 6. Check the answer in the                            We leave the check to you.
problem.
                                                           The principal of the federal loan was $12,870 and
Step 7. Answer the question.                               the principal for the bank loan was $8,670.

TRY IT 4.57  Translate to a system of equations and solve:

             Laura owes $18,000 on her student loans. The interest rate on the bank loan is 2.5% and the
             interest rate on the federal loan is 6.9%. The total amount of interest she paid last year was
             $1,066. What was the principal for each loan?

TRY IT 4.58  Translate to a system of equations and solve:

             Jill's Sandwich Shoppe owes $65,200 on two business loans, one at 4.5% interest and the other
             at 7.2% interest. The total amount of interest owed last year was $3,582. What was the principal
             for each loan?

Solve applications of cost and revenue functions

Suppose a company makes and sells x units of a product. The cost to the company is the total costs to produce x units.
This is the cost to manufacture for each unit times x, the number of units manufactured, plus the fixed costs.
The revenue is the money the company brings in as a result of selling x units. This is the selling price of each unit times
the number of units sold.
When the costs equal the revenue we say the business has reached the break-even point.

  Cost and Revenue Functions

  The cost function is the cost to manufacture each unit times x, the number of units manufactured, plus the fixed
  costs.

The revenue function is the selling price of each unit times x, the number of units sold.

The break-even point is when the revenue equals the costs.
406 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

         EXAMPLE 4.30
       The manufacturer of a weight training bench spends $105 to build each bench and sells them for $245. The
       manufacturer also has fixed costs each month of $7,000.

     Find the cost function C when x benches are manufactured.
     Find the revenue function R when x benches are sold.
     Show the break-even point by graphing both the Revenue and Cost functions on the same grid.
     Find the break-even point. Interpret what the break-even point means.

            Solution

     The manufacturer has $7,000 of fixed costs no matter how many weight training benches it produces. In addition to

       the fixed costs, the manufacturer also spends $105 to produce each bench. Suppose x benches are sold.
          Write the general Cost function formula.
          Substitute in the cost values.

     The manufacturer sells each weight training bench for $245. We get the total revenue by multiplying the revenue

       per unit times the number of units sold.
          Write the general Revenue function.
          Substitute in the revenue per unit.

     Essentially we have a system of linear equations. We will show the graph of the system as this helps make the idea

       of a break-even point more visual.

     To find the actual value, we remember the break-even point occurs when costs equal revenue.

          Write the break-even formula.
          Solve.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 407

When 50 benches are sold, the costs equal the revenue.

When 50 benches are sold, the revenue and costs are both $12,250. Notice this corresponds to the ordered pair

TRY IT 4.59  The manufacturer of a weight training bench spends $15 to build each bench and sells them for
             $32. The manufacturer also has fixed costs each month of $25,500.

              Find the cost function C when x benches are manufactured.
              Find the revenue function R when x benches are sold.
              Show the break-even point by graphing both the Revenue and Cost functions on the same

             grid.

              Find the break-even point. Interpret what the break-even point means.

TRY IT 4.60  The manufacturer of a weight training bench spends $120 to build each bench and sells them
             for $170. The manufacturer also has fixed costs each month of $150,000.

              Find the cost function C when x benches are manufactured.
              Find the revenue function R when x benches are sold.
              Show the break-even point by graphing both the Revenue and Cost functions on the same

             grid.

              Find the break-even point. Interpret what the break-even point means.

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with interest and mixtures.
Interest and Mixtures (https://openstax.org/l/37intmixure)

        SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Mixture Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

126. Tickets to a Broadway         127. Tickets for the Cirque du          128. Tickets for an Amtrak
        show cost $35 for adults           Soleil show are $70 for                 train cost $10 for children
        and $15 for children. The          adults and $50 for                      and $22 for adults. Josie
        total receipts for 1650            children. One evening                   paid $1200 for a total of
        tickets at one                     performance had a total                 72 tickets. How many
        performance were                   of 300 tickets sold and the             children tickets and how
        $47,150. How many adult            receipts totaled $17,200.               many adult tickets did
        and how many child                 How many adult and how                  Josie buy?
        tickets were sold?                 many child tickets were
                                           sold?
408 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

129. Tickets for a Minnesota              130. Tickets for a dance recital       131. Tickets for the community
        Twins baseball game are                   cost $15 for adults and $7             fair cost $12 for adults
        $69 for Main Level seats                  dollars for children. The              and $5 dollars for
        and $39 for Terrace Level                 dance company sold 253                 children. On the first day
        seats. A group of sixteen                 tickets and the total                  of the fair, 312 tickets
        friends went to the game                  receipts were $2771. How               were sold for a total of
        and spent a total of $804                 many adult tickets and                 $2204. How many adult
        for the tickets. How many                 how many child tickets                 tickets and how many
        of Main Level and how                     were sold?                             child tickets were sold?
        many Terrace Level tickets
        did they buy?

132. Brandon has a cup of                 133. Sherri saves nickels and          134. Peter has been saving his

quarters and dimes with a                 dimes in a coin purse for              loose change for several

total value of                   The      her daughter. The total                days. When he counted

number of quarters is                     value of the coins in the              his quarters and nickels,

four less than twice the                  purse is     The                       he found they had a total

number of dimes. How                      number of nickels is two               value           The number

many quarters and how                     less than five times the               of quarters was fifteen

many dimes does                           number of dimes. How                   more than three times the

Brandon have?                             many nickels and how                   number of dimes. How

                                          many dimes are in the                  many quarters and how

                                          coin purse?                            many dimes did Peter

                                                                                 have?

135. Lucinda had a pocketful              136. A cashier has 30 bills, all       137. A cashier has 54 bills, all
                                                  of which are $10 or $20                of which are $10 or $20
of dimes and quarters                             bills. The total value of the          bills. The total value of the
                                                  money is $460. How many                money is $910. How many
with a value of                      The          of each type of bill does              of each type of bill does
                                                  the cashier have?                      the cashier have?
number of dimes is

eighteen more than three

times the number of

quarters. How many

dimes and how many

quarters does Lucinda

have?

138. Marissa wants to blend               139. How many pounds of                140. Hannah has to make
                                                  nuts selling for $6 per
candy selling for                                 pound and raisins selling      twenty-five gallons of
                                                  for $3 per pound should
per pound with candy                              Kurt combine to obtain         punch for a potluck. The
                                                  120 pounds of trail mix
costing         per pound                         that cost him $5 per           punch is made of soda
                                                  pound?
to get a mixture that costs                                                      and fruit drink. The cost

her      per pound to                                                            of the soda is  per

make. She wants to make                                                          gallon and the cost of the

90 pounds of the candy                                                           fruit drink is  per

blend. How many pounds                                                           gallon. Hannah's budget

of each type of candy                                                            requires that the punch

should she use?                                                                  cost       per gallon.

                                                                                 How many gallons of

                                                                                 soda and how many

                                                                                 gallons of fruit drink does

                                                                                 she need?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          4.3 · Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations 409

141. Joseph would like to make       142. Julia and her husband            143. Twelve-year old Melody
        twelve pounds of a coffee            own a coffee shop. They               wants to sell bags of
        blend at a cost of $6 per            experimented with mixing              mixed candy at her
        pound. He blends Ground              a City Roast Columbian                lemonade stand. She will
        Chicory at $5 a pound                coffee that cost $7.80 per            mix M&M's that cost $4.89
        with Jamaican Blue                   pound with French Roast               per bag and Reese's
        Mountain at $9 per                   Columbian coffee that                 Pieces that cost $3.79 per
        pound. How much of each              cost $8.10 per pound to               bag to get a total of
        type of coffee should he             make a twenty-pound                   twenty-five bags of mixed
        use?                                 blend. Their blend should             candy. Melody wants the
                                             cost them $7.92 per                   bags of mixed candy to
144. Jotham needs 70 liters of               pound. How much of each               cost her $4.23 a bag to
        a 50% solution of an                 type of coffee should they            make. How many bags of
        alcohol solution. He has a           buy?                                  M&M's and how many
        30% and an 80% solution                                                    bags of Reese's Pieces
        available. How many liters   145. Joy is preparing 15 liters               should she use?
        of the 30% and how many              of a 25% saline solution.
        liters of the 80% solutions          She only has 40% and          146. A scientist needs 65 liters
        should he mix to make                10% solution in her lab.              of a 15% alcohol solution.
        the 50% solution?                    How many liters of the                She has available a 25%
                                             40% and how many liters               and a 12% solution. How
147. A scientist needs 120                   of the 10% should she                 many liters of the 25%
        milliliters of a 20% acid            mix to make the 25%                   and how many liters of
        solution for an                      solution?                             the 12% solutions should
        experiment. The lab has                                                    she mix to make the 15%
        available a 25% and a 10%    148. A 40% antifreeze solution                solution?
        solution. How many liters            is to be mixed with a 70%
        of the 25% and how many              antifreeze solution to get    149. A 90% antifreeze solution
        liters of the 10% solutions          240 liters of a 50%                   is to be mixed with a 75%
        should the scientist mix to          solution. How many liters             antifreeze solution to get
        make the 20% solution?               of the 40% and how many               360 liters of an 85%
                                             liters of the 70% solutions           solution. How many liters
                                             will be used?                         of the 90% and how many
                                                                                   liters of the 75% solutions
                                                                                   will be used?

Solve Interest Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

150. Hattie had $3000 to invest      151. Carol invested $2560 into        152. Sam invested $48,000,
        and wants to earn                    two accounts. One                     some at 6% interest and
        interest per year. She will          account paid 8% interest              the rest at 10%. How
        put some of the money                and the other paid 6%                 much did he invest at
        into an account that earns           interest. She earned                  each rate if he received
        12% per year and the rest                     interest on the              $4000 in interest in one
        into an account that earns           total investment. How                 year?
        10% per year. How much               much money did she put
        money should she put                 in each account?
        into each account?
410 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

153. Arnold invested $64,000,        154. After four years in           155. Mark wants to invest
                                                                                $10,000 to pay for his
some at  interest and                college, Josie owes $65,                   daughter's wedding next
                                                                                year. He will invest some
the rest at 9%. How much             800 in student loans. The                  of the money in a short
                                                                                term CD that pays 12%
did he invest at each rate           interest rate on the                       interest and the rest in a
                                                                                money market savings
if he received $4500 in              federal loans is          and              account that pays 5%
                                                                                interest. How much
interest in one year?                the rate on the private                    should he invest at each
                                                                                rate if he wants to earn
                                     bank loans is 2%. The                      $1095 in interest in one
                                                                                year?
                                     total interest she owes for

                                     one year was

                                     What is the amount of

                                     each loan?

156. A trust fund worth              157. A business has two loans
        $25,000 is invested in two           totaling $85,000. One
        different portfolios. This           loan has a rate of 6% and
        year, one portfolio is               the other has a rate of
        expected to earn                     4.5% This year, the
        interest and the other is            business expects to pay
        expected to earn 4%.                 $4,650 in interest on the
        Plans are for the total              two loans. How much is
        interest on the fund to be           each loan?
        $1150 in one year. How
        much money should be
        invested at each rate?

Solve Applications of Cost and Revenue Functions          159. The manufacturer of a water bottle spends $5 to
                                                                  build each bottle and sells them for $10. The
158. The manufacturer of an energy drink spends                   manufacturer also has fixed costs each month of
        $1.20 to make each drink and sells them for $2.
        The manufacturer also has fixed costs each            $6500.  Find the cost function C when x
        month of $8,000.                                      bottles are manufactured.  Find the revenue
                                                              function R when x bottles are sold.  Show the
     Find the cost function C when x energy
                                                                  break-even point by graphing both the Revenue
        drinks are manufactured.
                                                              and Cost functions on the same grid.  Find
     Find the revenue function R when x drinks
                                                                  the break-even point. Interpret what the break-
        are sold.                                                 even point means.

     Show the break-even point by graphing both

        the Revenue and Cost functions on the same
        grid.

     Find the break-even point. Interpret what the

        break-even point means.

Writing Exercises

160. Take a handful of two types of coins, and write a    161. In Example 4.28, we used elimination to solve
        problem similar to Example 4.25 relating the              the system of equations
        total number of coins and their total value. Set
        up a system of equations to describe your                 Could you have used substitution or elimination
        situation and then solve it.                              to solve this system? Why?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 411

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

4.4 Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether an ordered triple is a solution of a system of three linear equations with three
           variables
           Solve a system of linear equations with three variables
           Solve applications using systems of linear equations with three variables

BE PREPARED 4.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                  Evaluate                               when  and

                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

BE PREPARED 4.11  Classify the equations as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then
                  state the solution.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.6.

BE PREPARED 4.12  Classify the equations as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradiction and then
                  state the solution.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.

Determine Whether an Ordered Triple is a Solution of a System of Three Linear
Equations with Three Variables

In this section, we will extend our work of solving a system of linear equations. So far we have worked with systems of
equations with two equations and two variables. Now we will work with systems of three equations with three variables.
But first let's review what we already know about solving equations and systems involving up to two variables.

We learned earlier that the graph of a linear equation,        is a line. Each point on the line, an ordered pair

is a solution to the equation. For a system of two equations with two variables, we graph two lines. Then we can

see that all the points that are solutions to each equation form a line. And, by finding what the lines have in common,

we'll find the solution to the system.

Most linear equations in one variable have one solution, but we saw that some equations, called contradictions, have no
solutions and for other equations, called identities, all numbers are solutions

We know when we solve a system of two linear equations represented by a graph of two lines in the same plane, there
are three possible cases, as shown.
412 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Similarly, for a linear equation with three variables  every solution to the equation is an ordered triple,
          , that makes the equation true.

Linear Equation in Three Variables

A linear equation with three variables, where a, b, c, and d are real numbers and a, b, and c are not all 0, is of the form

Every solution to the equation is an ordered triple,   that makes the equation true.

All the points that are solutions to one equation form a plane in three-dimensional space. And, by finding what the
planes have in common, we'll find the solution to the system.

When we solve a system of three linear equations represented by a graph of three planes in space, there are three
possible cases.

Access for free at openstax.org
4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 413
414 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

To solve a system of three linear equations, we want to find the values of the variables that are solutions to all three

equations. In other words, we are looking for the ordered triple   that makes all three equations true. These are

called the solutions of the system of three linear equations with three variables.

Solutions of a System of Linear Equations with Three Variables

Solutions of a system of equations are the values of the variables that make all the equations true. A solution is
represented by an ordered triple

To determine if an ordered triple is a solution to a system of three equations, we substitute the values of the variables
into each equation. If the ordered triple makes all three equations true, it is a solution to the system.

  EXAMPLE 4.31

Determine whether the ordered triple is a solution to the system:

            

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                    4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 415



  TRY IT 4.61 Determine whether the ordered triple is a solution to the system:

                                  

  TRY IT 4.62 Determine whether the ordered triple is a solution to the system:

                                  

Solve a System of Linear Equations with Three Variables

To solve a system of linear equations with three variables, we basically use the same techniques we used with systems
that had two variables. We start with two pairs of equations and in each pair we eliminate the same variable. This will
then give us a system of equations with only two variables and then we know how to solve that system!

Next, we use the values of the two variables we just found to go back to the original equation and find the third variable.
We write our answer as an ordered triple and then check our results.

EXAMPLE 4.32

How to Solve a System of Equations With Three Variables by Elimination

Solve the system by elimination:

  Solution
416 4 · Systems of Linear Equations
        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 417

TRY IT 4.63 Solve the system by elimination:

TRY IT 4.64 Solve the system by elimination:

The steps are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of linear equations with three variables.

Step 1. Write the equations in standard form
              If any coefficients are fractions, clear them.

Step 2.  Eliminate the same variable from two equations.
           Decide which variable you will eliminate.
           Work with a pair of equations to eliminate the chosen variable.
           Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.
           Add the equations resulting from Step 2 to eliminate one variable

Step 3.  Repeat Step 2 using two other equations and eliminate the same variable as in Step 2.
Step 4.  The two new equations form a system of two equations with two variables. Solve this system.
Step 5.  Use the values of the two variables found in Step 4 to find the third variable.
Step 6.  Write the solution as an ordered triple.
Step 7.  Check that the ordered triple is a solution to all three original equations.

  EXAMPLE 4.33
Solve:

     Solution

We can eliminate from equations (1) and (2) by multiplying equation (2) by 2 and then adding the resulting equations.

Notice that equations (3) and (4) both have the variables and . We will solve this new system for and .

To solve for y, we substitute   into equation (3).
418 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

We now have  and                     We need to solve for z. We can substitute  into equation (1) to find z.

We write the solution as an ordered triple.
We check that the solution makes all three equations true.

       TRY IT 4.65 Solve:

       TRY IT 4.66 Solve:
When we solve a system and end up with no variables and a false statement, we know there are no solutions and that
the system is inconsistent. The next example shows a system of equations that is inconsistent.

  EXAMPLE 4.34
Solve the system of equations:

     Solution

Use equation (1) and (2) to eliminate z.

Use (2) and (3) to eliminate again.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 419

Use (4) and (5) to eliminate a variable.

There is no solution.
We are left with a false statement and this tells us the system is inconsistent and has no solution.

       TRY IT 4.67 Solve the system of equations:
       TRY IT 4.68 Solve the system of equations:
When we solve a system and end up with no variables but a true statement, we know there are infinitely many solutions.
The system is consistent with dependent equations. Our solution will show how two of the variables depend on the third.
  EXAMPLE 4.35
Solve the system of equations:
     Solution

Use equation (1) and (3) to eliminate x.

Use equation (1) and (2) to eliminate x again.

Use equation (4) and (5) to eliminate .
420 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

                                     There are infinitely many solutions.
                                     Represent the solution showing how x and y are dependent on z.

Solve equation (4) for y.

Use equation (1) to solve for x.

Substitute

The true statement         tells us that this is a dependent system that has infinitely many solutions. The solutions are of

the form    where                    and z is any real number.

TRY IT 4.69 Solve the system by equations:

       TRY IT 4.70 Solve the system by equations:

Solve Applications using Systems of Linear Equations with Three Variables

Applications that are modeled by a systems of equations can be solved using the same techniques we used to solve the
systems. Many of the application are just extensions to three variables of the types we have solved earlier.

  EXAMPLE 4.36
The community college theater department sold three kinds of tickets to its latest play production. The adult tickets sold
for $15, the student tickets for $10 and the child tickets for $8. The theater department was thrilled to have sold 250
tickets and brought in $2,825 in one night. The number of student tickets sold is twice the number of adult tickets sold.
How many of each type did the department sell?

     Solution

  We will use a chart to organize the
  information.

  Number of students is twice number of
  adults.

  Rewrite the equation in standard form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             4.4 · Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables 421

Use equations (1) and (2) to eliminate z.

Use (3) and (4) to eliminate

Solve for x.                                 adult tickets
Use equation (3) to find y.
Substitute
Use equation (1) to find z.
Substitute in the values

Write the solution.                        The theater department sold 75 adult tickets,
                                           150 student tickets, and 25 child tickets.

TRY IT 4.71          The community college fine arts department sold three kinds of tickets to its latest dance
                     presentation. The adult tickets sold for $20, the student tickets for $12 and the child tickets for
                     $10.The fine arts department was thrilled to have sold 350 tickets and brought in $4,650 in one
                     night. The number of child tickets sold is the same as the number of adult tickets sold. How
                     many of each type did the department sell?

TRY IT 4.72          The community college soccer team sold three kinds of tickets to its latest game. The adult
                     tickets sold for $10, the student tickets for $8 and the child tickets for $5. The soccer team was
                     thrilled to have sold 600 tickets and brought in $4,900 for one game. The number of adult
                     tickets is twice the number of child tickets. How many of each type did the soccer team sell?

MEDIA

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with solving a linear system in three variables with
no or infinite solutions.
422 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

      Solving a Linear System in Three Variables with No or Infinite Solutions (https://openstax.org/l/37linsys3var)
      3 Variable Application (https://openstax.org/l/37variableapp)

        SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether an Ordered Triple is a Solution of a System of Three Linear Equations with Three Variables
In the following exercises, determine whether the ordered triple is a solution to the system.

162.                                                        163.

                                                                          

164.                                                        165.

                                                                          

Solve a System of Linear Equations with Three Variables

In the following exercises, solve the system of equations.

166.                                 167.                           168.

169.                                 170.                           171.

172.                                 173.                           174.

175.                                 176.                           177.

178.                                 179.                           180.

181.                                 182.                           183.

184.                                 185.                           186.

187.                                 188.                           189.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 423

Solve Applications using Systems of Linear Equations with Three Variables

In the following exercises, solve the given problem.

190. The sum of the measures of the angles of a             191. The sum of the measures of the angles of a
        triangle is 180. The sum of the measures of the             triangle is 180. The sum of the measures of the
        second and third angles is twice the measure of             second and third angles is three times the
        the first angle. The third angle is twelve more             measure of the first angle. The third angle is
        than the second. Find the measures of the three             fifteen more than the second. Find the measures
        angles.                                                     of the three angles.

192. After watching a major musical production at the       193. The church youth group is selling snacks to raise
        theater, the patrons can purchase souvenirs. If a           money to attend their convention. Amy sold 2
        family purchases 4 t-shirts, the video, and 1               pounds of candy, 3 boxes of cookies and 1 can of
        stuffed animal, their total is $135.                        popcorn for a total sales of $65. Brian sold 4
        A couple buys 2 t-shirts, the video, and 3 stuffed          pounds of candy, 6 boxes of cookies and 3 cans
        animals for their nieces and spends $115.                   of popcorn for a total sales of $140. Paulina sold
        Another couple buys 2 t-shirts, the video, and 1            8 pounds of candy, 8 boxes of cookies and 5 cans
        stuffed animal and their total is $85. What is the          of popcorn for a total sales of $250. What is the
        cost of each item?                                          cost of each item?

Writing Exercises

194. In your own words explain the steps to solve a         195. How can you tell when a system of three linear
        system of linear equations with three variables             equations with three variables has no solution?
        by elimination.                                             Infinitely many solutions?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

4.5 Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Write the augmented matrix for a system of equations
           Use row operations on a matrix
           Solve systems of equations using matrices

       BE PREPARED 4.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

BE PREPARED 4.14   Solve:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 2.13.
424 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

  BE PREPARED 4.15                   Evaluate when  and

                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

Write the Augmented Matrix for a System of Equations

Solving a system of equations can be a tedious operation where a simple mistake can wreak havoc on finding the
solution. An alternative method which uses the basic procedures of elimination but with notation that is simpler is
available. The method involves using a matrix. A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers arranged in rows and
columns.

Matrix

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers arranged in rows and columns.

A matrix with m rows and n columns has order        The matrix on the left below has 2 rows and 3 columns and so

it has order  We say it is a 2 by 3 matrix.

  Each number in the matrix is called an element or entry in the matrix.

We will use a matrix to represent a system of linear equations. We write each equation in standard form and the
coefficients of the variables and the constant of each equation becomes a row in the matrix. Each column then would be
the coefficients of one of the variables in the system or the constants. A vertical line replaces the equal signs. We call the
resulting matrix the augmented matrix for the system of equations.

Notice the first column is made up of all the coefficients of x, the second column is the all the coefficients of y, and the
third column is all the constants.

  EXAMPLE 4.37

Write each system of linear equations as an augmented matrix:

              

     Solution

 The second equation is not in standard form. We rewrite the second equation in standard form.

We replace the second equation with its standard form. In the augmented matrix, the first equation gives us the first row
and the second equation gives us the second row. The vertical line replaces the equal signs.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 425

 All three equations are in standard form. In the augmented matrix the first equation gives us the first row, the

second equation gives us the second row, and the third equation gives us the third row. The vertical line replaces the
equal signs.

TRY IT 4.73 Write each system of linear equations as an augmented matrix:

                                       

TRY IT 4.74 Write each system of linear equations as an augmented matrix:

                                       

It is important as we solve systems of equations using matrices to be able to go back and forth between the system and
the matrix. The next example asks us to take the information in the matrix and write the system of equations.

  EXAMPLE 4.38

Write the system of equations that corresponds to the augmented matrix:

Solution

We remember that each row corresponds to an equation and that each entry is a coefficient of a variable or the

constant. The vertical line replaces the equal sign. Since this matrix is a  , we know it will translate into a system of

three equations with three variables.

       TRY IT 4.75 Write the system of equations that corresponds to the augmented matrix:

       TRY IT 4.76 Write the system of equations that corresponds to the augmented matrix:

Use Row Operations on a Matrix

Once a system of equations is in its augmented matrix form, we will perform operations on the rows that will lead us to
426 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

       the solution.
       To solve by elimination, it doesn't matter which order we place the equations in the system. Similarly, in the matrix we
       can interchange the rows.
       When we solve by elimination, we often multiply one of the equations by a constant. Since each row represents an
       equation, and we can multiply each side of an equation by a constant, similarly we can multiply each entry in a row by
       any real number except 0.
       In elimination, we often add a multiple of one row to another row. In the matrix we can replace a row with its sum with a
       multiple of another row.
       These actions are called row operations and will help us use the matrix to solve a system of equations.

         Row Operations
         In a matrix, the following operations can be performed on any row and the resulting matrix will be equivalent to the
         original matrix.
          1. Interchange any two rows.
          2. Multiply a row by any real number except 0.
          3. Add a nonzero multiple of one row to another row.

       Performing these operations is easy to do but all the arithmetic can result in a mistake. If we use a system to record the
       row operation in each step, it is much easier to go back and check our work.
       We use capital letters with subscripts to represent each row. We then show the operation to the left of the new matrix. To
       show interchanging a row:

       To multiply row 2 by :

       To multiply row 2 by and add it to row 1:

         EXAMPLE 4.39
       Perform the indicated operations on the augmented matrix:

     Interchange rows 2 and 3.
     Multiply row 2 by 5.
     Multiply row 3 by and add to row 1.

            Solution

     We interchange rows 2 and 3.

     We multiply row 2 by 5.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 427

 We multiply row 3 by and add to row 1.

TRY IT 4.77  Perform the indicated operations sequentially on the augmented matrix:

              Interchange rows 1 and 3.
              Multiply row 3 by 3.
              Multiply row 3 by 2 and add to row 2.

TRY IT 4.78  Perform the indicated operations on the augmented matrix:

              Interchange rows 1 and 2,
              Multiply row 1 by 2,
              Multiply row 2 by 3 and add to row 1.

Now that we have practiced the row operations, we will look at an augmented matrix and figure out what operation we
will use to reach a goal. This is exactly what we did when we did elimination. We decided what number to multiply a row
by in order that a variable would be eliminated when we added the rows together.

Given this system, what would you do to eliminate x?

This next example essentially does the same thing, but to the matrix.
  EXAMPLE 4.40

Perform the needed row operation that will get the first entry in row 2 to be zero in the augmented matrix:

     Solution                                  and then add it to row 2.
To make the 4 a 0, we could multiply row 1 by
428 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

TRY IT 4.79  Perform the needed row operation that will get the first entry in row 2 to be zero in the
             augmented matrix:

TRY IT 4.80  Perform the needed row operation that will get the first entry in row 2 to be zero in the
             augmented matrix:

Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices

To solve a system of equations using matrices, we transform the augmented matrix into a matrix in row-echelon form
using row operations. For a consistent and independent system of equations, its augmented matrix is in row-echelon
form when to the left of the vertical line, each entry on the diagonal is a 1 and all entries below the diagonal are zeros.

  Row-Echelon Form

  For a consistent and independent system of equations, its augmented matrix is in row-echelon form when to the left
  of the vertical line, each entry on the diagonal is a 1 and all entries below the diagonal are zeros.

Once we get the augmented matrix into row-echelon form, we can write the equivalent system of equations and read
the value of at least one variable. We then substitute this value in another equation to continue to solve for the other
variables. This process is illustrated in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 4.41

How to Solve a System of Equations Using a Matrix
Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 429

TRY IT 4.81 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

TRY IT 4.82 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

The steps are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of equations using matrices.

Step 1.  Write the augmented matrix for the system of equations.
Step 2.  Using row operations get the entry in row 1, column 1 to be 1.
Step 3.  Using row operations, get zeros in column 1 below the 1.
Step 4.  Using row operations, get the entry in row 2, column 2 to be 1.
Step 5.  Continue the process until the matrix is in row-echelon form.
Step 6.  Write the corresponding system of equations.
Step 7.  Use substitution to find the remaining variables.
Step 8.  Write the solution as an ordered pair or triple.
Step 9.  Check that the solution makes the original equations true.

Here is a visual to show the order for getting the 1's and 0's in the proper position for row-echelon form.
430 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

       We use the same procedure when the system of equations has three equations.
         EXAMPLE 4.42

       Solve the system of equations using a matrix:
            Solution

          Write the augmented matrix for the equations.
          Interchange row 1 and 3 to get the entry in
          row 1, column 1 to be 1.
          Using row operations, get zeros in column 1 below the 1.

          The entry in row 2, column 2 is now 1.
          Continue the process until the matrix
          is in row-echelon form.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 431

  The matrix is now in row-echelon form.
  Write the corresponding system of equations.
  Use substitution to find the remaining variables.

  Write the solution as an ordered pair or triple.
  Check that the solution makes the original equations true. We leave the check for you.

       TRY IT 4.83 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:
       TRY IT 4.84 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:
So far our work with matrices has only been with systems that are consistent and independent, which means they have
exactly one solution. Let's now look at what happens when we use a matrix for a dependent or inconsistent system.
  EXAMPLE 4.43
Solve the system of equations using a matrix:
432 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

            Solution

         Write the augmented matrix for the equations.
         The entry in row 1, column 1 is 1.
         Using row operations, get zeros in column 1 below the 1.

Continue the process until the matrix is in row-echelon form.

Multiply row 2 by 2 and add it to row 3.

At this point, we have all zeros on the left of row 3.

Write the corresponding system of equations.

Since  we have a false statement. Just as when we solved a system using other methods, this tells us we have an

inconsistent system. There is no solution.

       TRY IT 4.85 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

       TRY IT 4.86 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:
The last system was inconsistent and so had no solutions. The next example is dependent and has infinitely many
solutions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 433

  EXAMPLE 4.44
Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

     Solution

  Write the augmented matrix for the equations.
  The entry in row 1, column 1 is 1.
  Using row operations, get zeros in column 1 below the 1.

Continue the process until the matrix is in row-echelon form.

Multiply row 2 by and add it to row 3.

At this point, we have all zeros in the bottom row.

Write the corresponding system of equations.

Since  we have a true statement. Just as when we solved by substitution, this tells us we have a dependent

system. There are infinitely many solutions.

Solve for y in terms of z in the second equation.

Solve the first equation for x in terms of z.
Substitute
Simplify.
434 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

         Simplify.
         Simplify.
         The system has infinitely many solutions

      TRY IT 4.87 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

      TRY IT 4.88 Solve the system of equations using a matrix:

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with Gaussian Elimination.
      Gaussian Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/37GaussElim)

        SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Write the Augmented Matrix for a System of Equations

In the following exercises, write each system of linear equations as an augmented matrix.

196.                             197.                            198.

                                                                         

                                                                         

199.

    

      

Write the system of equations that corresponds to the augmented matrix.

200.                             201.                            202.

203.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            4.5 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices 435

Use Row Operations on a Matrix
In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations on the augmented matrices.

204.                          205.                                 206.

     Interchange rows 1            Interchange rows 1                   Interchange rows 2 and 3
                                                                        Multiply row 1 by 4
        and 2                         and 2                             Multiply row 2 by and

     Multiply row 2 by 3           Multiply row 1 by 4                     add to row 3.
     Multiply row 2 by             Multiply row 2 by 3

        and add row 1 to it.          and add row 1 to it.

207.                          208. Perform the needed row                   209. Perform the needed row
                                      operation that will get the                   operations that will get the
     Interchange rows 2 and           first entry in row 2 to be                    first entry in both row 2 and
                                      zero in the augmented                         row 3 to be zero in the
        3                             matrix:                                       augmented matrix:

     Multiply row 2 by 5
     Multiply row 3 by

        and add to row 1.

Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices
In the following exercises, solve each system of equations using a matrix.

210.                          211.                                 212.

213.

In the following exercises, solve each system of equations using a matrix.

214.                          215.                                 216.

217.                          218.                                 219.

220.                          221.                                 222.

223.                          224.                                 225.

226.                          227.                                 228.

229.
436 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Writing Exercises

230. Solve the system of equations                  231. Solve the system of equations                           by

by graphing and  by substitution.  Which                    substitution and explain all your steps in words.

method do you prefer? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

4.6 Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Evaluate the determinant of a        matrix

Evaluate the determinant of a        matrix

Use Cramer's Rule to solve systems of equations

Solve applications using determinants

BE PREPARED 4.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                     Simplify:
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 1.20.

BE PREPARED 4.17                     Simplify:
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.

BE PREPARED 4.18                     Simplify:
                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 1.18.

In this section we will learn of another method to solve systems of linear equations called Cramer's rule. Before we can
begin to use the rule, we need to learn some new definitions and notation.

Evaluate the Determinant of a                       Matrix

If a matrix has the same number of rows and columns, we call it a square matrix. Each square matrix has a real number

associated with it called its determinant. To find the determinant of the square matrix  we first write it as

To get the real number value of the determinant we subtract the products of the diagonals, as shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
Determinant                                                                             4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 437
The determinant of any square matrix
                                             where a, b, c, and d are real numbers, is

EXAMPLE 4.45

Evaluate the determinant of                

     Solution



  Write the determinant.
  Subtract the products of the diagonals.
  Simplify.
  Simplify.



Write the determinant.
Subtract the products of the diagonals.
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 4.89 Evaluate the determinant of      

TRY IT 4.90 Evaluate the determinant of      
438 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Evaluate the Determinant of a                       Matrix

To evaluate the determinant of a     matrix, we have to be able to evaluate the minor of an entry in the determinant.
The minor of an entry is the
contains the entry.                  determinant found by eliminating the row and column in the  determinant that

Minor of an entry in                 a Determinant

The minor of an entry in a           determinant is the  determinant found by eliminating the row and column in

the        determinant that contains the entry.

To find the minor of entry           we eliminate the row and column which contain it. So we eliminate the first row and first
column. Then we write the                 determinant that remains.

To find the minor of entry           we eliminate the row and column that contain it. So we eliminate the 2nd row and 2nd
column. Then we write the                 determinant that remains.

  EXAMPLE 4.46                                      find and then evaluate the minor of   

For the determinant

     Solution



Eliminate the row and column that contains

Write the  determinant that remains.
Evaluate.
Simplify.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                            4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 439

Eliminate the row and column that contains

Write the      determinant that remains.
Evaluate.
Simplify.



Eliminate the row and column that contains

Write the      determinant that remains.
Evaluate.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 4.91  For the determinant          find and then evaluate the minor of  

               

  TRY IT 4.92  For the determinant          find and then evaluate the minor of  

               

We are now ready to evaluate a  determinant. To do this we expand by minors, which allows us to evaluate the

  determinant using             determinants--which we already know how to evaluate!

To evaluate a  determinant by expanding by minors along the first row, we use the following pattern:
440 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Remember, to find the minor of an entry we eliminate the row and column that contains the entry.

Expanding by Minors along the First Row to Evaluate a  Determinant

To evaluate a  determinant by expanding by minors along the first row, the following pattern:

  EXAMPLE 4.47                        by expanding by minors along the first row.
Evaluate the determinant

     Solution

Expand by minors along the first row

Evaluate each determinant.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 4.93 Evaluate the determinant                   by expanding by minors along the first row.

TRY IT 4.94 Evaluate the determinant                   by expanding by minors along the first row.

To evaluate a  determinant we can expand by minors using any row or column. Choosing a row or column other

than the first row sometimes makes the work easier.

When we expand by any row or column, we must be careful about the sign of the terms in the expansion. To determine
the sign of the terms, we use the following sign pattern chart.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                  4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 441

  Sign Pattern
  When expanding by minors using a row or column, the sign of the terms in the expansion follow the following
  pattern.

Notice that the sign pattern in the first row matches the signs between the terms in the expansion by the first row.

Since we can expand by any row or column, how do we decide which row or column to use? Usually we try to pick a row
or column that will make our calculation easier. If the determinant contains a 0, using the row or column that contains
the 0 will make the calculations easier.

  EXAMPLE 4.48

Evaluate the determinant      by expanding by minors.

     Solution
To expand by minors, we look for a row or column that will make our calculations easier. Since 0 is in the second row and
second column, expanding by either of those is a good choice. Since the second row has fewer negatives than the
second column, we will expand by the second row.

Expand using the second row.

Be careful of the signs.

Evaluate each determinant.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Add.
442 4 · Systems of Linear Equations                     by expanding by minors.

              TRY IT 4.95 Evaluate the determinant

TRY IT 4.96 Evaluate the determinant                    by expanding by minors.

Use Cramer's Rule to Solve Systems of Equations

Cramer's Rule is a method of solving systems of equations using determinants. It can be derived by solving the general
form of the systems of equations by elimination. Here we will demonstrate the rule for both systems of two equations
with two variables and for systems of three equations with three variables.
Let's start with the systems of two equations with two variables.

  Cramer's Rule for Solving a System of Two Equations

For the system of equations              the solution   can be determined by

Notice that to form the determinant D, we use take the coefficients of the variables.

Notice that to form the determinant and  we substitute the constants for the coefficients of the variable we are
finding.

  EXAMPLE 4.49
How to Solve a System of Equations Using Cramer's Rule
Solve using Cramer's Rule:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 443

    Solution

    TRY IT 4.97 Solve using Cramer's rule:

    TRY IT 4.98 Solve using Cramer's rule:

    ...

         HOW TO

Solve a system of two equations using Cramer's rule.

Step 1.  Evaluate the determinant D, using the coefficients of the variables.
Step 2.  Evaluate the determinant Use the constants in place of the x coefficients.
Step 3.  Evaluate the determinant Use the constants in place of the y coefficients.
Step 4.
         Find x and y.
Step 5.  Write the solution as an ordered pair.
Step 6.  Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

To solve a system of three equations with three variables with Cramer's Rule, we basically do what we did for a system of

two equations. However, we now have to solve for three variables to get the solution. The determinants are also going to

be       which will make our work more interesting!
444 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Cramer's Rule for Solving a System of Three Equations

For the system of equations                         the solution  can be determined by

  EXAMPLE 4.50
Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule:

     Solution
  Evaluate the determinant D.
  Expand by minors using column 1.

  Evaluate the determinants.
  Simplify.
  Simplify.
  Simplify.
  Evaluate the determinant Use the
  constants to replace the coefficients of x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 445

Expand by minors using column 1.
Evaluate the determinants.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Evaluate the determinant Use the
constants to replace the coefficients of y.

Evaluate the determinants.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Evaluate the determinant Use the
constants to replace the coefficients of z.

Evaluate the determinants.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Find x, y, and z.
Substitute in the values.
446 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Simplify.

Write the solution as an ordered triple.

Check that the ordered triple is a solution  We leave the check to you.
to all three original equations.

                                             The solution is

TRY IT 4.99 Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule:

TRY IT 4.100 Solve the system of equations using Cramer's Rule:

Cramer's rule does not work when the value of the D determinant is 0, as this would mean we would be dividing by 0.

But when   the system is either inconsistent or dependent.

When the value of           and      and are all zero, the system is consistent and dependent and there are

infinitely many solutions.

When the value of           and      and are not all zero, the system is inconsistent and there is no solution.

Dependent and Inconsistent Systems of Equations

For any system of equations, where the value of the determinant

In the next example, we will use the values of the determinants to find the solution of the system.
  EXAMPLE 4.51

Solve the system of equations using Cramer's rule :
     Solution

We cannot use Cramer's Rule to solve this system. But by looking at the value of the determinants and  we can
determine whether the system is dependent or inconsistent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 447

Since all the determinants are not zero, the system is inconsistent. There is no solution.

TRY IT 4.101 Solve the system of equations using Cramer's rule:

TRY IT 4.102 Solve the system of equations using Cramer's rule:

Solve Applications using Determinants

An interesting application of determinants allows us to test if points are collinear. Three points  and

are collinear if and only if the determinant below is zero.

Test for Collinear Points

Three points                  and            are collinear if and only if

We will use this property in the next example.

EXAMPLE 4.52

Determine whether the points                    and  are collinear.

Solution

Substitute the values into the determinant.
                       and

Evaluate the determinant by expanding
by minors using column 3.

Evaluate the determinants.
448 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Simplify.
Simplify.

                                     The value of the determinant is 0, so the
                                     points are collinear.

      TRY IT 4.103 Determine whether the points                           and     are collinear.

      TRY IT 4.104 Determine whether the points                              and  are collinear.

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems of linear equations using
      determinants or Cramer's Rule.

      Solving Systems of Linear Equations Using Determinants (https://www.openstax.org/l/37sysdeterm)
      Solving Systems of Linear Equations Using Cramer's Rule (https://www.openstax.org/l/37syscramer)

        SECTION 4.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Evaluate the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix
In the following exercises, evaluate the determinant of each square matrix.

232.                                             233.

234.                                             235.

Evaluate the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
In the following exercises, find and then evaluate the indicated minors.

236.                                             237.

      Find the minor                                   Find the minor   

238.                                             239.

      Find the minor                                   Find the minor   

In the following exercises, evaluate each determinant by expanding by minors along the first row.

240.                                             241.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               4.6 · Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants 449

242.                                                   243.

In the following exercises, evaluate each determinant by expanding by minors.

244.                                                   245.

246.                                                   247.

Use Cramer's Rule to Solve Systems of Equations
In the following exercises, solve each system of equations using Cramer's Rule.

248.                    249.                                 250.

251.                    252.                                 253.

254.                    255.                                 256.

257.                    258.                                 259.

260.                    261.                                 262.

263.                    264.                                 265.

266.                    267.                                 268.

269.                    270.                                 271.

Solve Applications Using Determinants

In the following exercises, determine whether the given points are collinear.

272.  and                                              273.                        and
                                                                                 and
274.               and                                 275.

Writing Exercises

276. Explain the difference between a square matrix    277. Explain what is meant by the minor of an entry in
        and its determinant. Give an example of each.          a square matrix.
450 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

278. Explain how to decide which row or column you  279. Explain the steps for solving a system of
                                                            equations using Cramer's rule.
will use to expand a                 determinant.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

4.7 Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a system of linear inequalities
           Solve a system of linear inequalities by graphing
           Solve applications of systems of inequalities

       BE PREPARED 4.19 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve the inequality
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.52.

BE PREPARED 4.20                     Determine whether the ordered pair   is a solution to the system

                                     If you missed this problem, review Example 3.34.

Determine whether an ordered pair is a solution of a system of linear inequalities

The definition of a system of linear inequalities is very similar to the definition of a system of linear equations.
  System of Linear Inequalities

  Two or more linear inequalities grouped together form a system of linear inequalities.

A system of linear inequalities looks like a system of linear equations, but it has inequalities instead of equations. A
system of two linear inequalities is shown here.

To solve a system of linear inequalities, we will find values of the variables that are solutions to both inequalities. We

solve the system by using the graphs of each inequality and show the solution as a graph. We will find the region on the

plane that contains all ordered pairs  that make both inequalities true.

Solutions of a System of Linear Inequalities

Solutions of a system of linear inequalities are the values of the variables that make all the inequalities true.

The solution of a system of linear inequalities is shown as a shaded region in the x, y coordinate system that includes
all the points whose ordered pairs make the inequalities true.

To determine if an ordered pair is a solution to a system of two inequalities, we substitute the values of the variables into

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 451

each inequality. If the ordered pair makes both inequalities true, it is a solution to the system.
  EXAMPLE 4.53

Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system

  

  Solution

 Is the ordered pair    a solution?

The ordered pair      made both inequalities true. Therefore    is a solution to this system.

 Is the ordered pair    a solution?

The ordered pair  made one inequality true, but the other one false. Therefore         is not a solution to this system.

  TRY IT 4.105        Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system:

                        

  TRY IT 4.106 Determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system:

                        

Solve a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing

The solution to a single linear inequality is the region on one side of the boundary line that contains all the points that
make the inequality true. The solution to a system of two linear inequalities is a region that contains the solutions to
both inequalities. To find this region, we will graph each inequality separately and then locate the region where they are
both true. The solution is always shown as a graph.

EXAMPLE 4.54

How to Solve a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing
Solve the system by graphing:
452 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 453

TRY IT 4.107 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 4.108 Solve the system by graphing:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Solve a system of linear inequalities by graphing.
  Step 1. Graph the first inequality.

                Graph the boundary line.
                Shade in the side of the boundary line where the inequality is true.
  Step 2. On the same grid, graph the second inequality.
                Graph the boundary line.
                Shade in the side of that boundary line where the inequality is true.
  Step 3. The solution is the region where the shading overlaps.
  Step 4. Check by choosing a test point.

  EXAMPLE 4.55

Solve the system by graphing:
454 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

            Solution

         Graph x - y > 3, by graphing x - y = 3
         and testing a point.
         The intercepts are x = 3 and y = -3 and the
         boundary line will be dashed.
         Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality false so shade
         (red) the side that does not contain (0, 0).

Graph            by graphing

using the slope  and y-intercept b = 4.

The boundary line will be dashed

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality true, so
shade (blue) the side that contains (0, 0).

Choose a test point in the solution and verify that it is a
solution to both inequalties.

The point of intersection of the two lines is not included as both boundary lines were dashed. The solution is the area
shaded twice--which appears as the darkest shaded region.

       TRY IT 4.109 Solve the system by graphing:
       TRY IT 4.110 Solve the system by graphing:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 455

  EXAMPLE 4.56
Solve the system by graphing:

     Solution

Graph       by graphing

and testing a point. The intercepts are

x = 5 and y = -2.5 and the

boundary line will be dashed.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality true, so shade
(red) the side that contains (0, 0).

Graph       by graphing        and

recognizing that it is a horizontal line

through     The boundary line will

be dashed.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality
true so shade (blue) the side that contains (0, 0).

The point   is in the solution and we have already found it to be a solution of each inequality. The point of

intersection of the two lines is not included as both boundary lines were dashed.

The solution is the area shaded twice--which appears as the darkest shaded region.
456 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

              TRY IT 4.111 Solve the system by graphing:
              TRY IT 4.112 Solve the system by graphing:
       Systems of linear inequalities where the boundary lines are parallel might have no solution. We'll see this in the next
       example.
         EXAMPLE 4.57
       Solve the system by graphing:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 457

Solution

Graph            by graphing

and testing a point. The intercepts are x = 3

and y = 4 and the boundary line will be solid.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality false, so
shade (red) the side that does not contain (0, 0).

Graph            by graphing

using the slope  and y-intercept

b = 1. The boundary line will be dashed.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality true, so
shade (blue) the side that contains (0, 0).

There is no point in both shaded regions, so the system has no solution.
       TRY IT 4.113 Solve the system by graphing:
       TRY IT 4.114 Solve the system by graphing:

Some systems of linear inequalities where the boundary lines are parallel will have a solution. We'll see this in the next
458 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

       example.
         EXAMPLE 4.58

       Solve the system by graphing:
            Solution

Graph            by graphing

using the slope  and the intercept

b = -4. The boundary line will be dashed.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality true, so
shade (red) the side that contains (0, 0).

Graph            by graphing

and testing a point. The intercepts are

x = -4 and y = 2 and the boundary line will be dashed.

Choose a test point in the solution and verify
that it is a solution to both inequalties.

Test (0, 0) which makes the inequality false, so
shade (blue) the side that does not contain (0, 0).

No point on the boundary lines is included in the solution as both lines are dashed.
The solution is the region that is shaded twice which is also the solution to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 459

TRY IT 4.115 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 4.116 Solve the system by graphing:

Solve Applications of Systems of Inequalities

The first thing we'll need to do to solve applications of systems of inequalities is to translate each condition into an
inequality. Then we graph the system, as we did above, to see the region that contains the solutions. Many situations will
be realistic only if both variables are positive, so we add inequalities to the system as additional requirements.

  EXAMPLE 4.59

Christy sells her photographs at a booth at a street fair. At the start of the day, she wants to have at least 25 photos to
display at her booth. Each small photo she displays costs her $4 and each large photo costs her $10. She doesn't want to
spend more than $200 on photos to display.

 Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
 Graph the system.
 Could she display 10 small and 20 large photos?
 Could she display 20 small and 10 large photos?

     Solution



  Let

To find the system of equations translate the information.
460 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

          We have our system of equations.

          and   (both are greater than or equal to) all solutions will be in the first quadrant. As a result, our graph
Since

shows only quadrant one.

To graph        graph                       as a solid line.

Choose (0, 0) as a test point. Since it does not make the inequality true, shade

(red) the side that does not include the point (0, 0).

To graph                         graph          as a solid line.

Choose (0, 0) as a test point. Since it does make the inequality true, shade

(blue) the side that include the point (0, 0).

The solution of the system is the region of the graph that is shaded the darkest. The boundary line sections that border
the darkly-shaded section are included in the solution as are the points on the x-axis from (25, 0) to (55, 0).

 To determine if 10 small and 20 large photos would work, we look at the graph to see if the point (10, 20) is in the

solution region. We could also test the point to see if it is a solution of both equations.
It is not, Christy would not display 10 small and 20 large photos.

 To determine if 20 small and 10 large photos would work, we look at the graph to see if the point (20, 10) is in the

solution region. We could also test the point to see if it is a solution of both equations.
It is, so Christy could choose to display 20 small and 10 large photos.
Notice that we could also test the possible solutions by substituting the values into each inequality.

  TRY IT 4.117  A trailer can carry a maximum weight of 160 pounds and a maximum volume of 15 cubic feet. A
  TRY IT 4.118  microwave oven weighs 30 pounds and has 2 cubic feet of volume, while a printer weighs 20
                pounds and has 3 cubic feet of space.

                 Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
                 Graph the system.
                 Could 4 microwaves and 2 printers be carried on this trailer?
                 Could 7 microwaves and 3 printers be carried on this trailer?

                Mary needs to purchase supplies of answer sheets and pencils for a standardized test to be
                given to the juniors at her high school. The number of the answer sheets needed is at least 5
                more than the number of pencils. The pencils cost $2 and the answer sheets cost $1. Mary's
                budget for these supplies allows for a maximum cost of $400.

                 Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
                 Graph the system.
                 Could Mary purchase 100 pencils and 100 answer sheets?
                 Could Mary purchase 150 pencils and 150 answer sheets?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 461

When we use variables other than x and y to define an unknown quantity, we must change the names of the axes of the
graph as well.

  EXAMPLE 4.60
Omar needs to eat at least 800 calories before going to his team practice. All he wants is hamburgers and cookies, and
he doesn't want to spend more than $5. At the hamburger restaurant near his college, each hamburger has 240 calories
and costs $1.40. Each cookie has 160 calories and costs $0.50.

 Write a system of inequalities to model this situation.
 Graph the system.
 Could he eat 3 hamburgers and 1 cookie?
 Could he eat 2 hamburgers and 4 cookies?

     Solution



  Let

  To find the system of equations translate the information.

  The calories from hamburgers at 240 calories each, plus the calories from cookies at 160 calories each

  must be more that 800.

We have our system of equations.

       and  (both are greater than or equal to) all solutions will be in the first quadrant. As a result, our
Since
462 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

graph shows only quadrant one.

To graph                             graph        as a solid line.

Choose (0, 0) as a test point. Since it does not make the inequality true, shade (red) the
side that does not include the point (0, 0).

Graph         The boundary line is                We test (0, 0) and it makes the inequality true. We

shade the side of the line that includes (0, 0).

The solution of the system is the region of the graph that is shaded the darkest. The boundary line sections that border
the darkly shaded section are included in the solution as are the points on the x-axis from (5, 0) to (10, 0).

 To determine if 3 hamburgers and 1 cookie would meet Omar's criteria, we see if the point (3, 2) is in the solution

region. It is, so Omar might choose to eat 3 hamburgers and 1 cookie.

 To determine if 2 hamburgers and 4 cookies would meet Omar's criteria, we see if the point (2, 4) is in the solution

region. It is, Omar might choose to eat 2 hamburgers and 4 cookies.

We could also test the possible solutions by substituting the values into each inequality.

TRY IT 4.119  Tenison needs to eat at least an extra 1,000 calories a day to prepare for running a marathon.
              He has only $25 to spend on the extra food he needs and will spend it on $0.75 donuts which
              have 360 calories each and $2 energy drinks which have 110 calories.

               Write a system of inequalities that models this situation.
               Graph the system.
               Can he buy 8 donuts and 4 energy drinks and satisfy his caloric needs?
               Can he buy 1 donut and 3 energy drinks and satisfy his caloric needs?

TRY IT 4.120  Philip's doctor tells him he should add at least 1,000 more calories per day to his usual diet.
              Philip wants to buy protein bars that cost $1.80 each and have 140 calories and juice that costs
              $1.25 per bottle and have 125 calories. He doesn't want to spend more than $12.

               Write a system of inequalities that models this situation.
               Graph the system.
               Can he buy 3 protein bars and 5 bottles of juice?
               Can he buy 5 protein bars and 3 bottles of juice?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems of linear inequalities by
graphing.

Solving Systems of Linear Inequalities by Graphing (https://openstax.org/l/37sysineqgraph)
Systems of Linear Inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/37sysineqgraph2)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 463

        SECTION 4.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether an Ordered Pair is a Solution of a System of Linear Inequalities
In the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the system.

280.      281.                                              282.

                                                                

283.      284.                                              285.

                                                                

Solve a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing

In the following exercises, solve each system by graphing.

286.      287.                                              288.

289.      290.                                              291.

292.      293.                                              294.

295.      296.                                              297.

298.      299.                                              300.

301.      302.                                              303.

304.      305.                                              306.

307.      308.                                              309.

310.      311.                                              312.

313.      314.                                              315.

316.      317.
464 4 · Systems of Linear Equations

Solve Applications of Systems of Inequalities

In the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.

318. Caitlyn sells her drawings at the county fair. She    319. Jake does not want to spend more than $50 on
        wants to sell at least 60 drawings and has                 bags of fertilizer and peat moss for his garden.
        portraits and landscapes. She sells the portraits          Fertilizer costs $2 a bag and peat moss costs $5 a
        for $15 and the landscapes for $10. She needs to           bag. Jake's van can hold at most 20 bags.
        sell at least $800 worth of drawings in order to
        earn a profit.                                          Write a system of inequalities to model this

     Write a system of inequalities to model this                  situation.

        situation.                                              Graph the system.
                                                                Can he buy 15 bags of fertilizer and 4 bags of
     Graph the system.
     Will she make a profit if she sells 20 portraits              peat moss?

        and 35 landscapes?                                      Can he buy 10 bags of fertilizer and 10 bags

     Will she make a profit if she sells 50 portraits              of peat moss?

        and 20 landscapes?

320. Reiko needs to mail her Christmas cards and           321. Juan is studying for his final exams in chemistry
        packages and wants to keep her mailing costs to            and algebra. he knows he only has 24 hours to
        no more than $500. The number of cards is at               study, and it will take him at least three times as
        least 4 more than twice the number of packages.            long to study for algebra than chemistry.
        The cost of mailing a card (with pictures
        enclosed) is $3 and for a package the cost is $7.       Write a system of inequalities to model this

     Write a system of inequalities to model this                  situation.

        situation.                                              Graph the system.
                                                                Can he spend 4 hours on chemistry and 20
     Graph the system.
     Can she mail 60 cards and 26 packages?                        hours on algebra?
     Can she mail 90 cards and 40 packages?
                                                                Can he spend 6 hours on chemistry and 18
322. Jocelyn is pregnant and so she needs to eat at
        least 500 more calories a day than usual. When             hours on algebra?
        buying groceries one day with a budget of $15
        for the extra food, she buys bananas that have     323. Mark is attempting to build muscle mass and so
        90 calories each and chocolate granola bars that           he needs to eat at least an additional 80 grams
        have 150 calories each. The bananas cost $0.35             of protein a day. A bottle of protein water costs
        each and the granola bars cost $2.50 each.                 $3.20 and a protein bar costs $1.75. The protein
                                                                   water supplies 27 grams of protein and the bar
     Write a system of inequalities to model this                  supplies 16 gram. If he has $10 dollars to spend

        situation.                                              Write a system of inequalities to model this

     Graph the system.                                             situation.
     Could she buy 5 bananas and 6 granola
                                                                Graph the system.
        bars?                                                   Could he buy 3 bottles of protein water and 1

     Could she buy 3 bananas and 4 granola                         protein bar?

        bars?                                                   Could he buy no bottles of protein water and

                                                                   5 protein bars?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         4.7 · Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities 465

324. Jocelyn desires to increase both her protein        325. Mark is increasing his exercise routine by
        consumption and caloric intake. She desires to           running and walking at least 4 miles each day.
        have at least 35 more grams of protein each day          His goal is to burn a minimum of 1500 calories
        and no more than an additional 200 calories              from this exercise. Walking burns 270 calories/
        daily. An ounce of cheddar cheese has 7 grams            mile and running burns 650 calories.
        of protein and 110 calories. An ounce of
        parmesan cheese has 11 grams of protein and           Write a system of inequalities to model this
        22 calories.
                                                                 situation.
     Write a system of inequalities to model this
                                                              Graph the system.
        situation.                                            Could he meet his goal by walking 3 miles

     Graph the system.                                           and running 1 mile?
     Could she eat 1 ounce of cheddar cheese
                                                              Could he meet his goal by walking 2 miles
        and 3 ounces of parmesan cheese?
                                                                 and running 2 miles?
     Could she eat 2 ounces of cheddar cheese

        and 1 ounce of parmesan cheese?

Writing Exercises

326. Graph the inequality            How do you          327. Graph the system       What does
        know which side of the line          should be           the solution mean?
        shaded?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?
466 4 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

break-even point The point at which the revenue equals the costs is the break-even point;

coincident lines Coincident lines have the same slope and same y-intercept.

complementary angles Two angles are complementary if the sum of the measures of their angles is 90 degrees.

consistent and inconsistent systems Consistent system of equations is a system of equations with at least one

solution; inconsistent system of equations is a system of equations with no solution.

cost function The cost function is the cost to manufacture each unit times , the number of units manufactured, plus

the fixed costs; C(x) = (cost per unit)x + fixed costs.

determinant Each square matrix has a real number associated with it called its determinant.

matrix A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers arranged in rows and columns.

minor of an entry in a           determinant The minor of an entry in a      determinant is the                    determinant

found by eliminating the row and column in the           determinant that contains the entry.

revenue The revenue is the selling price of each unit times x, the number of units sold; R(x) = (selling price per unit)x.

row-echelon form A matrix is in row-echelon form when to the left of the vertical line, each entry on the diagonal is a 1

and all entries below the diagonal are zeros.

solutions of a system of equations Solutions of a system of equations are the values of the variables that make all the

equations true; solution is represented by an ordered pair

solutions of a system of linear equations with three variables The solutions of a system of equations are the values

of the variables that make all the equations true; a solution is represented by an ordered triple

square matrix A square matrix is a matrix with the same number of rows and columns.

supplementary angles Two angles are supplementary if the sum of the measures of their angles is 180 degrees.

system of linear equations When two or more linear equations are grouped together, they form a system of linear

equations.

system of linear inequalities Two or more linear inequalities grouped together form a system of linear inequalities.

Key Concepts

4.1 Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables

  · How to solve a system of linear equations by graphing.
      Step 1. Graph the first equation.
      Step 2. Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.
      Step 3. Determine whether the lines intersect, are parallel, or are the same line.
      Step 4. Identify the solution to the system.
                  If the lines intersect, identify the point of intersection. This is the solution to the system.
                  If the lines are parallel, the system has no solution.
                  If the lines are the same, the system has an infinite number of solutions.
      Step 5. Check the solution in both equations.

· How to solve a system of equations by substitution.
    Step 1. Solve one of the equations for either variable.
    Step 2. Substitute the expression from Step 1 into the other equation.
    Step 3. Solve the resulting equation.
    Step 4. Substitute the solution in Step 3 into either of the original equations to find the other variable.
    Step 5. Write the solution as an ordered pair.
    Step 6. Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

· How to solve a system of equations by elimination.
    Step 1. Write both equations in standard form. If any coefficients are fractions, clear them.
    Step 2. Make the coefficients of one variable opposites.
               Decide which variable you will eliminate.
               Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.
    Step 3. Add the equations resulting from Step 2 to eliminate one variable.
    Step 4. Solve for the remaining variable.
    Step 5. Substitute the solution from Step 4 into one of the original equations. Then solve for the other variable.
    Step 6. Write the solution as an ordered pair.
    Step 7. Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               4 · Chapter Review 467

4.2 Solve Applications with Systems of Equations

  · How To Solve Applications with Systems of Equations
      Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
      Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose variables to represent those quantities.
      Step 4. Translate into a system of equations.
      Step 5. Solve the system of equations using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

4.3 Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations

  · Cost function: The cost function is the cost to manufacture each unit times x, the number of units manufactured,
      plus the fixed costs.

  · Revenue: The revenue function is the selling price of each unit times x, the number of units sold.

  · Break-even point: The break-even point is when the revenue equals the costs.

4.4 Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables

  · Linear Equation in Three Variables: A linear equation with three variables, where a, b, c, and d are real numbers
      and a, b, and c are not all 0, is of the form

Every solution to the equation is an ordered triple,     that makes the equation true.

· How to solve a system of linear equations with three variables.

Step 1. Write the equations in standard form

If any coefficients are fractions, clear them.

Step 2. Eliminate the same variable from two equations.

Decide which variable you will eliminate.

Work with a pair of equations to eliminate the chosen variable.

Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.

Add the equations resulting from Step 2 to eliminate one variable

Step 3. Repeat Step 2 using two other equations and eliminate the same variable as in Step 2.

Step 4. The two new equations form a system of two equations with two variables. Solve this system.

Step 5. Use the values of the two variables found in Step 4 to find the third variable.

Step 6. Write the solution as an ordered triple.

Step 7. Check that the ordered triple is a solution to all three original equations.

4.5 Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices

  · Matrix: A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers arranged in rows and columns. A matrix with m rows and n

columns has order       The matrix on the left below has 2 rows and 3 columns and so it has order    We say

it is a 2 by 3 matrix.
468 4 · Chapter Review

   Each number in the matrix is called an element or entry in the matrix.
· Row Operations: In a matrix, the following operations can be performed on any row and the resulting matrix will

    be equivalent to the original matrix.
    Interchange any two rows
    Multiply a row by any real number except 0
    Add a nonzero multiple of one row to another row

· Row-Echelon Form: For a consistent and independent system of equations, its augmented matrix is in row-echelon
    form when to the left of the vertical line, each entry on the diagonal is a 1 and all entries below the diagonal are
    zeros.

· How to solve a system of equations using matrices.
    Step 1. Write the augmented matrix for the system of equations.
    Step 2. Using row operations get the entry in row 1, column 1 to be 1.
    Step 3. Using row operations, get zeros in column 1 below the 1.
    Step 4. Using row operations, get the entry in row 2, column 2 to be 1.
    Step 5. Continue the process until the matrix is in row-echelon form.
    Step 6. Write the corresponding system of equations.
    Step 7. Use substitution to find the remaining variables.
    Step 8. Write the solution as an ordered pair or triple.
    Step 9. Check that the solution makes the original equations true.

4.6 Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants

· Determinant: The determinant of any square matrix  where a, b, c, and d are real numbers, is

· Expanding by Minors along the First Row to Evaluate a 3 × 3 Determinant: To evaluate a  determinant by
    expanding by minors along the first row, the following pattern:

· Sign Pattern: When expanding by minors using a row or column, the sign of the terms in the expansion follow the
    following pattern.

· Cramer's Rule: For the system of equations         the solution            can be determined by

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4 · Exercises 469

   Notice that to form the determinant D, we use take the coefficients of the variables.
· How to solve a system of two equations using Cramer's rule.

   Step 1. Evaluate the determinant D, using the coefficients of the variables.
   Step 2. Evaluate the determinant Use the constants in place of the x coefficients.
   Step 3. Evaluate the determinant Use the constants in place of the y coefficients.

      Step 4. Find x and y.

      Step 5.  Write the solution as an ordered pair.
      Step 6.  Check that the ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.
      Step 7.  Dependent and Inconsistent Systems of Equations: For any system of equations, where the value of the
               determinant

      Step 8. Test for Collinear Points: Three points  and                         are collinear if and only if

4.7 Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities

  · Solutions of a System of Linear Inequalities: Solutions of a system of linear inequalities are the values of the
      variables that make all the inequalities true. The solution of a system of linear inequalities is shown as a shaded
      region in the x, y coordinate system that includes all the points whose ordered pairs make the inequalities true.

  · How to solve a system of linear inequalities by graphing.
      Step 1. Graph the first inequality.
                  Graph the boundary line.
                  Shade in the side of the boundary line where the inequality is true.
      Step 2. On the same grid, graph the second inequality.
                  Graph the boundary line.
                  Shade in the side of that boundary line where the inequality is true.
      Step 3. The solution is the region where the shading overlaps.
      Step 4. Check by choosing a test point.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Solve Systems of Linear Equations with Two Variables

Determine Whether an Ordered Pair is a Solution of a System of Equations.

In the following exercises, determine if the following points are solutions to the given system of equations.

328.                         329.

                                   
                                   

Solve a System of Linear Equations by Graphing

In the following exercises, solve the following systems of equations by graphing.

330.                         331.                      332.

333.
470 4 · Exercises

In the following exercises, without graphing determine the number of solutions and then classify the system of
equations.

334.                                335.                                   336.

Solve a System of Equations by Substitution
In the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by substitution.

337.                                338.                                   339.

340.                                341.

Solve a System of Equations by Elimination
In the following exercises, solve the systems of equations by elimination

342.                                343.                                   344.

345.                                346.

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Solve a System of Linear Equations

In the following exercises, decide whether it would be more convenient to solve the system of equations by substitution
or elimination.

347.                                348.

Solve Applications with Systems of Equations

Solve Direct Translation Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

349. Mollie wants to plant 200      350. Ashanti has been offered          351. Leroy spent 20 minutes
        bulbs in her garden, all            positions by two phone                 jogging and 40 minutes
        irises and tulips. She              companies. The first                   cycling and burned 600
        wants to plant three times          company pays a salary of               calories. The next day,
        as many tulips as irises.           $22,000 plus a                         Leroy swapped times,
        How many irises and how             commission of $100 for                 doing 40 minutes of
        many tulips should she              each contract sold. The                jogging and 20 minutes
        plant?                              second pays a salary of                of cycling and burned the
                                            $28,000 plus a                         same number of calories.
                                            commission of $25 for                  How many calories were
                                            each contract sold. How                burned for each minute
                                            many contract would                    of jogging and how many
                                            need to be sold to make                for each minute of
                                            the total pay the same?                cycling?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                4 · Exercises 471

352. Troy and Lisa were
        shopping for school
        supplies. Each purchased
        different quantities of the
        same notebook and
        thumb drive. Troy bought
        four notebooks and five
        thumb drives for $116.
        Lisa bought two
        notebooks and three
        thumb drives for $68.
        Find the cost of each
        notebook and each
        thumb drive.

Solve Geometry Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

353. The difference of two           354. Two angles are                   355. The measure of one of
        supplementary angles is              complementary. The                    the small angles of a right
        58 degrees. Find the                 measure of the larger                 triangle is 15 less than
        measures of the angles.              angle is five more than               twice the measure of the
                                             four times the measure of             other small angle. Find
                                             the smaller angle. Find               the measure of both
                                             the measures of both                  angles.
                                             angles.

356. Becca is hanging a 28 foot      357. The perimeter of a city
        floral garland on the two            rectangular park is 1428
        sides and top of a pergola           feet. The length is 78 feet
        to prepare for a wedding.            more than twice the
        The height is four feet              width. Find the length and
        less than the width. Find            width of the park.
        the height and width of
        the pergola.

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

358. Sheila and Lenore were driving to their                 359. Bob left home, riding his bike at a rate of 10
        grandmother's house. Lenore left one hour after              miles per hour to go to the lake. Cheryl, his wife,
        Sheila. Sheila drove at a rate of 45 mph, and                left 45 minutes hour) later, driving her car at a
        Lenore drove at a rate of 60 mph. How long will it
        take for Lenore to catch up to Sheila?                       rate of 25 miles per hour. How long will it take
                                                                     Cheryl to catch up to Bob?

360. Marcus can drive his boat 36 miles down the             361. A passenger jet can fly 804 miles in 2 hours with
        river in three hours but takes four hours to                 a tailwind but only 776 miles in 2 hours into a
        return upstream. Find the rate of the boat in still          headwind. Find the speed of the jet in still air and
        water and the rate of the current.                           the speed of the wind.
472 4 · Exercises

Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations

Solve Mixture Applications with Systems of Equations

For the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

362. Lynn paid a total of $2,780 for 261 tickets to the      363. Priam has dimes and pennies in a cup holder in
        theater. Student tickets cost $10 and adult tickets          his car. The total value of the coins is $4.21. The
        cost $15. How many student tickets and how                   number of dimes is three less than four times
        many adult tickets did Lynn buy?                             the number of pennies. How many dimes and
                                                                     how many pennies are in the cup?

364. Yumi wants to make 12 cups of party mix using           365. A scientist needs 70 liters of a 40% solution of
        candies and nuts. Her budget requires the party              alcohol. He has a 30% and a 60% solution
        mix to cost her $1.29 per cup. The candies are               available. How many liters of the 30% and how
        $2.49 per cup and the nuts are $0.69 per cup.                many liters of the 60% solutions should he mix to
        How many cups of candies and how many cups                   make the 40% solution?
        of nuts should she use?

Solve Interest Applications

For the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

366. Jack has $12,000 to invest and wants to earn            367. When she graduates college, Linda will owe
        7.5% interest per year. He will put some of the              $43,000 in student loans. The interest rate on the
        money into a savings account that earns 4% per               federal loans is 4.5% and the rate on the private
        year and the rest into CD account that earns 9%              bank loans is 2%. The total interest she owes for
        per year. How much money should he put into                  one year was $1,585. What is the amount of each
        each account?                                                loan?

Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables
Solve Systems of Equations with Three Variables
In the following exercises, determine whether the ordered triple is a solution to the system.

368.                             369.

                                       
      
                                       

Solve a System of Linear Equations with Three Variables

In the following exercises, solve the system of equations.

370.                             371.                        372.

373.                             374.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         4 · Exercises 473

Solve Applications using Systems of Linear Equations with Three Variables

375. After attending a major
        league baseball game,
        the patrons often
        purchase souvenirs. If a
        family purchases 4 t-
        shirts, a cap and 1 stuffed
        animal their total is $135.
        A couple buys 2 t-shirts, a
        cap and 3 stuffed animals
        for their nieces and
        spends $115. Another
        couple buys 2 t-shirts, a
        cap and 1 stuffed animal
        and their total is $85.
        What is the cost of each
        item?

Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices

Write the Augmented Matrix for a System of Equations.

Write each system of linear equations as an augmented matrix.

376.                       377.

Write the system of equations that that corresponds to the augmented matrix.

378.                       379.

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations on the augmented matrices.

380.                       381.

     Interchange rows 2         Interchange rows 2 and 3.
                                Multiply row 1 by 2.
        and 1.                  Multiply row 3 by and

     Multiply row 1 by 4.          add to row 2.
     Multiply row 2 by 3

        and add to row 1.

Solve Systems of Equations Using Matrices
In the following exercises, solve each system of equations using a matrix.

382.                       383.  384.

385.                       386.
474 4 · Exercises

Solve Systems of Equations Using Determinants
Evaluate the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix
In the following exercise, evaluate the determinate of the square matrix.
387.

Evaluate the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
In the following exercise, find and then evaluate the indicated minors.

388.

    Find the minor  
       

In the following exercise, evaluate each determinant by expanding by minors along the first row.

389.

In the following exercise, evaluate each determinant by expanding by minors.
390.

Use Cramer's Rule to Solve Systems of Equations
In the following exercises, solve each system of equations using Cramer's rule

391.                             392.  393.

394.                             395.

Solve Applications Using Determinants

In the following exercises, determine whether the given points are collinear.

396.               and

Graphing Systems of Linear Inequalities
Determine Whether an Ordered Pair is a Solution of a System of Linear Inequalities
In the following exercises, determine whether each ordered pair is a solution to the system.

397.                             398.

                                     
                                     

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     4 · Exercises 475

Solve a System of Linear Inequalities by Graphing
In the following exercises, solve each system by graphing.

399.                        400.                                      401.

402.                        403.                                      404.

Solve Applications of Systems of Inequalities

In the following exercises, translate to a system of inequalities and solve.

405. Roxana makes bracelets and necklaces and sells         406. Annie has a budget of $600 to purchase
        them at the farmers' market. She sells the                  paperback books and hardcover books for her
        bracelets for $12 each and the necklaces for $18            classroom. She wants the number of hardcover
        each. At the market next weekend she will have              to be at least 5 more than three times the
        room to display no more than 40 pieces, and she             number of paperback books. Paperback books
        needs to sell at least $500 worth in order to earn          cost $4 each and hardcover books cost $15 each.
        a profit.
                                                                 Write a system of inequalities to model this
     Write a system of inequalities to model this
                                                                    situation.
        situation.
                                                                 Graph the system.
     Graph the system.                                           Can she buy 8 paperback books and 40
     Should she display 26 bracelets and 14
                                                                    hardcover books?
        necklaces?
                                                                 Can she buy 10 paperback books and 37
     Should she display 39 bracelets and 1
                                                                    hardcover books?
        necklace?

Practice Test

In the following exercises, solve the following systems by graphing.

407.                        408.

In the following exercises, solve each system of equations. Use either substitution or elimination.

409.                        410.                                      411.

Solve the system of equations using a matrix.

412.                        413.

Solve using Cramer's rule.  415. Evaluate the determinant
414.                                by expanding by minors:
476 4 · Exercises

In the following exercises, translate to a system of equations and solve.

416. Greg is paddling his            417. A pharmacist needs 20            418. Arnold invested $64,000,
        canoe upstream, against              liters of a 2% saline                 some at 5.5% interest and
        the current, to a fishing            solution. He has a 1% and             the rest at 9%. How much
        spot 10 miles away. If he            a 5% solution available.              did he invest at each rate
        paddles upstream for 2.5             How many liters of the 1%             if he received $4,500 in
        hours and his return trip            and how many liters of                interest in one year?
        takes 1.25 hours, find the           the 5% solutions should
        speed of the current and             she mix to make the 2%
        his paddling speed in still          solution?
        water.

419. The church youth group is       420. The manufacturer of a            421. Translate to a system of
        selling snacks to raise              granola bar spends $1.20              inequalities and solve.
        money to attend their                to make each bar and                  Andi wants to spend no
        convention. Amy sold 2               sells them for $2. The                more than $50 on
        pounds of candy, 3 boxes             manufacturer also has                 Halloween treats. She
        of cookies and 1 can of              fixed costs each month of             wants to buy candy bars
        popcorn for a total sales            $8,000.                               that cost $1 each and
        of $65. Brian sold 4                                                       lollipops that cost $0.50
        pounds of candy, 6 boxes          Find the cost function                   each, and she wants the
        of cookies and 3 cans of                                                   number of lollipops to be
        popcorn for a total sales            C when x granola bars are             at least three times the
        of $140. Paulina sold 8              manufactured                          number of candy bars.
        pounds of candy, 8 boxes
        of cookies and 5 can of           Find the revenue                      Write a system of
        popcorn for a total sales
        of $250. What is the cost            function R when x granola             inequalities to model this
        of each item?                        bars are sold.                        situation.

                                          Show the break-even                   Graph the system.
                                                                                Can she buy 20 candy
                                             point by graphing both
                                             the Revenue and Cost                  bars and 40 lollipops?
                                             functions on the same
                                             grid.

                                          Find the break-even

                                             point. Interpret what the
                                             break-even point means.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     5 · Introduction 477

5  POLYNOMIALS AND POLYNOMIAL
   FUNCTIONS

Figure 5.1 There are many different kinds of coins in circulation, but a new type of coin exists only in the virtual world. It
is the bitcoin.

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials
  5.2 Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation
  5.3 Multiply Polynomials
  5.4 Dividing Polynomials

      Introduction

You may have coins and paper money in your wallet, but you may soon want to acquire a type of currency called
bitcoins. They exist only in a digital wallet on your computer. You can use bitcoins to pay for goods at some companies,
or save them as an investment. Although the future of bitcoins is uncertain, investment brokers are beginning to
investigate ways to make business predictions using this digital currency. Understanding how bitcoins are created and
obtained requires an understanding of a type of function known as a polynomial function. In this chapter you will
investigate polynomials and polynomial functions and learn how to perform mathematical operations on them.

5.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine the degree of polynomials
           Add and subtract polynomials
           Evaluate a polynomial function for a given value
           Add and subtract polynomial functions

       BE PREPARED 5.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.7.

   BE PREPARED 5.2  Subtract:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.5.
478 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

BE PREPARED 5.3                  Evaluate:    when          and

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

Determine the Degree of Polynomials

We have learned that a term is a constant or the product of a constant and one or more variables. A monomial is an

algebraic expression with one term. When it is of the form       where a is a constant and m is a whole number, it is

called a monomial in one variable. Some examples of monomials in one variable are  and . Monomials

can also have more than one variable such as      and

Monomial

A monomial is an algebraic expression with one term.

A monomial in one variable is a term of the form       where a is a constant and m is a whole number.

A monomial, or two or more monomials combined by addition or subtraction, is a polynomial. Some polynomials have
special names, based on the number of terms. A monomial is a polynomial with exactly one term. A binomial has exactly
two terms, and a trinomial has exactly three terms. There are no special names for polynomials with more than three
terms.

  Polynomials

  polynomial--A monomial, or two or more algebraic terms combined by addition or subtraction is a polynomial.
  monomial--A polynomial with exactly one term is called a monomial.
  binomial--A polynomial with exactly two terms is called a binomial.
  trinomial--A polynomial with exactly three terms is called a trinomial.

Here are some examples of polynomials.
                   Polynomial
                   Monomial 14
                   Binomial
                   Trinomial

Notice that every monomial, binomial, and trinomial is also a polynomial. They are just special members of the "family"
of polynomials and so they have special names. We use the words monomial, binomial, and trinomial when referring to
these special polynomials and just call all the rest polynomials.
The degree of a polynomial and the degree of its terms are determined by the exponents of the variable.
A monomial that has no variable, just a constant, is a special case. The degree of a constant is 0.

  Degree of a Polynomial

  The degree of a term is the sum of the exponents of its variables.
  The degree of a constant is 0.
  The degree of a polynomial is the highest degree of all its terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 479

Let's see how this works by looking at several polynomials. We'll take it step by step, starting with monomials, and then
progressing to polynomials with more terms.

Let's start by looking at a monomial. The monomial   has two variables a and b. To find the degree we need to find

the sum of the exponents. The variable a doesn't have an exponent written, but remember that means the exponent is 1.

The exponent of b is 2. The sum of the exponents,    is 3 so the degree is 3.

Here are some additional examples.

Working with polynomials is easier when you list the terms in descending order of degrees. When a polynomial is written
this way, it is said to be in standard form of a polynomial. Get in the habit of writing the term with the highest degree
first.

EXAMPLE 5.1

Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial. Then, find the degree of
each polynomial.

                                                                  15

  Solution

             Polynomial             Number of terms  Type        Degree of terms Degree of polynomial

                                    3                Trinomial                 2, 1, 0  2

                                    1                Monomial                  6        6

                                    5                Polynomial  5, 3, 2, 1, 0          5

                                    2                Binomial                  1, 4     4

   15                               1                Monomial                  0        0

  TRY IT 5.1 Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial.
480 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

                       Then, find the degree of each polynomial.

                                                                                

  TRY IT 5.2           Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial.
                       Then, find the degree of each polynomial.

                                                                                  

Add and Subtract Polynomials

We have learned how to simplify expressions by combining like terms. Remember, like terms must have the same
variables with the same exponent. Since monomials are terms, adding and subtracting monomials is the same as
combining like terms. If the monomials are like terms, we just combine them by adding or subtracting the coefficients.

EXAMPLE 5.2

Add or subtract:                   

  Solution





  TRY IT 5.3 Add or subtract:                   

  TRY IT 5.4 Add or subtract:                     

Remember that like terms must have the same variables with the same exponents.

EXAMPLE 5.3

Simplify:                        

  Solution



  Combine like terms.



There are no like terms to combine.
In this case, the polynomial is unchanged.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 481

TRY IT 5.5 Add:                              

TRY IT 5.6 Add:                              

We can think of adding and subtracting polynomials as just adding and subtracting a series of monomials. Look for the
like terms--those with the same variables and the same exponent. The Commutative Property allows us to rearrange the
terms to put like terms together.

EXAMPLE 5.4

Find the sum:
     Solution

Identify like terms.

Rewrite without the parentheses,
rearranging to get the like terms together.

Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 5.7 Find the sum:

       TRY IT 5.8 Find the sum:

Be careful with the signs as you distribute while subtracting the polynomials in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 5.5

Find the difference:
     Solution

Distribute and identify like terms.
Rearrange the terms.
Combine like terms.

TRY IT 5.9 Find the difference:

TRY IT 5.10 Find the difference:

To subtract from we write it as      placing the first.
482 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

  EXAMPLE 5.6                    from
Subtract

     Solution

Distribute.
Rearrange the terms, to put like terms together.
Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 5.11 Subtract                       from
       TRY IT 5.12 Subtract                         from

  EXAMPLE 5.7
Find the sum:

     Solution

Distribute.
Rearrange the terms to put like terms together.
Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 5.13 Find the sum:
       TRY IT 5.14 Find the sum:
When we add and subtract more than two polynomials, the process is the same.
  EXAMPLE 5.8
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 483

Rewrite without the parentheses,
rearranging to get the like terms together.

Combine like terms.

TRY IT 5.15 Simplify:

TRY IT 5.16 Simplify:

Evaluate a Polynomial Function for a Given Value

A polynomial function is a function defined by a polynomial. For example,            and  are

polynomial functions, because  and                are polynomials.

Polynomial Function

A polynomial function is a function whose range values are defined by a polynomial.

In Graphs and Functions, where we first introduced functions, we learned that evaluating a function means to find the

value of  for a given value of x. To evaluate a polynomial function, we will substitute the given value for the variable

and then simplify using the order of operations.

EXAMPLE 5.9

For the function               find:                

     Solution



  Simplify the exponents.
  Multiply.
  Simplify.



Simplify the exponents.
484 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

         Multiply.
         Simplify.

    

Simplify the exponents.
Multiply.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.17 For the function                  find                                    

TRY IT 5.18 For the function                  find                                    

The polynomial functions similar to the one in the next example are used in many fields to determine the height of an
object at some time after it is projected into the air. The polynomial in the next function is used specifically for dropping
something from 250 ft.

EXAMPLE 5.10

The polynomial function                                   gives the height of a ball t seconds after it is dropped from a 250-foot tall
building. Find the height after               seconds.

     Solution

To find    substitute
Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.

                                 After 2 seconds the height of the ball is 186 feet.

TRY IT 5.19   The polynomial function                gives the height of a stone t seconds after it is

              dropped from a 150-foot tall cliff. Find the height after               seconds (the initial height of the

              object).

TRY IT 5.20 The polynomial function                  gives the height of a ball t seconds after it is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 485

                       dropped from a 175-foot tall bridge. Find the height after  seconds.

Add and Subtract Polynomial Functions

Just as polynomials can be added and subtracted, polynomial functions can also be added and subtracted.

Addition and Subtraction of Polynomial Functions

For functions    and

EXAMPLE 5.11

For functions                     and             find:

                                       

  Solution



Rewrite without the parentheses.
Put like terms together.
Combine like terms.

 In part (a) we found             and now are asked to find

To find          substitute

Notice that we could have found        by first finding the values of  and         separately and then adding the
results.

  Find
486 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

         Find

         Find

    

         Rewrite without the parentheses.
         Put like terms together.
         Combine like terms.

    

TRY IT 5.21  For functions                                  and  find:   

                                                

TRY IT 5.22 For functions                       and              find    

                                              

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with adding and subtracting polynomials.
Adding and Subtracting Polynomials (https://openstax.org/l/37AddSubtrPoly)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 487

        SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine the Type of Polynomials

In the following exercises, determine if the polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial. Then,
indicate the degree of the polynomial.

1.                            2.                            3.

                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
  4                                                           
                                 19                           

4.                            5.                            6.

                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
                                                               17
  
                              8.
7.
                                
                                 15
                                
  

                                   
                                   

Add and Subtract Polynomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the monomials.

9.                            10.                           11.

                                                               
                                                               

12.                           13.                           14.

                                      16.                               17.
   
                                                                       
15.                                                                    

18.                           19.                           20.

                                                               
                                                               

21.                           22.                           23.

                                                               
                                                               
488 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

24.                                            25.                                     28.      from
26.                                               27.                      31. Subtract
29. Add:
32. Subtract                           30. Add:

              from

In the following exercises, add the polynomials.

33.                                                34.

35.                                                36.                                     37.
                                                                           40.
38.                                    39.

In the following exercises, subtract the polynomials.

41.                                                42.                                   43.
                                                                                46.
44.                                           45.

In the following exercises, subtract the polynomials.

47. Subtract        from                                          48. Subtract                  from
                                                                  50. Subtract                  from
49. Subtract                     from

In the following exercises, find the difference of the polynomials.

51. Find the difference of                         and            52. Find the difference of           and

In the following exercises, add the polynomials.

53.                                                               54.

55.                                                               56.

In the following exercises, add or subtract the polynomials.

57.                                                               58.

59.                                                               60.

61.                                                               62.

Evaluate a Polynomial Function for a Given Value

In the following exercises, find the function values for each polynomial function.

63. For the function                                  find:       64. For the function                   find:
                                              find:                                                    find:
                                                                      

65. For the function                                              66. For the function

                                                                      

In the following exercises, find the height for each polynomial function.

67. A painter drops a brush from a platform 75 feet               68. A girl drops a ball off a 200-foot cliff into the

     high. The polynomial function                                     ocean. The polynomial                    gives

     gives the height of the brush t seconds after it                  the height of the ball, in feet, t seconds after it is

     was dropped. Find the height after                 seconds.       dropped. Find the height after  seconds.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       5.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 489

69. A manufacturer of stereo sound speakers has            70. A manufacturer of the latest basketball shoes has

     found that the revenue received from selling the           found that the revenue received from selling the

     speakers at a cost of p dollars each is given by the       shoes at a cost of p dollars each is given by the

     polynomial function                           Find         polynomial                        Find the

     the revenue received when           dollars.               revenue received when  dollars.

71. The polynomial                       gives the cost,   72. The polynomial                     gives the cost,

     in dollars, of producing a rectangular container           in dollars, of producing a rectangular container

     whose top and bottom are squares with side x               whose top and bottom are squares with side x

     feet and height 6 feet. Find the cost of producing         feet and height 4 feet. Find the cost of producing

     a box with     feet.                                       a box with     feet.

Add and Subtract Polynomial Functions

In each example, find  (f + g)(x)  (f + g)(2)  (f - g)(x)  (f - g)(-3).

73.                        and                             74.                        and
                                                                                             and
75.                             and                        76.

Writing Exercises

77. Using your own words, explain the difference           78. Using your own words, explain the difference
      between a monomial, a binomial, and a trinomial.           between a polynomial with five terms and a
                                                                 polynomial with a degree of 5.
79. Ariana thinks the sum            is  What is
                                                           80. Is every trinomial a second degree polynomial? If
     wrong with her reasoning?                                   not, give an example.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
490 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

5.2 Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions using the properties for exponents
           Use the definition of a negative exponent
           Use scientific notation

       BE PREPARED 5.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.

BE PREPARED 5.5  Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.24.

BE PREPARED 5.6  Name the decimal
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.36.

Simplify Expressions Using the Properties for Exponents

Remember that an exponent indicates repeated multiplication of the same quantity. For example, in the expression
the exponent m tells us how many times we use the base a as a factor.

Let's review the vocabulary for expressions with exponents.
  Exponential Notation

  This is read a to the power.
  In the expression the exponent m tells us how many times we use the base a as a factor.
When we combine like terms by adding and subtracting, we need to have the same base with the same exponent. But
when you multiply and divide, the exponents may be different, and sometimes the bases may be different, too.
First, we will look at an example that leads to the Product Property.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 491

What does this mean?

Notice that 5 is the sum of the exponents, 2 and 3. We see  is  or

The base stayed the same and we added the exponents. This leads to the Product Property for Exponents.

Product Property for Exponents

If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then

To multiply with like bases, add the exponents.

EXAMPLE 5.12

Simplify each expression:                                   

  Solution



  Use the Product Property,
  Simplify.



  Use the Product Property,
  Simplify.



Rewrite,

Use the Commutative Property and
use the Product Property,

Simplify.
492 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

    

          Add the exponents, since bases are the same.
          Simplify.

  TRY IT 5.23 Simplify each expression:

                                                                 

  TRY IT 5.24 Simplify each expression:

                                                                 

Now we will look at an exponent property for division. As before, we'll try to discover a property by looking at some
examples.

Consider                                                    and

What do they mean?

Use the Equivalent Fractions Property.

Simplify.

Notice, in each case the bases were the same and we subtracted exponents. We see is  or . We see is or

When the larger exponent was in the numerator, we were left with factors in the numerator. When the larger exponent
was in the denominator, we were left with factors in the denominator--notice the numerator of 1. When all the factors in
the numerator have been removed, remember this is really dividing the factors to one, and so we need a 1 in the

numerator.    . This leads to the Quotient Property for Exponents.

Quotient Property for Exponents

If a is a real number,           and m and n are integers, then

EXAMPLE 5.13

Simplify each expression:                                 

     Solution
To simplify an expression with a quotient, we need to first compare the exponents in the numerator and denominator.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 493

Since      there are more factors of in the numerator.

Use Quotient Property,

Simplify.

           there are more factors of in the numerator.

  Since

Use Quotient Property,

Simplify.

Notice that when the larger exponent is in the numerator, we are left with factors in the numerator.



Since      there are more factors of in the denominator.

Use Quotient Property,

Simplify.

           there are more factors of in the denominator.

  Since

Use Quotient Property,

Simplify.

Simplify.

Notice that when the larger exponent is in the denominator, we are left with factors in the denominator.

TRY IT 5.25 Simplify each expression:                       

TRY IT 5.26 Simplify each expression:                     

A special case of the Quotient Property is when the exponents of the numerator and denominator are equal, such as an

expression like We know  for any        since any number divided by itself is 1.
494 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

The Quotient Property for Exponents shows us how to simplify when                  and when  by subtracting

exponents. What if               We will simplify in two ways to lead us to the definition of the Zero Exponent Property. In

general, for

We see simplifies to and to 1. So             Any non-zero base raised to the power of zero equals 1.

Zero Exponent Property

If a is a non-zero number, then
If a is a non-zero number, then a to the power of zero equals 1.
Any non-zero number raised to the zero power is 1.

In this text, we assume any variable that we raise to the zero power is not zero.

  EXAMPLE 5.14

Simplify each expression:  

     Solution
The definition says any non-zero number raised to the zero power is 1.





To simplify the expression n raised to the zero power we just use the definition of the zero exponent. The result is 1.

  TRY IT 5.27 Simplify each expression:               

  TRY IT 5.28 Simplify each expression:               

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

We saw that the Quotient Property for Exponents has two forms depending on whether the exponent is larger in the
numerator or the denominator. What if we just subtract exponents regardless of which is larger?

Let's consider  We subtract the exponent in the denominator from the exponent in the numerator. We see is
or

We can also simplify by dividing out common factors:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 495

This implies that       and it leads us to the definition of a negative exponent. If n is an integer and  then

Let's now look at what happens to a fraction whose numerator is one and whose denominator is an integer raised to a
negative exponent.

Use the definition of a negative exponent,

Simplify the complex fraction.
Multiply.

This implies            and is another form of the definition of Properties of Negative Exponents.

Properties of Negative Exponents

If n is an integer and      then              or

The negative exponent tells us we can rewrite the expression by taking the reciprocal of the base and then changing the
sign of the exponent.

Any expression that has negative exponents is not considered to be in simplest form. We will use the definition of a
negative exponent and other properties of exponents to write the expression with only positive exponents.

For example, if after simplifying an expression we end up with the expression  we will take one more step and write

The answer is considered to be in simplest form when it has only positive exponents.

EXAMPLE 5.15

Simplify each expression:                     

     Solution



  Use the definition of a negative exponent,


496 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

  Use the definition of a negative exponent,
  Simplify.



  Use the property of a negative exponent,



Use the property of a negative exponent,
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.29 Simplify each expression:           

TRY IT 5.30 Simplify each expression:           

Suppose now we have a fraction raised to a negative exponent. Let's use our definition of negative exponents to lead us
to a new property.

  Use the definition of a negative exponent,

  Simplify the denominator.
  Simplify the complex fraction.
  But we know that is
  This tells us that

To get from the original fraction raised to a negative exponent to the final result, we took the reciprocal of the base--the
fraction--and changed the sign of the exponent.
This leads us to the Quotient to a Negative Power Property.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 497

Quotient to a Negative Power Property

If a and b are real numbers,           and n is an integer, then

EXAMPLE 5.16

Simplify each expression:     

  Solution



  Use the Quotient to a Negative Exponent Property,
  Take the reciprocal of the fraction and change the sign of the exponent.
  Simplify.



Use the Quotient to a Negative Exponent Property,
Take the reciprocal of the fraction and change the sign of the exponent.

Simplify.

  TRY IT 5.31 Simplify each expression:           

  TRY IT 5.32 Simplify each expression:           

Now that we have negative exponents, we will use the Product Property with expressions that have negative exponents.

EXAMPLE 5.17

Simplify each expression:                           

  Solution



Add the exponents, since the bases are the same.
498 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

         Simplify.
         Use the definition of a negative exponent.

    

         Use the Commutative Property to get like bases together.
         Add the exponents for each base.
         Take reciprocals and change the signs of the exponents.
         Simplify.

    

         Rewrite with the like bases together.
         Multiply the coefficients and add the exponents of each variable.
         Use the definition of a negative exponent,
         Simplify.

TRY IT 5.33 Simplify each expression:

                                       

TRY IT 5.34 Simplify each expression:

                                       

Now let's look at an exponential expression that contains a power raised to a power. See if you can discover a general
property.

  How many factors altogether?
  So we have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 499

Notice the 6 is the product of the exponents, 2 and 3. We see that  is or

We multiplied the exponents. This leads to the Power Property for Exponents.

Power Property for Exponents

If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then

To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.

EXAMPLE 5.18

Simplify each expression:       

  Solution



  Use the Power Property,
  Simplify.



  Use the Power Property.
  Simplify.



Use the Power Property.
Add the exponents.

  TRY IT 5.35 Simplify each expression:                             

  TRY IT 5.36 Simplify each expression:                             

We will now look at an expression containing a product that is raised to a power. Can you find this pattern?
500 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

What does this mean?
We group the like factors together.
How many factors of 2 and of

Notice that each factor was raised to the power and    is

The exponent applies to each of the factors! This leads to the Product to a Power Property for Exponents.

Product to a Power Property for Exponents

If a and b are real numbers and m is a whole number, then

To raise a product to a power, raise each factor to that power.

EXAMPLE 5.19

Simplify each expression:                                        

  Solution



  Use Power of a Product Property,
  Simplify.



  Use Power of a Product Property,
  Simplify.
  Multiply.



Use the Product to a Power Property,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 501

  Use the Power Property,
  Use the Definition of a negative exponent,
  Simplify.



  Use the Product to a Power Property,
  Simplify.
  Rewrite using,
  Simplify.

TRY IT 5.37 Simplify each expression:                                                  

TRY IT 5.38 Simplify each expression:                                                  

Now we will look at an example that will lead us to the Quotient to a Power Property.

This means
Multiply the fractions.
Write with exponents.

Notice that the exponent applies to both the numerator and the denominator.

We see that  is

This leads to the Quotient to a Power Property for Exponents.

Quotient to a Power Property for Exponents

If and are real numbers,  and is an integer, then
502 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

To raise a fraction to a power, raise the numerator and denominator to that power.

  EXAMPLE 5.20
Simplify each expression:

                                              

     Solution



  Use Quotient to a Power Property,
  Simplify.



  Raise the numerator and denominator to the power.
  Use the definition of negative exponent.
  Multiply.



  Use Quotient to a Power Property,
  Use the Product to a Power Property,



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 503

Use Quotient to a Power Property,

Use the Product to a Power Property,
Simplify using the Power Property,
Use the definition of negative exponent.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.39 Simplify each expression:

                                                             

TRY IT 5.40 Simplify each expression:

                                                             

We now have several properties for exponents. Let's summarize them and then we'll do some more examples that use
more than one of the properties.

  Summary of Exponent Properties

If a and b are real numbers, and m and n are integers, then

    Property                                                   Description

  Product Property

  Power Property

  Product to a Power

  Quotient Property

  Zero Exponent Property
504 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

                                                  Property         Description
                                 Quotient to a Power Property           and
                                 Properties of Negative Exponents
                                 Quotient to a Negative Exponent

  EXAMPLE 5.21
Simplify each expression by applying several properties:

                                              

     Solution



  Use the Product to a Power Property,
  Simplify.
  Use the Commutative Property.
  Multiply the constants and add the exponents.



  Use the Power Property,
  Add the exponents in the numerator.
  Use the Quotient Property,



Access for free at openstax.org
                                            5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 505

Simplify inside the parentheses first.
Use the Quotient to a Power Property,
Use the Product to a Power Property,
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.41 Simplify each expression:

                                          

TRY IT 5.42 Simplify each expression:

                                          

Use Scientific Notation

Working with very large or very small numbers can be awkward. Since our number system is base ten we can use powers
of ten to rewrite very large or very small numbers to make them easier to work with. Consider the numbers 4,000 and
0.004.

Using place value, we can rewrite the numbers 4,000 and 0.004. We know that 4,000 means                 and 0.004 means

If we write the 1,000 as a power of ten in exponential form, we can rewrite these numbers in this way:
                                                     4,000
                                                     0.004

When a number is written as a product of two numbers, where the first factor is a number greater than or equal to one
but less than ten, and the second factor is a power of 10 written in exponential form, it is said to be in scientific
notation.

  Scientific Notation

  A number is expressed in scientific notation when it is of the form
506 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

It is customary in scientific notation to use as the  multiplication sign, even though we avoid using this sign elsewhere
in algebra.

If we look at what happened to the decimal point, we can see a method to easily convert from decimal notation to
scientific notation.

In both cases, the decimal was moved 3 places to get the first factor between 1 and 10.

The power of 10 is positive when the number is larger than 1:

The power of 10 is negative when the number is between 0 and 1:

             ...

                 HOW TO

To convert a decimal to scientific notation.

Step 1.  Move the decimal point so that the first factor is greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Count the number of decimal places, n, that the decimal point was moved.

         Write the number as a product with a power of 10. If the original number is.
           greater than 1, the power of 10 will be
           between 0 and 1, the power of 10 will be

Step 4. Check.

EXAMPLE 5.22

Write in scientific notation:    37,000 

     Solution



The original number, 37,000, is greater than 1        37,000
so we will have a positive power of 10.

Move the decimal point to get 3.7, a number
between 1 and 10.

Count the number of decimal places the point
was moved.

Write as a product with a power of 10.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 507

Check:

                                                 0.0052

  The original number, 0.0052, is between 0
  and 1 so we will have a negative power of 10.

  Move the decimal point to get 5.2, a number
  between 1 and 10.

  Count the number of decimal places the point
  was moved.

  Write as a product with a power of 10.

    TRY IT 5.43 Write in scientific notation:  96,000  0.0078.
    TRY IT 5.44 Write in scientific notation:  48,300  0.0129.

How can we convert from scientific notation to decimal form? Let's look at two numbers written in scientific notation and
see.

If we look at the location of the decimal point, we can see an easy method to convert a number from scientific notation
to decimal form.
508 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

In both cases the decimal point moved 4 places. When the exponent was positive, the decimal moved to the right. When
the exponent was negative, the decimal point moved to the left.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Convert scientific notation to decimal form.

Step 1.  Determine the exponent, n, on the factor 10.
Step 2.
         Move the decimal n places, adding zeros if needed.
           If the exponent is positive, move the decimal point n places to the right.
           If the exponent is negative, move the decimal point places to the left.

Step 3. Check.

EXAMPLE 5.23

Convert to decimal form:                      

  Solution



Determine the exponent, n, on the factor 10.

                                                                    The exponent is 3.

Since the exponent is positive, move the
decimal point 3 places to the right.

Add zeros as needed for placeholders.



  Determine the exponent, n, on the factor 10. The exponent is
  Since the exponent is negative, move the
  decimal point 2 places to the left.
  Add zeros as needed for placeholders.

  TRY IT 5.45   Convert to decimal form:                        
  TRY IT 5.46   Convert to decimal form:                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 509

When scientists perform calculations with very large or very small numbers, they use scientific notation. Scientific
notation provides a way for the calculations to be done without writing a lot of zeros. We will see how the Properties of
Exponents are used to multiply and divide numbers in scientific notation.

  EXAMPLE 5.24

Multiply or divide as indicated. Write answers in decimal form:                 

     Solution



  Use the Commutative Property to rearrange the factors.
  Multiply.
  Change to decimal form by moving the decimal two places left.



Separate the factors, rewriting as the product of two fractions.
Divide.
Change to decimal form by moving the decimal five places right.

TRY IT 5.47    Multiply or divide as indicated. Write answers in decimal form:

                 

TRY IT 5.48    Multiply or divide as indicated. Write answers in decimal form:

                 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with using multiplication properties of exponents.

  · Properties of Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/37Propofexpo)
  · Negative exponents (https://openstax.org/l/37Negativeexpo)
  · Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/l/37SciNotation)
510 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

        SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions Using the Properties for Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the properties for exponents.

81.                                                    82.                                    

83.                                                    84.                                   
                                                                                             
85.                                                                                         
87.                                                    86.

                                                       88.

89.                                                    90.    

91.                                                    92.    

93.                                                    94.  
95.     
                                                       96.    

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

97.                                                    98.                        
99.                                                    100.                       

101.                                                   102.     

103.                                                   104.     

105.                                                   106.                               

107.                                                   108.     

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product Property.

109.                                                   110.     

111.                                                   112.     

113.                                                   114.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Power Property.

115.                                                   116.   
                                                       118.   
117.                             

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              5.2 · Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation 511

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product to a Power Property.

119.                                                   120.                                     

121.                                                   122.                                   
                                                       

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Quotient to a Power Property.

123.                                                   124.                                     

125.                                                   126.                                       

In the following exercises, simplify each expression by applying several properties.

127.                                                   128.                           

129.                                                   130.           

Mixed Practice                                         132.   
                                                       134.    
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.
                                                       136.
131.                                                   138.
                                                       140.
133.                                                   142.
                                                       144.
135.                                                   146.
                                                       148.
137.                                                   150.
                                                       152.
139.                                                   154.
141.
143.
145.

147.
149.
151.

153.
512 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

155.                                            156.                   
157.                  
                                                158.
159.
                                                160.

161.

Use Scientific Notation

In the following exercises, write each number in scientific notation.

162.  57,000  0.026                             163.  340,000  0.041
164.  8,750,000  0.00000871                     165.  1,290,000  0.00000103

In the following exercises, convert each number to decimal form.

166.                                            167.                   

168.                                            169.                   

In the following exercises, multiply or divide as indicated. Write your answer in decimal form.

170.                                            171.                     
172.                                            173.                         

Writing Exercises

174. Use the Product Property for Exponents to  175. Jennifer thinks the quotient simplifies to
        explain why
                                                        What is wrong with her reasoning?
176. Explain why                 but
                                                177. When you convert a number from decimal
                                                        notation to scientific notation, how do you know
                                                        if the exponent will be positive or negative?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 513

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all goals?

5.3 Multiply Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Multiply monomials
           Multiply a polynomial by a monomial
           Multiply a binomial by a binomial
           Multiply a polynomial by a polynomial
           Multiply special products
           Multiply polynomial functions

       BE PREPARED 5.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Distribute:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.50.

  BE PREPARED 5.8  Simplify:                            

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.

  BE PREPARED 5.9  Evaluate:    for

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

Multiply Monomials

We are ready to perform operations on polynomials. Since monomials are algebraic expressions, we can use the
properties of exponents to multiply monomials.

EXAMPLE 5.25

Multiply:          

  Solution



  Use the Commutative Property to rearrange the terms.
  Multiply.



Use the Commutative Property to rearrange the terms.
Multiply.

  TRY IT 5.49 Multiply:         
514 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

  TRY IT 5.50 Multiply:                       

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

Multiplying a polynomial by a monomial is really just applying the Distributive Property.

EXAMPLE 5.26

Multiply:                          

  Solution



  Distribute.
  Multiply.



  Distribute.
  Multiply.

  TRY IT 5.51 Multiply:                         

  TRY IT 5.52 Multiply:                         

Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

Just like there are different ways to represent multiplication of numbers, there are several methods that can be used to
multiply a binomial times a binomial. We will start by using the Distributive Property.

EXAMPLE 5.27

Multiply:                        

  Solution



Distribute

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 515

  Distribute again.
  Combine like terms.



  Distribute.
  Distribute again.
  Combine like terms.

TRY IT 5.53 Multiply:                       

TRY IT 5.54 Multiply:                         

If you multiply binomials often enough you may notice a pattern. Notice that the first term in the result is the product of
the first terms in each binomial. The second and third terms are the product of multiplying the two outer terms and then
the two inner terms. And the last term results from multiplying the two last terms,

We abbreviate "First, Outer, Inner, Last" as FOIL. The letters stand for `First, Outer, Inner, Last'. We use this as another
method of multiplying binomials. The word FOIL is easy to remember and ensures we find all four products.

Let's multiply         using both methods.

We summarize the steps of the FOIL method below. The FOIL method only applies to multiplying binomials, not other
polynomials!

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Use the FOIL method to multiply two binomials.

When you multiply by the FOIL method, drawing the lines will help your brain focus on the pattern and make it easier to
516 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

apply.
Now we will do an example where we use the FOIL pattern to multiply two binomials.

EXAMPLE 5.28

Multiply:                        

  Solution





  TRY IT 5.55 Multiply:                       

  TRY IT 5.56 Multiply:                       

The final products in the last example were trinomials because we could combine the two middle terms. This is not
always the case.

EXAMPLE 5.29

Multiply:                        

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 517

  Step 1. Multiply the First terms.
  Step 2. Multiply the Outer terms.
  Step 3. Multiply the Inner terms.
  Step 4. Multiply the Last terms.
  Step 5. Combine like terms--there are none.



Step 1. Multiply the First terms.
Step 2. Multiply the Outer terms.
Step 3. Multiply the Inner terms.
Step 4. Multiply the Last terms.
Step 5. Combine like terms.

TRY IT 5.57 Multiply:                          

TRY IT 5.58 Multiply:                          

The FOIL method is usually the quickest method for multiplying two binomials, but it only works for binomials. You can
use the Distributive Property to find the product of any two polynomials. Another method that works for all polynomials
is the Vertical Method. It is very much like the method you use to multiply whole numbers. Look carefully at this example
of multiplying two-digit numbers.
518 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

Now we'll apply this same method to multiply two binomials.

  EXAMPLE 5.30

Multiply using the Vertical Method:
     Solution

It does not matter which binomial goes on the top.

Multiply                                      partial product
Multiply                                      partial product
Add like terms.                               product

Notice the partial products are the same as the terms in the FOIL method.

       TRY IT 5.59 Multiply using the Vertical Method:

       TRY IT 5.60 Multiply using the Vertical Method:

We have now used three methods for multiplying binomials. Be sure to practice each method, and try to decide which
one you prefer. The methods are listed here all together, to help you remember them.

  Multiplying Two Binomials

  To multiply binomials, use the:
    · Distributive Property
    · FOIL Method
    · Vertical Method

Multiply a Polynomial by a Polynomial

We have multiplied monomials by monomials, monomials by polynomials, and binomials by binomials. Now we're ready
to multiply a polynomial by a polynomial. Remember, FOIL will not work in this case, but we can use either the
Distributive Property or the Vertical Method.

EXAMPLE 5.31

Multiply                         using  the Distributive Property and  the Vertical Method.

     Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                               5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 519

Distribute.
Multiply.
Combine like terms.

 It is easier to put the polynomial with fewer terms on the bottom because we get fewer partial products this way.

Multiply             by 3.
Multiply             by .

Add like terms.

TRY IT 5.61 Multiply           using  the Distributive Property and  the Vertical Method.
                                using  the Distributive Property and  The Vertical
TRY IT 5.62          Multiply
                     Method.

We have now seen two methods you can use to multiply a polynomial by a polynomial. After you practice each method,
you'll probably find you prefer one way over the other. We list both methods are listed here, for easy reference.

  Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial

  To multiply a trinomial by a binomial, use the:
    · Distributive Property
    · Vertical Method

Multiply Special Products

Mathematicians like to look for patterns that will make their work easier. A good example of this is squaring binomials.
While you can always get the product by writing the binomial twice and multiplying them, there is less work to do if you
learn to use a pattern. Let's start by looking at three examples and look for a pattern.

Look at these results. Do you see any patterns?

What about the number of terms? In each example we squared a binomial and the result was a trinomial.
Now look at the first term in each result. Where did it come from?
520 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

       The first term is the product of the first terms of each binomial. Since the binomials are identical, it is just the square of
       the first term!

             To get the first term of the product, square the first term.
       Where did the last term come from? Look at the examples and find the pattern.
       The last term is the product of the last terms, which is the square of the last term.

             To get the last term of the product, square the last term.
       Finally, look at the middle term. Notice it came from adding the "outer" and the "inner" terms--which are both the same!
       So the middle term is double the product of the two terms of the binomial.

             To get the middle term of the product, multiply the terms and double their product.
       Putting it all together:

         Binomial Squares Pattern
         If a and b are real numbers,

To square a binomial, square the first term, square the last term , double their product.

EXAMPLE 5.32

Multiply:     

  Solution



Square the first term.
Square the last term.
Double their product.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 521



Use the pattern.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.63 Multiply:                          

TRY IT 5.64 Multiply:                            

We just saw a pattern for squaring binomials that we can use to make multiplying some binomials easier. Similarly, there
is a pattern for another product of binomials. But before we get to it, we need to introduce some vocabulary.

A pair of binomials that each have the same first term and the same last term, but one is a sum and one is a difference is
called a conjugate pair and is of the form

Conjugate Pair

A conjugate pair is two binomials of the form

The pair of binomials each have the same first term and the same last term, but one binomial is a sum and the other
is a difference.

There is a nice pattern for finding the product of conjugates. You could, of course, simply FOIL to get the product, but
using the pattern makes your work easier. Let's look for the pattern by using FOIL to multiply some conjugate pairs.

What do you observe about the products?

The product of the two binomials is also a binomial! Most of the products resulting from FOIL have been trinomials.

Each first term is the product of the first terms of the binomials, and since they are identical it is the square of the first
term.

        To get the first term, square the first term.
The last term came from multiplying the last terms, the square of the last term.

To get the last term, square the last term.

Why is there no middle term? Notice the two middle terms you get from FOIL combine to 0 in every case, the result of
one addition and one subtraction.

The product of conjugates is always of the form    This is called a difference of squares.
522 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

       This leads to the pattern:
         Product of Conjugates Pattern
         If a and b are real numbers,

The product is called a difference of squares.
To multiply conjugates, square the first term, square the last term, write it as a difference of squares.

EXAMPLE 5.33

Multiply using the product of conjugates pattern:     

  Solution



Are the binomials conjugates?

It is the product of conjugates.

Square the first term,

Square the last term,
Simplify. The product is a difference of squares.



This fits the pattern.
Use the pattern.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 5.65 Multiply:                             

  TRY IT 5.66 Multiply:                             

We just developed special product patterns for Binomial Squares and for the Product of Conjugates. The products look
similar, so it is important to recognize when it is appropriate to use each of these patterns and to notice how they differ.
Look at the two patterns together and note their similarities and differences.

Access for free at openstax.org
Comparing the Special Product Patterns                                                                        5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 523
                              Binomial Squares
                                                                          Product of Conjugates

  · Squaring a binomial                                            · Multiplying conjugates

  · Product is a trinomial                                         · Product is a binomial.

  · Inner and outer terms with FOIL are the same. · Inner and outer terms with FOIL are opposites.

  · Middle term is double the product of the terms · There is no middle term.

EXAMPLE 5.34

Choose the appropriate pattern and use it to find the product:

                                                

  Solution



These are conjugates. They have the same first numbers, and the same last numbers, and one binomial is a sum and the

other is a difference. It fits the Product of Conjugates pattern.

  Use the pattern.

  Simplify.



We are asked to square a binomial. It fits the binomial squares pattern.

  Use the pattern.

  Simplify.



Again, we will square a binomial so we use the binomial squares pattern.
524 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

  Use the pattern.

  Simplify.



This product does not fit the patterns, so we will use FOIL.

TRY IT 5.67         Choose the appropriate pattern and use it to find the product:

                                                                           

TRY IT 5.68         Choose the appropriate pattern and use it to find the product:

                                                                                     

Multiply Polynomial Functions

Just as polynomials can be multiplied, polynomial functions can also be multiplied.

Multiplication of Polynomial Functions

For functions  and

EXAMPLE 5.35

For functions                    and              find:                  

     Solution



  Substitute for                              and now are asked to find
  Multiply the polynomials.
  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.

 In part  we found

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 525

To find  substitute

      TRY IT 5.69 For functions                      and        find   

      TRY IT 5.70 For functions                      and        find   

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with multiplying polynomials.
      Introduction to special products of binomials (https://openstax.org/l/37Introspecprod)

        SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Multiply Monomials

In the following exercises, multiply the monomials.

178.                                   179.               180.

                                                              
                                                              

181.                                                      184.

                                                              
                                                              

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

In the following exercises, multiply.

182.                                   183.

                                           
                                           

185.

    
    

Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply the binomials using  the Distributive Property;  the FOIL method;  the Vertical
Method.

186.                                   187.               188.
526 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

189.

In the following exercises, multiply the binomials. Use any method.

190.                             191.                                192.

193.                             194.                                195.

196.                             197.                                198.

199.                             200.                                201.

202.                             203.                                204.

205.

Multiply a Polynomial by a Polynomial

In the following exercises, multiply using  the Distributive Property;  the Vertical Method.

206.                             207.                                208.

209.                             210.                                211.

Multiply Special Products

In the following exercises, multiply. Use either method.

212.                             213.                                214.

215.

In the following exercises, square each binomial using the Binomial Squares Pattern.

216.                             217.                                218.

219.                             220.                                221.

222.                             223.                                224.

225.                             226.                                227.

In the following exercises, multiply each pair of conjugates using the Product of Conjugates Pattern.

228.                             229.                                230.

231.                             232.                                233.

234.                             235.                                236.

237.                             238.                                239.

In the following exercises, find each product.

240.                             241.                                242.

243.                             244.                                245.

246.                             247.                                248.

249.                             250.                                251.

252.                             253.                                254.

255.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           5.3 · Multiply Polynomials 527

Mixed Practice                                          257.
                                                        259.
256.                                                    261.
258.                                                    263.
260.                                                    265.
262.                                                    267.
264.                                                    269.
266.                                                    271.
268.                                                    273.
270.                                                    275.
272.                                                    277.
274.
276.

Multiply Polynomial Functions

278. For functions             and                      279. For functions            and

                      find                              281. For functions    find              

280. For functions             and                          find                      and

    find                                                283. For functions  

282. For functions                  and                                                    and

                    find                                                    find                

Writing Exercises                                       285. Multiply the following:

284. Which method do you prefer to use when                   Explain the pattern that you see in your answers.
        multiplying two binomials: the Distributive
        Property or the FOIL method? Why? Which         287. Why does             result in a trinomial, but
        method do you prefer to use when multiplying a                      result in a binomial?
        polynomial by a polynomial: the Distributive
        Property or the Vertical Method? Why?

286. Multiply the following:

Explain the pattern that you see in your answers.
528 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

5.4 Dividing Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Dividing monomials
           Dividing a polynomial by a monomial
           Dividing polynomials using long division
           Dividing polynomials using synthetic division
           Dividing polynomial functions
           Use the remainder and factor theorems

       BE PREPARED 5.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Add:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.28.

BE PREPARED 5.11                 Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.25.

BE PREPARED 5.12                 Combine like terms:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.7.

Dividing Monomials

We are now familiar with all the properties of exponents and used them to multiply polynomials. Next, we'll use these
properties to divide monomials and polynomials.

  EXAMPLE 5.36

Find the quotient:

     Solution
When we divide monomials with more than one variable, we write one fraction for each variable.

Rewrite as a fraction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 529

Use fraction multiplication.
Simplify and use the Quotient Property.
Multiply.

TRY IT 5.71 Find the quotient:

TRY IT 5.72 Find the quotient:

Once you become familiar with the process and have practiced it step by step several times, you may be able to simplify
a fraction in one step.

  EXAMPLE 5.37

Find the quotient:           by dividing out a common factor, and to simplify the variables by subtracting their

     Solution
Be very careful to simplify
exponents.

Simplify and use the Quotient Property.

TRY IT 5.73 Find the quotient:

TRY IT 5.74 Find the quotient:

Divide a Polynomial by a Monomial

Now that we know how to divide a monomial by a monomial, the next procedure is to divide a polynomial of two or more
terms by a monomial.

The method we'll use to divide a polynomial by a monomial is based on the properties of fraction addition. So we'll start

with an example to review fraction addition. The sum  simplifies to

Now we will do this in reverse to split a single fraction into separate fractions. For example,  can be written

This is the "reverse" of fraction addition and it states that if a, b, and c are numbers where   then             We

will use this to divide polynomials by monomials.
530 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

         Division of a Polynomial by a Monomial
         To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide each term of the polynomial by the monomial.
         EXAMPLE 5.38
       Find the quotient:

            Solution

         Rewrite as a fraction.
         Divide each term by the divisor. Be careful with the signs!
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 5.75 Find the quotient:
              TRY IT 5.76 Find the quotient:

     Divide Polynomials Using Long Division

       Divide a polynomial by a binomial, we follow a procedure very similar to long division of numbers. So let's look carefully
       the steps we take when we divide a 3-digit number, 875, by a 2-digit number, 25.

       We check division by multiplying the quotient by the divisor.
       If we did the division correctly, the product should equal the dividend.

       Now we will divide a trinomial by a binomial. As you read through the example, notice how similar the steps are to the
       numerical example above.

         EXAMPLE 5.39
       Find the quotient:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 531

Solution

Write it as a long division problem.
Be sure the dividend is in standard form.

Divide by It may help to ask yourself, "What do I need
to multiply by to get ?"

Put the answer, in the quotient over the term.

Multiply times            Line up the like terms under the dividend.

Subtract            from

You may find it easier to change the signs and then add.

Then bring down the last term, 20.

Divide by It may help to ask yourself, "What do I
need to multiply by to get ?"
Put the answer, , in the quotient over the constant term.

Multiply 4 times

Subtract            from

Check:
Multiply the quotient by the divisor.
You should get the dividend.

TRY IT 5.77 Find the quotient:

TRY IT 5.78 Find the quotient:

When we divided 875 by 25, we had no remainder. But sometimes division of numbers does leave a remainder. The same
is true when we divide polynomials. In the next example, we'll have a division that leaves a remainder. We write the
remainder as a fraction with the divisor as the denominator.

Look back at the dividends in previous examples. The terms were written in descending order of degrees, and there were

no missing degrees. The dividend in this example will be              It is missing an term. We will add in

as a placeholder.

EXAMPLE 5.40

Find the quotient:
532 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

     Solution            term in the dividend. We will add   as a placeholder.
Notice that there is no

Write it as a long division problem. Be sure the dividend
is in standard form with placeholders for missing terms.

Divide by

Put the answer, in the quotient over the term.

Multiply times                   Line up the like terms.

Subtract and then bring down the next term.

Divide     by

Put the answer,          in the quotient over the term.

Multiply   times                 Line up the like terms

Subtract and bring down the next term.

Divide by

Put the answer, in the quotient over the term.

Multiply times                   Line up the like terms.

Subtract and bring down the next term.

Divide by

Put the answer, in the quotient over the constant

term.

Multiply times                   Line up the like terms.

Change the signs, add.

Write the remainder as a fraction with the divisor as the
denominator.

To check, multiply                                        .

The result should be

TRY IT 5.79 Find the quotient:

TRY IT 5.80 Find the quotient:

In the next example, we will divide by        As we divide, we will have to consider the constants as well as the
variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 533

  EXAMPLE 5.41
Find the quotient:

     Solution
This time we will show the division all in one step. We need to add two placeholders in order to divide.

To check, multiply
The result should be

       TRY IT 5.81 Find the quotient:

       TRY IT 5.82 Find the quotient:

Divide Polynomials using Synthetic Division

As we have mentioned before, mathematicians like to find patterns to make their work easier. Since long division can be
tedious, let's look back at the long division we did in Example 5.39 and look for some patterns. We will use this as a basis
for what is called synthetic division. The same problem in the synthetic division format is shown next.

Synthetic division basically just removes unnecessary repeated variables and numbers. Here all the and are

removed. as well as the  and  as they are opposite the term above.

The first row of the synthetic division is the coefficients of the dividend. The is the opposite of the 5 in the divisor.

The second row of the synthetic division are the numbers shown in red in the division problem.

The third row of the synthetic division are the numbers shown in blue in the division problem.

Notice the quotient and remainder are shown in the third row.

The following example will explain the process.                     is divided by
  EXAMPLE 5.42

Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when
534 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

  Solution
Write the dividend with decreasing powers of

Write the coefficients of the terms as the first
row of the synthetic division.

Write the divisor as             and place c

in the synthetic division in the divisor box.

Bring down the first coefficient to the third row.

Multiply that coefficient by the divisor and place the
result in the second row under the second coefficient.

Add the second column, putting the result in the third row.

Multiply that result by the divisor and place the
result in the second row under the third coefficient.

Add the third column, putting the result in the third row.

Multiply that result by the divisor and place the
result in the third row under the third coefficient.

Add the final column, putting the result in the third row.

The quotient is                  and the remainder is 2.

The division is complete. The numbers in the third row give us the result. The  are the coefficients of the

quotient. The quotient is                     The 2 in the box in the third row is the remainder.

Check:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 535

TRY IT 5.83          Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when                            is divided
                     by

TRY IT 5.84          Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when                            is divided
                     by

In the next example, we will do all the steps together.

EXAMPLE 5.43

Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when                             is divided by

     Solution                          has its term in order with descending degree but we notice there is no   term. We
The polynomial
will add a 0 as a placeholder for the  term. In          form, the divisor is

We divided a 4th degree polynomial by a 1st degree polynomial so the quotient will be a 3rd degree polynomial.

Reading from the third row, the quotient has the coefficients                    which is                 The remainder
is 0.

TRY IT 5.85          Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when                          is divided
                     by                                                                                   is divided by

TRY IT 5.86 Use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder when

Divide Polynomial Functions

Just as polynomials can be divided, polynomial functions can also be divided.

Division of Polynomial Functions

For functions   and  where

  EXAMPLE 5.44                         and               find:                 

For functions

     Solution


536 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

Substitute for  and

Divide the polynomials.

 In part  we found               and now are asked to find

To find         substitute

TRY IT 5.87 For functions                              and                 find      

TRY IT 5.88 For functions                              and                 find      

Use the Remainder and Factor Theorem

Let's look at the division problems we have just worked that ended up with a remainder. They are summarized in the

chart below. If we take the dividend from each division problem and use it to define a function, we get the functions

shown in the chart. When the divisor is written as     the value of the function at  is the same as the

remainder from the division problem.

                Dividend                      Divisor  Remainder           Function

                                                       4                               4

                                                       3                               3

          Table 5.1

To see this more generally, we realize we can check a division problem by multiplying the quotient times the divisor and

add the remainder. In function notation we could say, to get the dividend  we multiply the quotient,     times the

divisor,  and add the remainder, r.

If we evaluate this at we get:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 537

This leads us to the Remainder Theorem.

Remainder Theorem

If the polynomial function         is divided by        then the remainder is

EXAMPLE 5.45

Use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder when                           is divided by

Solution

To use the Remainder Theorem, we must use the divisor in the        form. We can write the divisor  as

So, our is

To find the remainder, we evaluate  which is

To evaluate            substitute
Simplify.

                                         The remainder is 5 when               is divided by

Check:
Use synthetic division to check.

The remainder is 5.

TRY IT 5.89 Use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder when                                    is divided by

TRY IT 5.90 Use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder when                                    is divided by

When we divided             by      in Example 5.41 the result was             To check our work, we multiply
                   by  to get         .

Written this way, we can see that                  and        are factors of   When we did the division, the
remainder was zero.

Whenever a divisor,           divides a polynomial function,  and resulting in a remainder of zero, we say     is a
factor of

The reverse is also true. If       is a factor of  then       will divide the polynomial function resulting in a remainder
of zero.
538 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

We will state this in the Factor Theorem.

Factor Theorem

For any polynomial function

· if         is a factor of       then

· if            then             is a factor of

EXAMPLE 5.46

Use the Remainder Theorem to determine if          is a factor of

Solution

The Factor Theorem tells us that              is a factor of       if

To evaluate     substitute
Simplify.
Subtract.

Since           is a factor of

      TRY IT 5.91 Use the Factor Theorem to determine if               is a factor of

      TRY IT 5.92 Use the Factor Theorem to determine if               is a factor of

      MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with dividing polynomials.
      Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial (https://openstax.org/l/37Polybybinom)
      Synthetic Division & Remainder Theorem (https://openstax.org/l/37SynDivision)

        SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Divide Monomials
In the following exercises, divide the monomials.

288.                              289.                                 290.

291.                              292.                                 293.

294.                              295.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       5.4 · Dividing Polynomials 539

Divide a Polynomial by a Monomial

In the following exercises, divide each polynomial by the monomial.

296.                                 297.                            298.

299.                                 300.                            301.

302.                                 303.

Divide Polynomials using Long Division

In the following exercises, divide each polynomial by the binomial.

304.                                 305.                            306.
                                                                      309.
307.                                 308.                             312.

310.                                 311.                            315.

313.                                 314.

Divide Polynomials using Synthetic Division

In the following exercises, use synthetic Division to find the quotient and remainder.

316.                    is divided by                317.                               is divided by

318.                    is divided by                319.                               is divided by

320.                    is divided by                321.                     is divided by

322.                    is divided by                323.                               is divided by

Divide Polynomial Functions                 and      325. For functions                        and

In the following exercises, divide.                                  find               

324. For functions                              and  327. For functions                                  and

                find                                                 find               

326. For functions                      and          329. For functions                     and

                find                                                find                

328. For functions

                find 

Use the Remainder and Factor Theorem

In the following exercises, use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder.

330.                    is divided by                331.                               is divided by
                                                                                         divided by
332.                    divided by                   333.

In the following exercises, use the Factor Theorem to determine if   is a factor of the polynomial function.

334. Determine whether  a factor of                  335. Determine whether             a factor of

336. Determine whether  a factor of                  337. Determine whether             a factor of
540 5 · Polynomials and Polynomial Functions

Writing Exercises

338. James divides               by 6 this way:    339. Divide   and explain with words how

                    What is wrong with his         you get each term of the quotient.

reasoning?

340. Explain when you can use synthetic division.  341. In your own words, write the steps for synthetic

                                                   division for  divided by

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  5 · Chapter Review 541

Chapter Review

Key Terms

binomial A binomial is a polynomial with exactly two terms.

conjugate pair A conjugate pair is two binomials of the form                   The pair of binomials each have the

same first term and the same last term, but one binomial is a sum and the other is a difference.

degree of a constant The degree of any constant is 0.

degree of a polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the highest degree of all its terms.

degree of a term The degree of a term is the sum of the exponents of its variables.

monomial A monomial is an algebraic expression with one term. A monomial in one variable is a term of the form

where a is a constant and m is a whole number.

polynomial A monomial or two or more monomials combined by addition or subtraction is a polynomial.

polynomial function A polynomial function is a function whose range values are defined by a polynomial.

Power Property According to the Power Property, a to the m to the n equals a to the m times n.

Product Property According to the Product Property, a to the m times a to the n equals a to the m plus n.

Product to a Power According to the Product to a Power Property, a times b in parentheses to the m equals a to the m

times b to the m.

Properties of Negative Exponents According to the Properties of Negative Exponents, a to the negative n equals 1

divided by a to the n and 1 divided by a to the negative n equals a to the n.

Quotient Property According to the Quotient Property, a to the m divided by a to the n equals a to the m minus n as

long as a is not zero.

Quotient to a Negative Exponent Raising a quotient to a negative exponent occurs when a divided by b in

parentheses to the power of negative n equals b divided by a in parentheses to the power of n.

Quotient to a Power Property According to the Quotient to a Power Property, a divided by b in parentheses to the

power of m is equal to a to the m divided by b to the m as long as b is not zero.

standard form of a polynomial A polynomial is in standard form when the terms of a polynomial are written in

descending order of degrees.

trinomial A trinomial is a polynomial with exactly three terms.

Zero Exponent Property According to the Zero Exponent Property, a to the zero is 1 as long as a is not zero.

Key Concepts

5.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials

· Monomial

 A monomial is an algebraic expression with one term.

 A monomial in one variable is a term of the form            where a is a constant and m is a whole number.

· Polynomials
    Polynomial--A monomial, or two or more algebraic terms combined by addition or subtraction is a polynomial.
    monomial --A polynomial with exactly one term is called a monomial.
    binomial -- A polynomial with exactly two terms is called a binomial.
    trinomial --A polynomial with exactly three terms is called a trinomial.

· Degree of a Polynomial
    The degree of a term is the sum of the exponents of its variables.
    The degree of a constant is 0.
    The degree of a polynomial is the highest degree of all its terms.

5.2 Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation

  · Exponential Notation

   This is read a to the power.
   In the expression , the exponent m tells us how many times we use the base a as a factor.
· Product Property for Exponents
   If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then
542 5 · Chapter Review

To multiply with like bases, add the exponents.

· Quotient Property for Exponents

If is a real number,             and m and n are integers, then

· Zero Exponent
    If a is a non-zero number, then
    If a is a non-zero number, then a to the power of zero equals 1.
    Any non-zero number raised to the zero power is 1.

· Negative Exponent

 If n is an integer and          then            or

· Quotient to a Negative Exponent Property

If are real numbers,                   and is an integer, then

· Power Property for Exponents
    If is a real number and are integers, then

    To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.
· Product to a Power Property for Exponents

   If a and b are real numbers and m is a whole number, then

To raise a product to a power, raise each factor to that power.

· Quotient to a Power Property for Exponents

If and are real numbers,         and is an integer, then

    To raise a fraction to a power, raise the numerator and denominator to that power.
· Summary of Exponent Properties

   If a and b are real numbers, and m and n are integers, then

                                                  Property            Description
                                 Product Property
                                 Power Property
                                 Product to a Power
                                 Quotient Property

                                 Zero Exponent Property
                                 Quotient to a Power Property:

                                 Properties of Negative Exponents     and

                                 Quotient to a Negative Exponent

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          5 · Chapter Review 543

  · Scientific Notation
      A number is expressed in scientific notation when it is of the form

  · How to convert a decimal to scientific notation.
      Step 1. Move the decimal point so that the first factor is greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10.
      Step 2. Count the number of decimal places, that the decimal point was moved.
      Step 3. Write the number as a product with a power of 10. If the original number is.
                     greater than 1, the power of 10 will be
                     between 0 and 1, the power of 10 will be
      Step 4. Check.

  · How to convert scientific notation to decimal form.
      Step 1. Determine the exponent, on the factor 10.
      Step 2. Move the decimal places, adding zeros if needed.
                     If the exponent is positive, move the decimal point places to the right.
                     If the exponent is negative, move the decimal point places to the left.
      Step 3. Check.

5.3 Multiply Polynomials

  · How to use the FOIL method to multiply two binomials.

  · Multiplying Two Binomials: To multiply binomials, use the:
       Distributive Property
       FOIL Method

  · Multiplying a Polynomial by a Polynomial: To multiply a trinomial by a binomial, use the:
       Distributive Property
       Vertical Method

  · Binomial Squares Pattern
      If a and b are real numbers,

  · Product of Conjugates Pattern
      If are real numbers

      The product is called a difference of squares.
      To multiply conjugates, square the first term, square the last term, write it as a difference of squares.
  · Comparing the Special Product Patterns
544 5 · Exercises

                         Binomial Squares                        Product of Conjugates

      · Squaring a binomial                                      · Multiplying conjugates

      · Product is a trinomial                                   · Product is a binomial.

      · Inner and outer terms with FOIL are the same. · Inner and outer terms with FOIL are opposites.

      · Middle term is double the product of the terms · There is no middle term.

· Multiplication of Polynomial Functions:

       For functions             and

5.4 Dividing Polynomials

  · Division of a Polynomial by a Monomial

       To divide a polynomial by a monomial, divide each term of the polynomial by the monomial.

· Division of Polynomial Functions

       For functions             and       where

· Remainder Theorem                         is divided by     then the remainder is
    If the polynomial function

· Factor Theorem: For any polynomial function

       if  is a factor of             then

       if          then          is a factor of

Exercises

Review Exercises

Add and Subtract Polynomials

Types of Polynomials

In the following exercises, determine the type of polynomial.

342.                                                       343.

344.                                                       345.

Add and Subtract Polynomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the polynomials.

346.                                                       347.

348.                                                       349.

350.                                                       351.

352. Find the sum of                  and                  353. Find the difference of     and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5 · Exercises 545

In the following exercises, simplify.

354.                                                     355.
                                                         357.
356.                                                     359.
                                                         361. Subtract
358.                                                     363.

360.                                                                                      from

362. Find the difference of                  and

364.

Evaluate a Polynomial Function for a Given Value of the Variable

In the following exercises, find the function values for each polynomial function.

365. For the function                         find:      366. For the function                  find:

                                                                

367. A pair of glasses is dropped off a bridge 640 feet  368. A manufacturer of the latest soccer shoes has

      above a river. The polynomial function                   found that the revenue received from selling the

                       gives the height of the                 shoes at a cost of dollars each is given by the

      glasses t seconds after they were dropped. Find          polynomial                       Find the

      the height of the glasses when                           revenue received when            dollars.

Add and Subtract Polynomial Functions

In the following exercises, find  (f + g)(x)  (f + g)(3)  (f - g)(x)  (f - g)(-2)

369.                         and                         370.                             and

Properties of Exponents and Scientific Notation

Simplify Expressions Using the Properties for Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the properties for exponents.

371.                                   372.                       373.

374.                                   375.                       376.

377.                                   378.                       379.

380.                                   381.                       382.

383.

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

384.                                   385.                       386.

387.                                   388.                       389.

390.                                   391.                       392.

393.                                   394.                       395.

396.                                   397.
546 5 · Exercises

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product Property.

398.                                   399.                            400.

401.                                   402.                            403.

404.                                   405.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Power Property.

406.                                   407.                            408.

409.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product to a Power Property.

410.                                   411.                            412.

413.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Quotient to a Power Property.

414.                                   415.                            416.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression by applying several properties.

417.                                   418.                            419.

In the following exercises, write each number in scientific notation.

420.                                   421. 5,300,000                  422.

In the following exercises, convert each number to decimal form.

423.                                   424.                            425.

In the following exercises, multiply or divide as indicated. Write your answer in decimal form.

426.                                   427.                            428.

429.

Multiply Polynomials

Multiply Monomials

In the following exercises, multiply the monomials.

430.                                   431.                            432.

433.

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

In the following exercises, multiply.

434.                                   435.                            436.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5 · Exercises 547

437.

Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply the binomials using:

 the Distributive Property  the FOIL method  the Vertical Method.

438.  439.                                                           440.

441.

In the following exercises, multiply the binomials. Use any method.

442.  443.                                                           444.

445.  446.                                                           447.

448.  449.

Multiply a Polynomial by a Polynomial

In the following exercises, multiply using  the Distributive Property  the Vertical Method.

450.  451.

In the following exercises, multiply. Use either method.

452.  453.

Multiply Special Products
In the following exercises, square each binomial using the Binomial Squares Pattern.

454.  455.                                                           456.

457.

In the following exercises, multiply each pair of conjugates using the Product of Conjugates.

458.  459.                                                           460.

461.                               462.

Divide Monomials
Divide Monomials
In the following exercises, divide the monomials.

463.  464.                                                           465.

466.  467.                                                           468.

469.  470.

Divide a Polynomial by a Monomial
In the following exercises, divide each polynomial by the monomial

471.  472.                                                           473.
548 5 · Exercises

Divide Polynomials using Long Division

In the following exercises, divide each polynomial by the binomial.

474.                                     475.                             476.

477.

Divide Polynomials using Synthetic Division

In the following exercises, use synthetic Division to find the quotient and remainder.

478.                                 is  479.                             is 480.                               is
        divided by
                                                    divided by                        divided by

Divide Polynomial Functions

In the following exercises, divide.

481. For functions                                  and         482. For functions                                     and

                 find                                                            find 
                                                                      

Use the Remainder and Factor Theorem

In the following exercises, use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder.

483.                                 is divided by              484.                                   divided by

In the following exercises, use the Factor Theorem to determine if        is a factor of the polynomial function.

485. Determine whether                   is a factor of         486. Determine whether                 is a factor of
                                  .                                                                 .

Practice Test

487. For the polynomial                  488.                                         489.

       Is it a monomial,

      binomial, or trinomial?

       What is its degree?

490.                                     491.                             492.

493.                                     494.                             495.

496.                                     497.                             498.

499.                                     500.                             501.

502.                                     503.                             504.

505.                                     506.                             507.

508.                                                     509. Use the Factor Theorem  510.  Convert 112,000 to

                                                         to determine if  a                            scientific notation. 

                                                         factor of                                     Convert                to

                                                                                                       decimal form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          5 · Exercises 549

In the following exercises, simplify and write your answer in exponential notation.

511.          512.                            513. For the function

                                              find:

                                               

514. For      515. For functions              516. A hiker drops a pebble
                                                      from a bridge 240 feet
      and                                             above a canyon. The
                                                      function
      find          and                                                            gives
                                        find          the height of the pebble
                                                      seconds after it was
                                                      dropped. Find the height
                                                      when
550 5 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        6 · Introduction to Factoring 551

6  FACTORING

Figure 6.1 Scientists use factoring to calculate growth rates of infectious diseases such as viruses. (credit: "FotoshopTofs"
/ Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping
  6.2 Factor Trinomials
  6.3 Factor Special Products
  6.4 General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials
  6.5 Polynomial Equations

      Introduction to Factoring

An epidemic of a disease has broken out. Where did it start? How is it spreading? What can be done to control it?
Answers to these and other questions can be found by scientists known as epidemiologists. They collect data and
analyze it to study disease and consider possible control measures. Because diseases can spread at alarming rates, these
scientists must use their knowledge of mathematics involving factoring. In this chapter, you will learn how to factor and
apply factoring to real-life situations.

6.1 Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the greatest common factor of two or more expressions
           Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial
           Factor by grouping

       BE PREPARED 6.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Factor 56 into primes.
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.2.

   BE PREPARED 6.2  Find the least common multiple (LCM) of 18 and 24.
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.3.

   BE PREPARED 6.3  Multiply:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.26.
552 6 · Factoring

    Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

       Earlier we multiplied factors together to get a product. Now, we will reverse this process; we will start with a product and
       then break it down into its factors. Splitting a product into factors is called factoring.

We have learned how to factor numbers to find the least common multiple (LCM) of two or more numbers. Now we will
factor expressions and find the greatest common factor of two or more expressions. The method we use is similar to
what we used to find the LCM.

  Greatest Common Factor

  The greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more expressions is the largest expression that is a factor of all the
  expressions.

We summarize the steps we use to find the greatest common factor.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two expressions.

Step 1.  Factor each coefficient into primes. Write all variables with exponents in expanded form.
Step 2.  List all factors--matching common factors in a column. In each column, circle the common factors.
Step 3.  Bring down the common factors that all expressions share.
Step 4.  Multiply the factors.

The next example will show us the steps to find the greatest common factor of three expressions.

  EXAMPLE 6.1

Find the greatest common factor of
     Solution

  Factor each coefficient into primes and write the
  variables with exponents in expanded form.
  Circle the common factors in each column.
  Bring down the common factors.

Multiply the factors.

                                 The GCF of                        , and is .

TRY IT 6.1 Find the greatest common factor:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             6.1 · Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping 553

TRY IT 6.2 Find the greatest common factor:

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

It is sometimes useful to represent a number as a product of factors, for example, 12 as or       In algebra, it can
                                                                                                         and end with
also be useful to represent a polynomial in factored form. We will start with a product, such as

its factors,  To do this we apply the Distributive Property "in reverse."

We state the Distributive Property here just as you saw it in earlier chapters and "in reverse."

Distributive Property

If a, b, and c are real numbers, then

The form on the left is used to multiply. The form on the right is used to factor.

So how do you use the Distributive Property to factor a polynomial? You just find the GCF of all the terms and write the
polynomial as a product!

  EXAMPLE 6.2

How to Use the Distributive Property to factor a polynomial
Factor:

     Solution

TRY IT 6.3 Factor:
TRY IT 6.4 Factor:
554 6 · Factoring

...

     HOW TO

Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial.

Step 1.  Find the GCF of all the terms of the polynomial.
Step 2.  Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
Step 3.  Use the "reverse" Distributive Property to factor the expression.
Step 4.  Check by multiplying the factors.

Factor as a Noun and a Verb
We use "factor" as both a noun and a verb:

  EXAMPLE 6.3
Factor:

     Solution

  Find the GCF of and

Rewrite each term.
Factor the GCF.
Check:

       TRY IT 6.5 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.6 Factor:
  EXAMPLE 6.4
Factor:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                  6.1 · Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping 555

  Solution
The GCF of
is

Rewrite each term using the GCF,
Factor the GCF.
Check:

       TRY IT 6.7 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.8 Factor:
When the leading coefficient is negative, we factor the negative out as part of the GCF.
  EXAMPLE 6.5
Factor:
     Solution
The leading coefficient is negative, so the GCF will be negative.

  Rewrite each term using the GCF,
  Factor the GCF.
  Check:

TRY IT 6.9 Factor:
556 6 · Factoring

              TRY IT 6.10 Factor:
       So far our greatest common factors have been monomials. In the next example, the greatest common factor is a
       binomial.

         EXAMPLE 6.6
       Factor:

            Solution
       The GCF is the binomial

         Factor the GCF,
         Check on your own by multiplying.

              TRY IT 6.11 Factor:
              TRY IT 6.12 Factor:

    Factor by Grouping

       Sometimes there is no common factor of all the terms of a polynomial. When there are four terms we separate the
       polynomial into two parts with two terms in each part. Then look for the GCF in each part. If the polynomial can be
       factored, you will find a common factor emerges from both parts. Not all polynomials can be factored. Just like some
       numbers are prime, some polynomials are prime.

         EXAMPLE 6.7
       How to Factor a Polynomial by Grouping
       Factor by grouping:

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        6.1 · Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping 557

  TRY IT 6.13 Factor by grouping:

  TRY IT 6.14 Factor by grouping:

  ...

       HOW TO

Factor by grouping.

Step 1.  Group terms with common factors.
Step 2.  Factor out the common factor in each group.
Step 3.  Factor the common factor from the expression.
Step 4.  Check by multiplying the factors.

EXAMPLE 6.8

Factor by grouping:                   

  Solution



There is no GCF in all four terms.

Separate into two parts.

Factor the GCF from both parts. Be careful with the signs when factoring the GCF from the
last two terms.

Factor out the common factor.

Check on your own by multiplying.



  There is no GCF in all four terms.
  Separate into two parts.
  Factor the GCF from both parts.
  Factor out the common factor.
  Check on your own by multiplying.
558 6 · Factoring

     TRY IT 6.15 Factor by grouping:                          

     TRY IT 6.16 Factor by grouping:                          

        SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

In the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

1.                                   2.                         3.

4.                                   5.                         6.

7.                                   8.

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

In the following exercises, factor the greatest common factor from each polynomial.

9.                                   10.                        11.

12.                                  13.                        14.

15.                                  16.                        17.

18.                                  19.                        20.

21.                                  22.                        23.

24.                                  25.                        26.

27.                                  28.                        29.

30.                                  31.                        32.

33.                                  34.                        35.

36.

Factor by Grouping

In the following exercises, factor by grouping.

37.                                  38.                        39.

40.                                  41.                        42.

43.                                  44.                        45.

46.                                  47.                        48.

49.                                  50.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, factor.

51.                                  52.                        53.

54.                                  55.                        56.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      6.2 · Factor Trinomials 559

Writing Exercises

57. What does it mean to say a polynomial is in     58. How do you check result after factoring a
      factored form?                                      polynomial?

59. The greatest common factor of 36 and 60 is 12.  60. What is the GCF of       and  Write a
      Explain what this means.
                                                    general rule that tells you how to find the GCF of

                                                    and

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved your goals in this section! Reflect on the study skills you used so that
you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific!

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly as topics you do not master become potholes in your road to success.
Math is sequential - every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is critical and you must not ignore it. You need to get help immediately or you will quickly be
overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as possible to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan to
get you the help you need.

6.2 Factor Trinomials                             using trial and error
                                                  using the `ac' method
Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Factor trinomials of the form
           Factor trinomials of the form
           Factor trinomials of the form
           Factor using substitution

BE PREPARED 6.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                               Find all the factors of 72.
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 1.2.

BE PREPARED 6.5                Find the product:
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 5.28.

BE PREPARED 6.6                Simplify:
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 1.18.

Factor Trinomials of the Form

You have already learned how to multiply binomials using FOIL. Now you'll need to "undo" this multiplication. To factor
the trinomial means to start with the product, and end with the factors.
560 6 · Factoring

To figure out how we would factor a trinomial of the form                 such as  and factor it to
                      let's start with two general binomials of the form     and

  Foil to find the product.                           we need two factors          and  where the two
  Factor the GCF from the middle terms.

  Our trinomial is of the form

This tells us that to factor a trinomial of the form
numbers m and n multiply to c and add to b.

  EXAMPLE 6.9
How to Factor a Trinomial of the form
Factor:

     Solution

       TRY IT 6.17 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.18 Factor:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       6.2 · Factor Trinomials 561

Let's summarize the steps we used to find the factors.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Factor trinomials of the form

  Step 1. Write the factors as two binomials with first terms x.

  Step 2. Find two numbers m and n that
                multiply to
                add to

  Step 3. Use m and n as the last terms of the factors.
  Step 4. Check by multiplying the factors.

In the first example, all terms in the trinomial were positive. What happens when there are negative terms? Well, it
depends which term is negative. Let's look first at trinomials with only the middle term negative.

How do you get a positive product and a negative sum? We use two negative numbers.

EXAMPLE 6.10

Factor:                                                                we need two negative factors. Find two

     Solution
Again, with the positive last term, 28, and the negative middle term,
numbers that multiply 28 and add to

Write the factors as two binomials with first terms
Find two numbers that: multiply to 28 and add to -11.

              Factors of                               Sum of factors
562 6 · Factoring

Use                as the last terms of the binomials.
Check:

       TRY IT 6.19 Factor:

       TRY IT 6.20 Factor:

Now, what if the last term in the trinomial is negative? Think about FOIL. The last term is the product of the last terms in
the two binomials. A negative product results from multiplying two numbers with opposite signs. You have to be very
careful to choose factors to make sure you get the correct sign for the middle term, too.
How do you get a negative product and a positive sum? We use one positive and one negative number.
When we factor trinomials, we must have the terms written in descending order--in order from highest degree to lowest
degree.

  EXAMPLE 6.11
Factor:

     Solution

  First we put the terms in decreasing degree order.

  Factors will be two binomials with first terms

                                 Factors of             Sum of factors

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     6.2 · Factor Trinomials 563

Check:

TRY IT 6.21 Factor:

TRY IT 6.22 Factor:

Sometimes you'll need to factor trinomials of the form  with two variables, such as

The first term, is the product of the first terms of the binomial factors,  The in the last term means that the

second terms of the binomial factors must each contain y. To get the coefficients b and c, you use the same process

summarized in How To Factor trinomials.

EXAMPLE 6.12

Factor:

     Solution
We need r in the first term of each binomial and s in the second term. The last term of the trinomial is negative, so the
factors must have opposite signs.

Note that the first terms are last terms contain
Find the numbers that multiply to -9 and add to -8.

                                         Factors of     Sum of factors
564 6 · Factoring

         Check:

       TRY IT 6.23 Factor:

       TRY IT 6.24 Factor:

Some trinomials are prime. The only way to be certain a trinomial is prime is to list all the possibilities and show that
none of them work.

  EXAMPLE 6.13
Factor:

     Solution
We need u in the first term of each binomial and v in the second term. The last term of the trinomial is negative, so the
factors must have opposite signs.

Note that the first terms are last terms contain
Find the numbers that multiply to -12 and add to -9.

                   Factors of                         Sum of factors

Note there are no factor pairs that give us as a sum. The trinomial is prime.
       TRY IT 6.25 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.26 Factor:

Let's summarize the method we just developed to factor trinomials of the form

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           6.2 · Factor Trinomials 565

Strategy for Factoring Trinomials of the Form
When we factor a trinomial, we look at the signs of its terms first to determine the signs of the binomial factors.

Notice that, in the case when m and n have opposite signs, the sign of the one with the larger absolute value matches
the sign of b.

Factor Trinomials of the form ax2 + bx + c using Trial and Error

Our next step is to factor trinomials whose leading coefficient is not 1, trinomials of the form
Remember to always check for a GCF first! Sometimes, after you factor the GCF, the leading coefficient of the trinomial
becomes 1 and you can factor it by the methods we've used so far. Let's do an example to see how this works.

  EXAMPLE 6.14

Factor completely:
     Solution

  Is there a greatest common factor?

Yes,  Factor it.

Binomial, trinomial, or more than three terms?

It is a trinomial. So "undo FOIL."

Use a table like the one shown to find two numbers that
multiply to -5 and add to 4.
566 6 · Factoring                Factors of  Sum of factors

         Check:

       TRY IT 6.27 Factor completely:

       TRY IT 6.28 Factor completely:

What happens when the leading coefficient is not 1 and there is no GCF? There are several methods that can be used to
factor these trinomials. First we will use the Trial and Error method.
Let's factor the trinomial
From our earlier work, we expect this will factor into two binomials.

We know the first terms of the binomial factors will multiply to give us  The only factors of are  We can
place them in the binomials.

Check: Does

We know the last terms of the binomials will multiply to 2. Since this trinomial has all positive terms, we only need to
consider positive factors. The only factors of 2 are 1, 2. But we now have two cases to consider as it will make a
difference if we write 1, 2 or 2, 1.

Which factors are correct? To decide that, we multiply the inner and outer terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                             6.2 · Factor Trinomials 567

Since the middle term of the trinomial is the factors in the first case will work. Let's use FOIL to check.

Our result of the factoring is:

  EXAMPLE 6.15
How to Factor a Trinomial Using Trial and Error
Factor completely using trial and error:

     Solution
568 6 · Factoring

TRY IT 6.29 Factor completely using trial and error:

TRY IT 6.30 Factor completely using trial and error:

...

     HOW TO

Factor trinomials of the form    using trial and error.

Step 1.  Write the trinomial in descending order of degrees as needed.
Step 2.  Factor any GCF.
Step 3.  Find all the factor pairs of the first term.
Step 4.  Find all the factor pairs of the third term.
Step 5.  Test all the possible combinations of the factors until the correct product is found.
Step 6.  Check by multiplying.

Remember, when the middle term is negative and the last term is positive, the signs in the binomials must both be
negative.

  EXAMPLE 6.16
Factor completely using trial and error:

     Solution
  The trinomial is already in descending order.

  Find the factors of the first term.

  Find the factors of the last term. Consider the signs.
  Since the last term, 5, is positive its factors must both be
  positive or both be negative. The coefficient of the
  middle term is negative, so we use the negative factors.

Consider all the combinations of factors.

                                 Possible factors        Product

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      6.2 · Factor Trinomials 569

Possible factors                             Product

The correct factors are those whose product
is the original trinomial.

Check by multiplying:

       TRY IT 6.31 Factor completely using trial and error:

       TRY IT 6.32 Factor completely using trial and error:

When we factor an expression, we always look for a greatest common factor first. If the expression does not have a
greatest common factor, there cannot be one in its factors either. This may help us eliminate some of the possible factor
combinations.

  EXAMPLE 6.17
Factor completely using trial and error:

     Solution
  The trinomial is already in descending order.

  Find the factors of the first term.

  Find the factors of the last term. Consider the signs.
  Since 15 is positive and the coefficient of the middle
  term is negative, we use the negative factors.

Consider all the combinations of factors.
570 6 · Factoring

         The correct factors are those whose product is the original trinomial.
         Check by multiplying:

              TRY IT 6.33 Factor completely using trial and error
              TRY IT 6.34 Factor completely using trial and error:
       Don't forget to look for a GCF first and remember if the leading coefficient is negative, so is the GCF.
         EXAMPLE 6.18
       Factor completely using trial and error:
            Solution
         Notice the greatest common factor, so factor it first.
         Factor the trinomial.
       Consider all the combinations.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             6.2 · Factor Trinomials 571

The correct factors are those whose product
is the original trinomial. Remember to include
the factor

Check by multiplying:

TRY IT 6.35 Factor completely using trial and error:

TRY IT 6.36 Factor completely using trial and error:

Factor Trinomials of the Form                         using the "ac" Method

Another way to factor trinomials of the form    is the "ac" method. (The "ac" method is sometimes called the

grouping method.) The "ac" method is actually an extension of the methods you used in the last section to factor

trinomials with leading coefficient one. This method is very structured (that is step-by-step), and it always works!

EXAMPLE 6.19

How to Factor Trinomials using the "ac" Method
Factor using the `ac' method:

     Solution
572 6 · Factoring

TRY IT 6.37 Factor using the `ac' method:

TRY IT 6.38 Factor using the `ac' method:

The "ac" method is summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Factor trinomials of the form           using the "ac" method.

Step 1. Factor any GCF.
Step 2. Find the product ac.
Step 3. Find two numbers m and n that:

  Step 4. Split the middle term using m and n.
  Step 5. Factor by grouping.
  Step 6. Check by multiplying the factors.

Don't forget to look for a common factor!
  EXAMPLE 6.20

Factor using the `ac' method:
     Solution

  Is there a greatest common factor?

  Yes. The GCF is 5.

  Factor it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  6.2 · Factor Trinomials 573

The trinomial inside the parentheses has a
leading coefficient that is not 1.
Find the product
Find two numbers that multiply to
and add to b.
Split the middle term.

Factor the trinomial by grouping.

Check by multiplying all three factors.

TRY IT 6.39 Factor using the `ac' method:

TRY IT 6.40 Factor using the `ac' method:

Factor Using Substitution

Sometimes a trinomial does not appear to be in the              form. However, we can often make a thoughtful
substitution that will allow us to make it fit the       form. This is called factoring by substitution. It is standard to
use u for the substitution.

In the        the middle term has a variable, x, and its square,  is the variable part of the first term. Look for

this relationship as you try to find a substitution.

EXAMPLE 6.21

Factor by substitution:

Solution

The variable part of the middle term is and its square,  is the variable part of the first term. (We know
                                                         form we need to factor it.
If we let     we can put our trinomial in the

Rewrite the trinomial to prepare for the substitution.
574 6 · Factoring

Let                and substitute.

Factor the trinomial.

Replace u with

Check:

       TRY IT 6.41 Factor by substitution:

       TRY IT 6.42 Factor by substitution:

Sometimes the expression to be substituted is not a monomial.

EXAMPLE 6.22

Factor by substitution:

Solution

The binomial in the middle term,    is squared in the first term. If we let          and substitute, our trinomial will

be in              form.

Rewrite the trinomial to prepare for the substitution.

Let                and substitute.

Factor the trinomial.

Replace u with

Simplify inside the parentheses.

This could also be factored by first multiplying out the       and the       and then combining like terms and then
factoring. Most students prefer the substitution method.

TRY IT 6.43 Factor by substitution:
TRY IT 6.44 Factor by substitution:
MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with factoring.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.2 · Factor Trinomials 575

      Factor a trinomial using the AC method (https://openstax.org/l/37ACmethod)

        SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Factor Trinomials of the Form

In the following exercises, factor each trinomial of the form

61.                            62.                                    63.

64.                            65.                                    66.

67.                            68.                                    69.

70.                            71.                                    72.

73.                            74.                                    75.

76.                            77.                                    78.

In the following exercises, factor each trinomial of the form                If the trinomial cannot be factored, answer
"Prime."
                                                                      81.
79.                            80.                                    84.
                                                                      87.
82.                            83.

85.                            86.

88.

Factor Trinomials of the Form        Using Trial and Error

In the following exercises, factor completely using trial and error.

89.                            90.                                    91.

92.                            93.                                    94.

95.                            96.                                    97.

98.                            99.                                    100.

101.                           102.                                   103.

104.                           105.                                   106.

107.                           108.                                   109.

110.

Factor Trinomials of the Form        using the `ac' Method

In the following exercises, factor using the `ac' method.

111.                           112.                                   113.

114.                           115.                                   116.

117.                           118.                                   119.

120.                           121.                                   122.

123.                           124.                                   125.

126.
576 6 · Factoring

Factor Using Substitution

In the following exercises, factor using substitution.

127.                              128.                                129.

130.                              131.                                132.

133.                              134.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, factor each expression using any method.

135.                              136.                                137.

138.                              139.                                140.

141.                              142.                                143.

144.                              145.                                146.

147.                              148.                                149.

150.                              151.                                152.

153.                              154.

Writing Exercises

155. Many trinomials of the form         factor            156. Tommy factored             as

      into the product of two binomials                    Sara factored it as                 Ernesto

      Explain how you find the values of m and n.          factored it as                  Who is correct?

                                                           Explain why the other two are wrong.

157. List, in order, all the steps you take when using     158. How is the "ac" method similar to the "undo FOIL"
        the "ac" method to factor a trinomial of the form          method? How is it different?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

6.3 Factor Special Products

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Factor perfect square trinomials
           Factor differences of squares
           Factor sums and differences of cubes

       BE PREPARED 6.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       6.3 · Factor Special Products 577

                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.18.

BE PREPARED 6.8                    Multiply:
                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

BE PREPARED 6.9                    Multiply:
                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.33.

We have seen that some binomials and trinomials result from special products--squaring binomials and multiplying
conjugates. If you learn to recognize these kinds of polynomials, you can use the special products patterns to factor
them much more quickly.

Factor Perfect Square Trinomials

Some trinomials are perfect squares. They result from multiplying a binomial times itself. We squared a binomial using
the Binomial Squares pattern in a previous chapter.

The trinomial                is called a perfect square trinomial. It is the square of the binomial

In this chapter, you will start with a perfect square trinomial and factor it into its prime factors.

You could factor this trinomial using the methods described in the last section, since it is of the form       But if

you recognize that the first and last terms are squares and the trinomial fits the perfect square trinomials pattern, you

will save yourself a lot of work.

Here is the pattern--the reverse of the binomial squares pattern.

Perfect Square Trinomials Pattern

If a and b are real numbers

To make use of this pattern, you have to recognize that a given trinomial fits it. Check first to see if the leading coefficient

is a perfect square, Next check that the last term is a perfect square, Then check the middle term--is it the

product,       If everything checks, you can easily write the factors.

EXAMPLE 6.23

How to Factor Perfect Square Trinomials
Factor:
578 6 · Factoring

            Solution

              TRY IT 6.45 Factor:
              TRY IT 6.46 Factor:
       The sign of the middle term determines which pattern we will use. When the middle term is negative, we use the pattern

                            which factors to
       The steps are summarized here.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Factor perfect square trinomials.

       We'll work one now where the middle term is negative.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     6.3 · Factor Special Products 579

  EXAMPLE 6.24
Factor:

     Solution
The first and last terms are squares. See if the middle term fits the pattern of a perfect square trinomial. The middle term
is negative, so the binomial square would be

Are the first and last terms perfect squares?
Check the middle term.

Does it match  Yes.

Write as the square of a binomial.
Check by multiplying:

       TRY IT 6.47 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.48 Factor:
The next example will be a perfect square trinomial with two variables.
  EXAMPLE 6.25
Factor:
     Solution

  Test each term to verify the pattern.
  Factor.
  Check by multiplying.
580 6 · Factoring

              TRY IT 6.49 Factor:
              TRY IT 6.50 Factor:
       Remember the first step in factoring is to look for a greatest common factor. Perfect square trinomials may have a GCF in
       all three terms and it should be factored out first. And, sometimes, once the GCF has been factored, you will recognize a
       perfect square trinomial.
         EXAMPLE 6.26
       Factor:
            Solution

         Is there a GCF? Yes, so factor it out.
         Is this a perfect square trinomial?
         Verify the pattern.
         Factor.
       Remember: Keep the factor 4y in the final product.
       Check:

              TRY IT 6.51 Factor:
              TRY IT 6.52 Factor:

     Factor Differences of Squares

       The other special product you saw in the previous chapter was the Product of Conjugates pattern. You used this to
       multiply two binomials that were conjugates. Here's an example:

       A difference of squares factors to a product of conjugates.
         Difference of Squares Pattern
         If a and b are real numbers,

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     6.3 · Factor Special Products 581

Remember, "difference" refers to subtraction. So, to use this pattern you must make sure you have a binomial in which
two squares are being subtracted.

  EXAMPLE 6.27
How to Factor a Binomial Using the Difference of Squares
Factor:

     Solution

     TRY IT 6.53 Factor:

     TRY IT 6.54 Factor:

           ...

              HOW TO
Factor differences of squares.

It is important to remember that sums of squares do not factor into a product of binomials. There are no binomial

factors that multiply together to get a sum of squares. After removing any GCF, the expression  is prime!

The next example shows variables in both terms.
582 6 · Factoring

         EXAMPLE 6.28
       Factor:

            Solution

         Is this a difference of squares? Yes.
         Factor as the product of conjugates.
         Check by multiplying.

              TRY IT 6.55 Factor:
              TRY IT 6.56 Factor:
       As always, you should look for a common factor first whenever you have an expression to factor. Sometimes a common
       factor may "disguise" the difference of squares and you won't recognize the perfect squares until you factor the GCF.
       Also, to completely factor the binomial in the next example, we'll factor a difference of squares twice!
         EXAMPLE 6.29
       Factor:
            Solution

         Is there a GCF? Yes, --factor it out!
         Is the binomial a difference of squares? Yes.
         Factor as a product of conjugates.
         Notice the first binomial is also a difference of squares!
         Factor it as the product of conjugates.
         The last factor, the sum of squares, cannot be factored.
         Check by multiplying:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     6.3 · Factor Special Products 583

       TRY IT 6.57 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.58 Factor:
The next example has a polynomial with 4 terms. So far, when this occurred we grouped the terms in twos and factored
from there. Here we will notice that the first three terms form a perfect square trinomial.
  EXAMPLE 6.30
Factor:
     Solution
Notice that the first three terms form a perfect square trinomial.

  Factor by grouping the first three terms.
  Use the perfect square trinomial pattern.
  Is this a difference of squares? Yes.
  Yes--write them as squares.
  Factor as the product of conjugates.

You may want to rewrite the solution as
       TRY IT 6.59 Factor:
       TRY IT 6.60 Factor:

Factor Sums and Differences of Cubes

There is another special pattern for factoring, one that we did not use when we multiplied polynomials. This is the
pattern for the sum and difference of cubes. We will write these formulas first and then check them by multiplication.
584 6 · Factoring

       We'll check the first pattern and leave the second to you.

         Distribute.
         Multiply.
         Combine like terms.
         Sum and Difference of Cubes Pattern

       The two patterns look very similar, don't they? But notice the signs in the factors. The sign of the binomial factor matches
       the sign in the original binomial. And the sign of the middle term of the trinomial factor is the opposite of the sign in the
       original binomial. If you recognize the pattern of the signs, it may help you memorize the patterns.

The trinomial factor in the sum and difference of cubes pattern cannot be factored.

It will be very helpful if you learn to recognize the cubes of the integers from 1 to 10, just like you have learned to
recognize squares. We have listed the cubes of the integers from 1 to 10 in Table 6.1.

                                 n 12 3 4 5   6  7  8  9  10

                                 1 8 27 64 125 216 343 512 729 1000

Table 6.1

  EXAMPLE 6.31

How to Factor the Sum or Difference of Cubes
Factor:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  6.3 · Factor Special Products 585

TRY IT 6.61 Factor:

TRY IT 6.62 Factor:

...

     HOW TO

Factor the sum or difference of cubes.

Step 1.  Does the binomial fit the sum or difference of cubes pattern?
         Is it a sum or difference?
Step 2.  Are the first and last terms perfect cubes?
Step 3.  Write them as cubes.
Step 4.  Use either the sum or difference of cubes pattern.
Step 5.  Simplify inside the parentheses.
         Check by multiplying the factors.

  EXAMPLE 6.32
Factor:

     Solution

This binomial is a difference. The first and last
terms are perfect cubes.

Write the terms as cubes.

Use the difference of cubes pattern.

Simplify.                                          We'll leave the check to you.
Check by multiplying.

TRY IT 6.63 Factor:
586 6 · Factoring

              TRY IT 6.64 Factor:
       In the next example, we first factor out the GCF. Then we can recognize the sum of cubes.

         EXAMPLE 6.33
       Factor:

            Solution

Factor the common factor.
This binomial is a sum The first and last
terms are perfect cubes.

Write the terms as cubes.

Use the sum of cubes pattern.

Simplify.

Check:                                                                                                      We'll leave

To check, you may find it easier to multiply the sum of cubes factors first, then multiply that product by
the multiplication for you.

       TRY IT 6.65 Factor:

       TRY IT 6.66 Factor:

The first term in the next example is a binomial cubed.
  EXAMPLE 6.34

Factor:
     Solution

This binomial is a difference. The first and
last terms are perfect cubes.
Write the terms as cubes.

Use the difference of cubes pattern.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     6.3 · Factor Special Products 587

Check by multiplying.                   We'll leave the check to you.

      TRY IT 6.67 Factor:

      TRY IT 6.68 Factor:

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with factoring special products.
      Factoring Binomials-Cubes #2 (https://openstax.org/l/37BinomCubes)

        SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Factor Perfect Square Trinomials

In the following exercises, factor completely using the perfect square trinomials pattern.

159.                              160.  161.

162.                              163.  164.

165.                              166.  167.

168.                              169.  170.

171.                              172.  173.

174.

Factor Differences of Squares

In the following exercises, factor completely using the difference of squares pattern, if possible.

175.                              176.  177.

178.                              179.  180.

181.                              182.  183.

184.                              185.  186.

187.                              188.  189.

190.                              191.  192.

193.                              194.

Factor Sums and Differences of Cubes

In the following exercises, factor completely using the sums and differences of cubes pattern, if possible.

195.                              196.  197.

198.                              199.  200.

201.                              202.  203.
588 6 · Factoring

204.                             205.               206.

207.                             208.               209.

210.                             211.               212.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, factor completely.

213.                             214.               215.

216.                             217.               218.

219.                             220.               221.

222.                             223.               224.

225.                             226.               227.

228.

Writing Exercises

229. Why was it important to practice using the     230. How do you recognize the binomial squares
        binomial squares pattern in the chapter on          pattern?
        multiplying polynomials?

231. Explain why                 Use algebra,       232. Maribel factored  as                                    Was
        words, or pictures.
                                                    she right or wrong? How do you know?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

6.4 General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Recognize and use the appropriate method to factor a polynomial completely

Recognize and Use the Appropriate Method to Factor a Polynomial Completely

You have now become acquainted with all the methods of factoring that you will need in this course. The following chart
summarizes all the factoring methods we have covered, and outlines a strategy you should use when factoring
polynomials.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 6.4 · General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials 589

General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials

...

     HOW TO

Use a general strategy for factoring polynomials.

Step 1.  Is there a greatest common factor?
Step 2.  Factor it out.
         Is the polynomial a binomial, trinomial, or are there more than three terms?
         If it is a binomial:

           Is it a sum?
               Of squares? Sums of squares do not factor.
               Of cubes? Use the sum of cubes pattern.

           Is it a difference?
               Of squares? Factor as the product of conjugates.
               Of cubes? Use the difference of cubes pattern.

         If it is a trinomial:             Undo FOIL.
           Is it of the form
           Is it of the form

         If a and c are squares, check if it fits the trinomial square pattern.

         Use the trial and error or "ac" method.

         If it has more than three terms:
           Use the grouping method.

Step 3. Check.
           Is it factored completely?
           Do the factors multiply back to the original polynomial?

Remember, a polynomial is completely factored if, other than monomials, its factors are prime!
  EXAMPLE 6.35

Factor completely:
590 6 · Factoring

            Solution
         Is there a GCF? Yes, .
         Factor out the GCF.
         In the parentheses, is it a binomial, trinomial, or are there more terms?
         Trinomial with leading coefficient 1.
         "Undo" FOIL.

         Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
         Neither binomial can be factored.
         Check your answer.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 6.69 Factor completely:
              TRY IT 6.70 Factor completely:
       Be careful when you are asked to factor a binomial as there are several options!
         EXAMPLE 6.36
       Factor completely:
            Solution
         Is there a GCF? Yes, 6.
         Factor out the GCF.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     6.4 · General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials 591

In the parentheses, is it a binomial, trinomial or are there more than three terms? Binomial.
Is it a sum? No.
Is it a difference? Of squares or cubes? Yes, squares.
Write as a product of conjugates.

Check:

       TRY IT 6.71 Factor completely:

       TRY IT 6.72 Factor completely:

The next example can be factored using several methods. Recognizing the trinomial squares pattern will make your work
easier.

  EXAMPLE 6.37
Factor completely:

     Solution

Is there a GCF? No.

Is it a binomial, trinomial, or are there more terms?

Trinomial with         . But the first term is a perfect square.

Is the last term a perfect square? Yes.

Does it fit the pattern,  ? Yes.

Write it as a square.
592 6 · Factoring

         Check your answer.

       TRY IT 6.73 Factor completely:

       TRY IT 6.74 Factor completely:

Remember, sums of squares do not factor, but sums of cubes do!
  EXAMPLE 6.38

Factor completely
     Solution

Is there a GCF? Yes,             .

Factor out the GCF.

In the parentheses, is it a binomial, trinomial, or are there more than three terms?
Binomial.

Is it a sum? Of squares? Yes.                                                         Sums of squares are
                                                                                               prime.

Check:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         6.4 · General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials 593

       TRY IT 6.75 Factor completely:
       TRY IT 6.76 Factor completely:
When using the sum or difference of cubes pattern, being careful with the signs.
  EXAMPLE 6.39
Factor completely:
     Solution
  Is there a GCF? Yes, 3.
  Factor it out.
  In the parentheses, is it a binomial, trinomial,
  of are there more than three terms? Binomial.
  Is it a sum or difference? Sum.
  Of squares or cubes? Sum of cubes.

  Write it using the sum of cubes pattern.
  Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
  Check by multiplying.

       TRY IT 6.77 Factor completely:
       TRY IT 6.78 Factor completely:

  EXAMPLE 6.40
Factor completely:

     Solution

  Is there a GCF? Factor out
  Is the binomial a sum or difference? Of squares or cubes?
  Write it as a difference of squares.
  Factor it as a product of conjugates
  The first binomial is again a difference of squares.
594 6 · Factoring

         Factor it as a product of conjugates.
         Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
         Check your answer.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 6.79 Factor completely:
              TRY IT 6.80 Factor completely:
         EXAMPLE 6.41
       Factor completely:
            Solution
         Is there a GCF? Factor out the GCF, 4.
         There are four terms. Use grouping.
         Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
         Check your answer.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 6.81 Factor completely:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         6.4 · General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials 595

       TRY IT 6.82 Factor completely:
Taking out the complete GCF in the first step will always make your work easier.

  EXAMPLE 6.42
Factor completely:

     Solution

Is there a GCF? Factor out the GCF, .

Factor the trinomial with  .

Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
Check your answer.
Multiply.

       TRY IT 6.83 Factor completely:

       TRY IT 6.84 Factor completely:

When we have factored a polynomial with four terms, most often we separated it into two groups of two terms.
Remember that we can also separate it into a trinomial and then one term.

  EXAMPLE 6.43
Factor completely:

     Solution

Is there a GCF? No.

With more than 3 terms, use grouping. Last 2 terms have no GCF. Try grouping
first 3 terms.

Factor the trinomial with  . But the first term is a perfect square.
596 6 · Factoring

Is the last term of the trinomial a perfect square? Yes.

Does the trinomial fit the pattern,             ? Yes.

Write the trinomial as a square.

Is this binomial a sum or difference? Of squares or cubes? Write it as a difference
of squares.

Write it as a product of conjugates.

Is the expression factored completely? Yes.
Check your answer.
Multiply.

      TRY IT 6.85 Factor completely:
      TRY IT 6.86 Factor completely:

        SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Recognize and Use the Appropriate Method to Factor a Polynomial Completely

In the following exercises, factor completely.

233.                                 234.                 235.

236.                                 237.                 238.

239.                                 240.                 241.

242.                                 243.                 244.

245.                                 246.                 247.

248.                                 249.                 250.

251.                                 252.                 253.

254.                                 255.                 256.

257.                                 258.                 259.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.5 · Polynomial Equations 597

260.                        261.                                    262.

263.                        264.                                    265.

266.                        267.                                    268.

269.                        270.                                    271.

272.

Writing Exercises

273. Explain what it mean to factor a polynomial         274. The difference of squares  can be
        completely.
                                                         factored as                     But it is not
275. Of all the factoring methods covered in this
        chapter (GCF, grouping, undo FOIL, `ac' method,  completely factored. What more must be done to
        special products) which is the easiest for you?
        Which is the hardest? Explain your answers.      completely factor.

                                                         276. Create three factoring problems that would be
                                                                 good test questions to measure your knowledge
                                                                 of factoring. Show the solutions.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

6.5 Polynomial Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the Zero Product Property
           Solve quadratic equations by factoring
           Solve equations with polynomial functions
           Solve applications modeled by polynomial equations

       BE PREPARED 6.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

      BE PREPARED 6.11  Factor completely:
                        If you missed this problem, review Example 3.48.

      BE PREPARED 6.12  If        find                   and solve

                        If you missed this problem, review Example 3.59.

We have spent considerable time learning how to factor polynomials. We will now look at polynomial equations and
solve them using factoring, if possible.

A polynomial equation is an equation that contains a polynomial expression. The degree of the polynomial equation
is the degree of the polynomial.
598 6 · Factoring

Polynomial Equation

A polynomial equation is an equation that contains a polynomial expression.
The degree of the polynomial equation is the degree of the polynomial.

We have already solved polynomial equations of degree one. Polynomial equations of degree one are linear equations
are of the form

We are now going to solve polynomial equations of degree two. A polynomial equation of degree two is called a
quadratic equation. Listed below are some examples of quadratic equations:

The last equation doesn't appear to have the variable squared, but when we simplify the expression on the left we will
get

The general form of a quadratic equation is    with                           (If  then  and we are left with
no quadratic term.)

Quadratic Equation

An equation of the form                      is called a quadratic equation.

To solve quadratic equations we need methods different from the ones we used in solving linear equations. We will look
at one method here and then several others in a later chapter.

Use the Zero Product Property

We will first solve some quadratic equations by using the Zero Product Property. The Zero Product Property says that if
the product of two quantities is zero, then at least one of the quantities is zero. The only way to get a product equal to
zero is to multiply by zero itself.

Zero Product Property

If                 then either   or  or both.

We will now use the Zero Product Property, to solve a quadratic equation.

  EXAMPLE 6.44

How to Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Zero Product Property
Solve:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                       6.5 · Polynomial Equations 599

       TRY IT 6.87 Solve:
       TRY IT 6.88 Solve:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Use the Zero Product Property.
  Step 1. Set each factor equal to zero.
  Step 2. Solve the linear equations.
  Step 3. Check.

Solve Quadratic Equations by Factoring

The Zero Product Property works very nicely to solve quadratic equations. The quadratic equation must be factored, with
zero isolated on one side. So we must be sure to start with the quadratic equation in standard form,
Then we must factor the expression on the left.

  EXAMPLE 6.45
How to Solve a Quadratic Equation by Factoring
Solve:

     Solution
600 6 · Factoring

TRY IT 6.89 Solve:

TRY IT 6.90 Solve:

...

     HOW TO

Solve a quadratic equation by factoring.

Step 1.  Write the quadratic equation in standard form,
Step 2.  Factor the quadratic expression.
Step 3.  Use the Zero Product Property.
Step 4.  Solve the linear equations.
Step 5.  Check. Substitute each solution separately into the original equation.

Before we factor, we must make sure the quadratic equation is in standard form.
Solving quadratic equations by factoring will make use of all the factoring techniques you have learned in this chapter!
Do you recognize the special product pattern in the next example?

  EXAMPLE 6.46

Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.5 · Polynomial Equations 601

Solution

  Write the quadratic equation in standard form.
  Factor. It is a difference of squares.

  Use the Zero Product Property to set each factor to .
  Solve each equation.

Check:
We leave the check up to you.

       TRY IT 6.91 Solve:

       TRY IT 6.92 Solve:

In the next example, the left side of the equation is factored, but the right side is not zero. In order to use the Zero
Product Property, one side of the equation must be zero. We'll multiply the factors and then write the equation in
standard form.

  EXAMPLE 6.47
Solve:

     Solution

Multiply the binomials.

Write the quadratic equation in standard form.
Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property to set each factor to 0.
Solve each equation.

Check your answers.                                     The check is left to you.

       TRY IT 6.93 Solve:
       TRY IT 6.94 Solve:
In the next example, when we factor the quadratic equation we will get three factors. However the first factor is a
602 6 · Factoring

       constant. We know that factor cannot equal 0.
         EXAMPLE 6.48

       Solve:
            Solution

Write the quadratic equation in standard form.

Factor the greatest common factor first.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property to set each factor to 0.
Solve each equation.

Check your answers.                                        The check is left to you.

       TRY IT 6.95 Solve:

       TRY IT 6.96 Solve:

The Zero Product Property also applies to the product of three or more factors. If the product is zero, at least one of the
factors must be zero. We can solve some equations of degree greater than two by using the Zero Product Property, just
like we solved quadratic equations.

  EXAMPLE 6.49
Solve:

     Solution

Bring all the terms to one side so that the other side is  The check is left to you.
zero.

Factor the greatest common factor first.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property to set each factor to 0.
Solve each equation.

Check your answers.

TRY IT 6.97 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.5 · Polynomial Equations 603

TRY IT 6.98 Solve:

Solve Equations with Polynomial Functions

As our study of polynomial functions continues, it will often be important to know when the function will have a certain
value or what points lie on the graph of the function. Our work with the Zero Product Property will be help us find these
answers.

EXAMPLE 6.50

For the function              find two points that lie on the graph of the function.

 find x when

     Solution



Substitute 6 for        .

Put the quadratic in standard form.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the zero product property.
Solve.

Check:

 Since                  and     the points     and  lie on the graph of the function.

TRY IT 6.99                For the function

                            find x when         Find two points that lie on the graph of the function.

TRY IT 6.100                 For the function

                              find x when       Find two points that lie on the graph of the function.

The Zero Product Property also helps us determine where the function is zero. A value of x where the function is 0, is
called a zero of the function.

Zero of a Function

For any function f, if       then x is a zero of the function.
604 6 · Factoring

When               the point     is a point on the graph. This point is an x-intercept of the graph. It is often important to

know where the graph of a function crosses the axes. We will see some examples later.

EXAMPLE 6.51

For the function                            find

 the zeros of the function,  any x-intercepts of the graph of the function,  any y-intercepts of the graph of the

function

     Solution

 To find the zeros of the function, we need to find when the function value is 0.

Substitute 0 for       .

Factor the trinomial.

Use the zero product property.
Solve.

 An x-intercept occurs when                 Since  and        the points               and                     lie on the graph.

These points are x-intercepts of the function.

 A y-intercept occurs when                  To find the y-intercepts we need to find

Find               by substituting 0 for .

Simplify.

Since              the point                lies on the graph. This point is the y-intercept of the function.

TRY IT 6.101              For the function              find

                           the zeros of the function,  any x-intercepts of the graph of the function,  any

                          y-intercepts of the graph of the function.

TRY IT 6.102              For the function              find

                           the zeros of the function,  any x-intercepts of the graph of the function,  any

                          y-intercepts of the graph of the function.

Solve Applications Modeled by Polynomial Equations

The problem-solving strategy we used earlier for applications that translate to linear equations will work just as well for
applications that translate to polynomial equations. We will copy the problem-solving strategy here so we can use it for
reference.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.5 · Polynomial Equations 605

...

     HOW TO

Use a problem solving strategy to solve word problems.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
         information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebraic equation.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using appropriate algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

We will start with a number problem to get practice translating words into a polynomial equation.
  EXAMPLE 6.52

The product of two consecutive odd integers is 323. Find the integers.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                     We are looking for two consecutive integers.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                         Let

Step 4. Translate into an equation. Restate the problem in a  The product of the two consecutive odd integers
sentence.                                                     is 323.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Bring all the terms to one side.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve the equations.

There are two values for n that are solutions to this problem. So there are two sets of consecutive odd integers that
will work.

If the first integer is                                       If the first integer is

then the next odd integer is                                  then the next odd integer is
606 6 · Factoring

Step 6. Check the answer.
The results are consecutive odd integers

Both pairs of consecutive integers are solutions.  The consecutive integers are 17, 19 and
Step 7. Answer the question

       TRY IT 6.103 The product of two consecutive odd integers is 255. Find the integers.

       TRY IT 6.104 The product of two consecutive odd integers is 483 Find the integers.

Were you surprised by the pair of negative integers that is one of the solutions to the previous example? The product of
the two positive integers and the product of the two negative integers both give positive results.
In some applications, negative solutions will result from the algebra, but will not be realistic for the situation.

  EXAMPLE 6.53
A rectangular bedroom has an area 117 square feet. The length of the bedroom is four feet more than the width. Find
the length and width of the bedroom.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem. In problems involving
  geometric figures, a sketch can help you visualize
  the situation.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.         We are looking for the length and width.
Step 3. Name what you are looking for.
The length is four feet more than the width.       Let  the width of the bedroom.
Step 4. Translate into an equation.
Restate the important information in a sentence.        the length of the garden

                                                   The area of the bedroom is 117 square feet.

Access for free at openstax.org
Use the formula for the area of a rectangle.                                         6.5 · Polynomial Equations 607
Substitute in the variables.
Step 5. Solve the equation Distribute first.                                Width is 9 feet.
Get zero on one side.                                             13 Length is 13 feet.
Factor the trinomial.
Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve each equation.
Since w is the width of the bedroom, it does not
make sense for it to be negative. We eliminate that value for w.

Find the value of the length.

Step 6. Check the answer.
Does the answer make sense?

Yes, this makes sense.                                            The width of the bedroom is 9 feet and
Step 7. Answer the question.                                      the length is 13 feet.

TRY IT 6.105  A rectangular sign has an area of 30 square feet. The length of the sign is one foot more than
              the width. Find the length and width of the sign.

TRY IT 6.106  A rectangular patio has an area of 180 square feet. The width of the patio is three feet less than
              the length. Find the length and width of the patio.

In the next example, we will use the Pythagorean Theorem          This formula gives the relation between the
legs and the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
608 6 · Factoring

       We will use this formula to in the next example.
         EXAMPLE 6.54

       A boat's sail is in the shape of a right triangle as shown. The hypotenuse will be 17 feet long. The length of one side will
       be 7 feet less than the length of the other side. Find the lengths of the sides of the sail.

  Solution
Step 1. Read the problem

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.            We are looking for the lengths of the
                                                      sides of the sail.

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.                Let length of a side of the sail.
One side is 7 less than the other.                               length of other side

Step 4. Translate into an equation. Since this is a
right triangle we can use the Pythagorean Theorem.

Substitute in the variables.

Step 5. Solve the equation
Simplify.

It is a quadratic equation, so get zero on one side.

Factor the greatest common factor.

Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property.

Solve.

Since x is a side of the triangle,  does not
make sense.

Find the length of the other side.

        If the length of one side is
        then the length of the other side is

                                                      8 is the length of the other side.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           6.5 · Polynomial Equations 609

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem
Do these numbers make sense?

Step 7. Answer the question                            The sides of the sail are 8, 15 and 17 feet.

TRY IT 6.107  Justine wants to put a deck in the corner of her backyard in the shape of a right triangle. The
              length of one side of the deck is 7 feet more than the other side. The hypotenuse is 13. Find the
              lengths of the two sides of the deck.

TRY IT 6.108  A meditation garden is in the shape of a right triangle, with one leg 7 feet. The length of the
              hypotenuse is one more than the length of the other leg. Find the lengths of the hypotenuse
              and the other leg.

The next example uses the function that gives the height of an object as a function of time when it is thrown from 80 feet
above the ground.

EXAMPLE 6.55

Dennis is going to throw his rubber band ball upward from the top of a campus building. When he throws the rubber

band ball from 80 feet above the ground, the function                      models the height, h, of the ball above

the ground as a function of time, t. Find:

 the zeros of this function which tell us when the ball hits the ground,   when the ball will be 80 feet above the

ground,  the height of the ball at          seconds.

Solution

 The zeros of this function are found by solving       This will tell us when the ball will hit the ground.

Substitute in the polynomial for

Factor the GCF,
Factor the trinomial.

Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve.

The result    tells us the ball will hit the ground 5 seconds after it is thrown. Since time cannot be negative, the result
610 6 · Factoring

                 is discarded.

     The ball will be 80 feet above the ground when

Substitute in the polynomial
for

Subtract 80 from both sides.

Factor the GCF,

Use the Zero Product
Property.
Solve.

                                             The ball will be at 80 feet the moment Dennis tosses the ball and then 4 seconds
                                             later, when the ball is falling.

 To find the height ball at      seconds we find

To find    substitute 2 for

Simplify.

                                 After 2 seconds, the ball will be at 144 feet.

TRY IT 6.109  Genevieve is going to throw a rock from the top a trail overlooking the ocean. When she throws
TRY IT 6.110
              the rock upward from 160 feet above the ocean, the function                              models

              the height, h, of the rock above the ocean as a function of time, t. Find:

               the zeros of this function which tell us when the rock will hit the ocean,  when the rock
              will be 160 feet above the ocean,  the height of the rock at        seconds.

              Calib is going to throw his lucky penny from his balcony on a cruise ship. When he throws the

              penny upward from 128 feet above the ground, the function                                models

              the height, h, of the penny above the ocean as a function of time, t. Find:

               the zeros of this function which is when the penny will hit the ocean,  when the penny
              will be 128 feet above the ocean,  the height the penny will be at           seconds which is

              when the penny will be at its highest point.

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with quadratic equations.
Beginning Algebra & Solving Quadratics with the Zero Property (https://openstax.org/l/37ZeroProperty)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 6.5 · Polynomial Equations 611

        SECTION 6.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Zero Product Property

In the following exercises, solve.

277.                                278.                             279.

280.                                281.                             282.

Solve Quadratic Equations by Factoring

In the following exercises, solve.

283.                                284.                             285.

286.                                287.                             288.

289.                                290.                             291.

292.                                293.                             294.

295.                                296.                             297.

298.                                299.                             300.

301.                                302.                             303.

304.                                305.                             306.

307.                                308.                             309.

310.                                311.                             312.

Solve Equations with Polynomial Functions

In the following exercises, solve.

313. For the function,                     find          314. For the function,   find

      when               Use this information to find          when               Use this information to find

      two points that lie on the graph of the function.        two points that lie on the graph of the function.

315. For the function,                      find         316. For the function,                              

      when               Use this information to find          find when          Use this information to

      two points that lie on the graph of the function.        find two points that lie on the graph of the

                                                               function.

In the following exercises, for each function, find:  the zeros of the function  the x-intercepts of the graph of the
function  the y-intercept of the graph of the function.

317.                                                     318.

319.                                                     320.

Solve Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations        322. The product of two consecutive odd integers is
                                                                 195. Find the integers.
In the following exercises, solve.
                                                         324. The product of two consecutive even integers is
321. The product of two consecutive odd integers is              288. Find the integers.
        143. Find the integers.

323. The product of two consecutive even integers is
        168. Find the integers.
612 6 · Factoring

325. The area of a rectangular carpet is 28 square               326. A rectangular retaining wall has area 15 square
        feet. The length is three feet more than the                     feet. The height of the wall is two feet less than
        width. Find the length and the width of the                      its length. Find the height and the length of the
        carpet.                                                          wall.

327. The area of a bulletin board is 55 square feet.             328. A rectangular carport has area 150 square feet.
        The length is four feet less than three times the                The width of the carport is five feet less than
        width. Find the length and the width of the a                    twice its length. Find the width and the length of
        bulletin board.                                                  the carport.

329. A pennant is shaped like a right triangle, with             330. A stained glass window is shaped like a right
        hypotenuse 10 feet. The length of one side of the                triangle. The hypotenuse is 15 feet. One leg is
        pennant is two feet longer than the length of the                three more than the other. Find the lengths of
        other side. Find the length of the two sides of the              the legs.
        pennant.
                                                                 332. A goat enclosure is in the shape of a right
331. A reflecting pool is shaped like a right triangle,                  triangle. One leg of the enclosure is built against
        with one leg along the wall of a building. The                   the side of the barn. The other leg is 4 feet more
        hypotenuse is 9 feet longer than the side along                  than the leg against the barn. The hypotenuse is
        the building. The third side is 7 feet longer than               8 feet more than the leg along the barn. Find the
        the side along the building. Find the lengths of                 three sides of the goat enclosure.
        all three sides of the reflecting pool.
                                                                 334. Gianna is going to throw a ball from the top floor
333. Juli is going to launch a model rocket in her back
        yard. When she launches the rocket, the function         of her middle school. When she throws the ball
                                   models the height, h, of the
        rocket above the ground as a function of time, t.        from 48 feet above the ground, the function
        Find:
                                                                                             models the height, h, of
     the zeros of this function, which tell us when
    the rocket will be on the ground.  the time the              the ball above the ground as a function of time,

        rocket will be 16 feet above the ground.                 t. Find:

                                                                  the zeros of this function which tells us when
                                                                 the ball will hit the ground.  the time(s) the
                                                                 ball will be 48 feet above the ground.  the
                                                                 height the ball will be at  seconds which is

                                                                 when the ball will be at its highest point.

Writing Exercises

335. Explain how you solve a quadratic equation. How             336. Give an example of a quadratic equation that has
        many answers do you expect to get for a                          a GCF and none of the solutions to the equation
        quadratic equation?                                              is zero.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 613

Chapter Review

Key Terms

degree of the polynomial equation The degree of the polynomial equation is the degree of the polynomial.
factoring Splitting a product into factors is called factoring.
greatest common factor The greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more expressions is the largest expression that

    is a factor of all the expressions.
polynomial equation A polynomial equation is an equation that contains a polynomial expression.
quadratic equation Polynomial equations of degree two are called quadratic equations.
zero of the function A value of where the function is 0, is called a zero of the function.
Zero Product Property The Zero Product Property says that if the product of two quantities is zero, then at least one of

    the quantities is zero.

Key Concepts
6.1 Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping

  · How to find the greatest common factor (GCF) of two expressions.
      Step 1. Factor each coefficient into primes. Write all variables with exponents in expanded form.
      Step 2. List all factors--matching common factors in a column. In each column, circle the common factors.
      Step 3. Bring down the common factors that all expressions share.
      Step 4. Multiply the factors.

  · Distributive Property: If a, b, and c are real numbers, then

      The form on the left is used to multiply. The form on the right is used to factor.
  · How to factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial.

      Step 1. Find the GCF of all the terms of the polynomial.
      Step 2. Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
      Step 3. Use the "reverse" Distributive Property to factor the expression.
      Step 4. Check by multiplying the factors.

  · Factor as a Noun and a Verb: We use "factor" as both a noun and a verb.

  · How to factor by grouping.
      Step 1. Group terms with common factors.
      Step 2. Factor out the common factor in each group.
      Step 3. Factor the common factor from the expression.
      Step 4. Check by multiplying the factors.

6.2 Factor Trinomials

  · How to factor trinomials of the form
      Step 1. Write the factors as two binomials with first terms x.

      Step 2. Find two numbers m and n that

   Step 3. Use m and n as the last terms of the factors.         : When we factor a trinomial, we look at the signs of its
    Step 4. Check by multiplying the factors.

· Strategy for Factoring Trinomials of the Form
    terms first to determine the signs of the binomial factors.
614 6 · Chapter Review

Notice that, in the case when m and n have opposite signs, the sign of the one with the larger absolute value

matches the sign of b.

· How to factor trinomials of the form                using trial and error.

Step 1. Write the trinomial in descending order of degrees as needed.

Step 2. Factor any GCF.

Step 3. Find all the factor pairs of the first term.

Step 4. Find all the factor pairs of the third term.

Step 5. Test all the possible combinations of the factors until the correct product is found.

Step 6. Check by multiplying.

· How to factor trinomials of the form                using the "ac" method.
    Step 1. Factor any GCF.
   Step 2. Find the product ac.
   Step 3. Find two numbers m and n that:

      Step 4. Split the middle term using m and n.
      Step 5. Factor by grouping.
      Step 6. Check by multiplying the factors.

6.3 Factor Special Products

  · Perfect Square Trinomials Pattern: If a and b are real numbers,

  · How to factor perfect square trinomials.

  · Difference of Squares Pattern: If are real numbers,
  · How to factor differences of squares.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          6 · Chapter Review 615

  · Sum and Difference of Cubes Pattern

  · How to factor the sum or difference of cubes.
      Step 1. Does the binomial fit the sum or difference of cubes pattern?
                  Is it a sum or difference?
                  Are the first and last terms perfect cubes?
      Step 2. Write them as cubes.
      Step 3. Use either the sum or difference of cubes pattern.
      Step 4. Simplify inside the parentheses
      Step 5. Check by multiplying the factors.

6.4 General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials

· How to use a general strategy for factoring polynomials.

Step 1. Is there a greatest common factor?

Factor it out.

Step 2. Is the polynomial a binomial, trinomial, or are there more than three terms?

If it is a binomial:

Is it a sum?

Of squares? Sums of squares do not factor.

Of cubes? Use the sum of cubes pattern.

Is it a difference?

Of squares? Factor as the product of conjugates.

Of cubes? Use the difference of cubes pattern.

If it is a trinomial:

Is it of the form           Undo FOIL.

Is it of the form

If a and c are squares, check if it fits the trinomial square pattern.

Use the trial and error or "ac" method.

If it has more than three terms:

Use the grouping method.

Step 3. Check.

Is it factored completely?

Do the factors multiply back to the original polynomial?

6.5 Polynomial Equations

  · Polynomial Equation: A polynomial equation is an equation that contains a polynomial expression. The degree of
616 6 · Exercises

    the polynomial equation is the degree of the polynomial.   is called a quadratic equation.
· Quadratic Equation: An equation of the form

· Zero Product Property: If                then either  or     or both.

· How to use the Zero Product Property

      Step 1. Set each factor equal to zero.

      Step 2. Solve the linear equations.

      Step 3. Check.

· How to solve a quadratic equation by factoring.
    Step 1. Write the quadratic equation in standard form,
    Step 2. Factor the quadratic expression.
    Step 3. Use the Zero Product Property.
    Step 4. Solve the linear equations.
    Step 5. Check. Substitute each solution separately into the original equation.

· Zero of a Function: For any function f, if            then x is a zero of the function.

· How to use a problem solving strategy to solve word problems.

      Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.

      Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.

      Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

      Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important

      information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebraic equation.

      Step 5. Solve the equation using appropriate algebra techniques.

      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Greatest Common Factor and Factor by Grouping

Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

In the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

337.                             338.                                   339.

340.

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

In the following exercises, factor the greatest common factor from each polynomial.

341.                             342.                                   343.

344.                             345.                                   346.

347.                             348.

Factor by Grouping

In the following exercises, factor by grouping.

349.                             350.                                   351.

352.                             353.                                   354.

Factor Trinomials

Factor Trinomials of the Form

In the following exercises, factor each trinomial of the form

355.                             356.                                   357.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             6 · Exercises 617

358.

In the following examples, factor each trinomial of the form

359.                                 360.                             361.

362.                                 363.

Factor Trinomials of the Form              Using Trial and Error

In the following exercises, factor completely using trial and error.

364.                                 365.                             366.

367.                                 368.                             369.

370.                                 371.

Factor Trinomials of the Form              using the `ac' Method

In the following exercises, factor.                                            374.
                                                                               377.
372.                                 373.                                      380.

375.                                 376.

378.                                 379.

Factor using substitution

In the following exercises, factor using substitution.

381.                                 382.

Factor Special Products

Factor Perfect Square Trinomials

In the following exercises, factor completely using the perfect square trinomials pattern.

383.                                 384.                             385.

386.                                 387.

Factor Differences of Squares

In the following exercises, factor completely using the difference of squares pattern, if possible.

388.                                 389.                             390.

391.                                 392.                             393.

394.                                 395.                             396.

397.                                 398.                             399.

400.

Factor Sums and Differences of Cubes

In the following exercises, factor completely using the sums and differences of cubes pattern, if possible.

401.                                 402.                             403.

404.
618 6 · Exercises

General Strategy for Factoring Polynomials

Recognize and Use the Appropriate Method to Factor a Polynomial Completely

In the following exercises, factor completely.

405.                                406.                             407.

408.                                409.                             410.

411.                                412.                             413.

414.                                415.                             416.

417.                                418.                             419.

420.                                421.

Polynomial Equations

Use the Zero Product Property

In the following exercises, solve.

422.                                423.                             424.

425.                                426.

Solve Quadratic Equations by Factoring

In the following exercises, solve.

427.                                428.                             429.

430.                                431.                             432.

433.                                434.                             435.

436.

Solve Equations with Polynomial Functions

In the following exercises, solve.

437. For the function,                           find    438. For the function,   find

      when               Use this information to find          when               Use this information to find

      two points that lie on the graph of the function.        two points that lie on the graph of the function.

In each function, find:  the zeros of the function  the x-intercepts of the graph of the function  the y-intercept of the
graph of the function.

439.                                                     440.

Solve Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations        442. The area of a rectangular shaped patio 432
                                                                 square feet. The length of the patio is 6 feet
In the following exercises, solve.                               more than its width. Find the length and width.

441. The product of two consecutive odd numbers is
        399. Find the numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6 · Exercises 619

443. A ladder leans against the wall of a building. The    444. Shruti is going to throw a ball from the top of a
        length of the ladder is 9 feet longer than the
        distance of the bottom of the ladder from the      cliff. When she throws the ball from 80 feet
        building. The distance of the top of the ladder
        reaches up the side of the building is 7 feet      above the ground, the function
        longer than the distance of the bottom of the
        ladder from the building. Find the lengths of all                          models the height, h, of
        three sides of the triangle formed by the ladder
        leaning against the building.                      the ball above the ground as a function of time,

                                                           t. Find:  the zeros of this function which tells
                                                           us when the ball will hit the ground.  the

                                                           time(s) the ball will be 80 feet above the ground.

                                                            the height the ball will be at  seconds

                                                           which is when the ball will be at its highest point.

Practice Test

In the following exercises, factor completely.

445.                    446.                               447.

448.                    449.                               450.

451.                    452.                               453.

454.                    455.                               456.

457.                    458.

In the following exercises, solve                          460. The product of two consecutive integers is 156.
459.                                                               Find the integers.

461. The area of a rectangular place mat is 168            462. Jing is going to throw a ball from the balcony of
        square inches. Its length is two inches longer             her condo. When she throws the ball from 80
        than the width. Find the length and width of the           feet above the ground, the function
        placemat.                                                                                     models the height, h, of
                                                                   the ball above the ground as a function of time,

                                                               t. Find:  the zeros of this function which tells
                                                               us when the ball will hit the ground.  the

                                                                   time(s) the ball will be 128 feet above the

                                                               ground.  the height the ball will be at

                                                                   seconds.

463. For the function,         find                        464. For the function            find:  the

      when               Use this information to find      zeros of the function  the x-intercepts of the

      two points that lie on the graph of the function.    graph of the function  the y-intercept of the

                                                           graph of the function.
620 6 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                             7 · Introduction 621

7  RATIONAL EXPRESSIONS AND
   FUNCTIONS

Figure 7.1 American football is the most watched spectator sport in the United States. People around the country are
constantly tracking statistics for football and other sports. (credit: "keijj44" / Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions
  7.2 Add and Subtract Rational Expressions
  7.3 Simplify Complex Rational Expressions
  7.4 Solve Rational Equations
  7.5 Solve Applications with Rational Equations
  7.6 Solve Rational Inequalities

      Introduction

Twelve goals last season. Fifteen home runs. Nine touchdowns. Whatever the statistics, sports analysts know it. Their
jobs depend on it. Compiling and analyzing sports data not only help fans appreciate their teams but also help owners
and coaches decide which players to recruit, how to best use them in games, how much they should be paid, and which
players to trade. Understanding this kind of data requires a knowledge of specific types of expressions and functions. In
this chapter, you will work with rational expressions and perform operations on them. And you will use rational
expressions and inequalities to solve real-world problems.

7.1 Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined
           Simplify rational expressions
           Multiply rational expressions
           Divide rational expressions
           Multiply and divide rational functions

       BE PREPARED 7.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:

                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 5.13.
622 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

BE PREPARED 7.2                  Multiply:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.25.

BE PREPARED 7.3                  Divide:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.26.

We previously reviewed the properties of fractions and their operations. We introduced rational numbers, which are just
fractions where the numerators and denominators are integers. In this chapter, we will work with fractions whose
numerators and denominators are polynomials. We call this kind of expression a rational expression.

  Rational Expression

  A rational expression is an expression of the form where p and q are polynomials and

Here are some examples of rational expressions:

Notice that the first rational expression listed above, , is just a fraction. Since a constant is a polynomial with degree
zero, the ratio of two constants is a rational expression, provided the denominator is not zero.
We will do the same operations with rational expressions that we did with fractions. We will simplify, add, subtract,
multiply, divide and use them in applications.

Determine the Values for Which a Rational Expression is Undefined

If the denominator is zero, the rational expression is undefined. The numerator of a rational expression may be 0--but
not the denominator.
When we work with a numerical fraction, it is easy to avoid dividing by zero because we can see the number in the
denominator. In order to avoid dividing by zero in a rational expression, we must not allow values of the variable that will
make the denominator be zero.
So before we begin any operation with a rational expression, we examine it first to find the values that would make the
denominator zero. That way, when we solve a rational equation for example, we will know whether the algebraic
solutions we find are allowed or not.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined.
  Step 1. Set the denominator equal to zero.
  Step 2. Solve the equation.

  EXAMPLE 7.1

Determine the value for which each rational expression is undefined:



     Solution
The expression will be undefined when the denominator is zero.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                               7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 623

  Set the denominator equal to zero and solve
  for the variable.



  Set the denominator equal to zero and solve
  for the variable.



  Set the denominator equal to zero and solve
  for the variable.

TRY IT 7.1  Determine the value for which each rational expression is undefined.

             

TRY IT 7.2  Determine the value for which each rational expression is undefined.

             

Simplify Rational Expressions

A fraction is considered simplified if there are no common factors, other than 1, in its numerator and denominator.
Similarly, a simplified rational expression has no common factors, other than 1, in its numerator and denominator.

  Simplified Rational Expression

A rational expression is considered simplified if there are no common factors in its numerator and denominator.
624 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       For example,

       We use the Equivalent Fractions Property to simplify numerical fractions. We restate it here as we will also use it to
       simplify rational expressions.

         Equivalent Fractions Property
         If a, b, and c are numbers where

Notice that in the Equivalent Fractions Property, the values that would make the denominators zero are specifically

disallowed. We see     clearly stated.

To simplify rational expressions, we first write the numerator and denominator in factored form. Then we remove the
common factors using the Equivalent Fractions Property.

Be very careful as you remove common factors. Factors are multiplied to make a product. You can remove a factor from
a product. You cannot remove a term from a sum.

Removing the x's from  would be like cancelling the 2's in the fraction

EXAMPLE 7.2

How to Simplify a Rational Expression

Simplify:           .

Solution

       TRY IT 7.3 Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 625

TRY IT 7.4 Simplify:

We now summarize the steps you should follow to simplify rational expressions.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Simplify a rational expression.
  Step 1. Factor the numerator and denominator completely.
  Step 2. Simplify by dividing out common factors.

Usually, we leave the simplified rational expression in factored form. This way, it is easy to check that we have removed
all the common factors.

We'll use the methods we have learned to factor the polynomials in the numerators and denominators in the following
examples.

Every time we write a rational expression, we should make a statement disallowing values that would make a
denominator zero. However, to let us focus on the work at hand, we will omit writing it in the examples.

  EXAMPLE 7.3

Simplify:  .

Solution

Factor the numerator and denominator,
first factoring out the GCF.

Remove the common factors of

TRY IT 7.5 Simplify:                   .

TRY IT 7.6 Simplify:                   .

Now we will see how to simplify a rational expression whose numerator and denominator have opposite factors. We
previously introduced opposite notation: the opposite of a is and
The numerical fraction, say simplifies to . We also recognize that the numerator and denominator are opposites.

The fraction , whose numerator and denominator are opposites also simplifies to .
626 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

This tells us that       is the opposite of

In general, we could write the opposite of   as  So the rational expression simplifies to

Opposites in a Rational Expression

The opposite of          is

An expression and its opposite divide to

We will use this property to simplify rational expressions that contain opposites in their numerators and denominators.

Be careful not to treat          and        as opposites. Recall that in addition, order doesn't matter so  . So if

, then

EXAMPLE 7.4

Simplify:
     Solution

Factor the numerator and the denominator.
Recognize the factors that are opposites.
Simplify.

TRY IT 7.7 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.8 Simplify:

Multiply Rational Expressions

To multiply rational expressions, we do just what we did with numerical fractions. We multiply the numerators and
multiply the denominators. Then, if there are any common factors, we remove them to simplify the result.

Multiplication of Rational Expressions

If p, q, r, and s are polynomials where          then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 627

To multiply rational expressions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

Remember, throughout this chapter, we will assume that all numerical values that would make the denominator be zero

are excluded. We will not write the restrictions for each rational expression, but keep in mind that the denominator can

never be zero. So in this next example,  and

EXAMPLE 7.5

How to Multiply Rational Expressions
Simplify:

Solution

       TRY IT 7.9 Simplify:

       TRY IT 7.10 Simplify:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Multiply rational expressions.
  Step 1. Factor each numerator and denominator completely.
  Step 2. Multiply the numerators and denominators.
  Step 3. Simplify by dividing out common factors.

  EXAMPLE 7.6
Multiply:
628 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

Factor the numerators and denominators
and then multiply.

Simplify by dividing out
common factors.

Simplify.

Rewrite  using an exponent.

TRY IT 7.11 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.12 Simplify:

Divide Rational Expressions

Just like we did for numerical fractions, to divide rational expressions, we multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of
the second.

Division of Rational Expressions

If p, q, r, and s are polynomials where     then

  To divide rational expressions, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

Once we rewrite the division as multiplication of the first expression by the reciprocal of the second, we then factor
everything and look for common factors.

  EXAMPLE 7.7
How to Divide Rational Expressions
Divide:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 629

TRY IT 7.13 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.14 Simplify:

...

     HOW TO

Divide rational expressions.

Step 1.  Rewrite the division as the product of the first rational expression and the reciprocal of the second.
Step 2.  Factor the numerators and denominators completely.
Step 3.  Multiply the numerators and denominators together.
Step 4.  Simplify by dividing out common factors.

Recall from Use the Language of Algebra that a complex fraction is a fraction that contains a fraction in the numerator,
the denominator or both. Also, remember a fraction bar means division. A complex fraction is another way of writing
division of two fractions.

  EXAMPLE 7.8

Divide:

     Solution

Rewrite with a division sign.

Rewrite as product of first times reciprocal
of second.
630 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         Factor the numerators and the
         denominators, and then multiply.
         Simplify by dividing out common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 7.15 Simplify:

              TRY IT 7.16 Simplify:

       If we have more than two rational expressions to work with, we still follow the same procedure. The first step will be to
       rewrite any division as multiplication by the reciprocal. Then, we factor and multiply.

         EXAMPLE 7.9
       Perform the indicated operations:

            Solution

         Rewrite the division as multiplication
         by the reciprocal.
         Factor the numerators and the denominators.
         Multiply the fractions. Bringing the constants to
         the front will help when removing common factors.
         Simplify by dividing out common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 7.17 Perform the indicated operations:
              TRY IT 7.18 Perform the indicated operations:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 631

Multiply and Divide Rational Functions

We started this section stating that a rational expression is an expression of the form  where p and q are polynomials

and     Similarly, we define a rational function as a function of the form               where  and  are

polynomial functions and  is not zero.

Rational Function

A rational function is a function of the form

where   and        are polynomial functions and     is not zero.

The domain of a rational function is all real numbers except for those values that would cause division by zero. We must
eliminate any values that make

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Determine the domain of a rational function.

  Step 1. Set the denominator equal to zero.
  Step 2. Solve the equation.
  Step 3. The domain is all real numbers excluding the values found in Step 2.

  EXAMPLE 7.10

Find the domain of
     Solution

The domain will be all real numbers except those values that make the denominator zero. We will set the denominator
equal to zero , solve that equation, and then exclude those values from the domain.

  Set the denominator to zero.

  Factor, first factor out the GCF.

Use the Zero Product Property.

Solve.

                                The domain of       is all real numbers

                                where          and

     TRY IT 7.19 Find the domain of
     TRY IT 7.20 Find the domain of
632 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

To multiply rational functions, we multiply the resulting rational expressions on the right side of the equation using the
same techniques we used to multiply rational expressions.

  EXAMPLE 7.11

Find             where                           and

Solution

Factor each numerator and denominator.
Multiply the numerators and denominators.
Remove common factors.
Simplify.

      TRY IT 7.21 Find                           where  and

      TRY IT 7.22 Find                           where  and

To divide rational functions, we divide the resulting rational expressions on the right side of the equation using the same
techniques we used to divide rational expressions.

  EXAMPLE 7.12

Find      where                             and

Solution

Substitute in the functions

Rewrite the division as the product of
       and the reciprocal of

Factor the numerators and denominators
and then multiply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            7.1 · Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions 633

    Simplify by dividing out common factors.

     TRY IT 7.23 Find                         where             and
     TRY IT 7.24 Find                         where               and

        SECTION 7.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine the Values for Which a Rational Expression is Undefined
In the following exercises, determine the values for which the rational expression is undefined.

1.  ,  ,                                             2.  ,                  ,
3.  ,  , 
                                                     4.  ,  , 

Simplify Rational Expressions
In the following exercises, simplify each rational expression.

5.                             6.                                      7.

8.                             9.                                      10.

11.                            12.                                     13.

14.                            15.                                     16.

17.                            18.                                     19.

20.                            21.                                     22.

23.                            24.                                     25.

26.                            27.                                     28.

Multiply Rational Expressions

In the following exercises, multiply the rational expressions.

29.                                                  30.

31.                                                  32.
634 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

33.                                                           34.

35.                                                           36.

37.                                                           38.

39.                                                           40.

41.                                                           42.

Divide Rational Expressions
In the following exercises, divide the rational expressions.

43.                                                           44.

45.                                                           46.

47.                                                           48.

49.                                                           50.

51.                                                           52.

53.                                                           54.

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operations.

55.                                                           56.

57.                                                           58.

Multiply and Divide Rational Functions
In the following exercises, find the domain of each function.

59.                                                           60.

61.                                                           62.

For the following exercises, find           where                  and  are given.
63.
                                                              64.

65.                                                           66.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 635

For the following exercises, find   where                and  are given.
67.
                                                         68.
69.
                                                         70.

Writing Exercises

71. Explain how you find the values of x for which the   72. Explain all the steps you take to simplify the
                                                               rational expression
rational expression                is undefined.

73.  Multiply        and explain all your steps.         74.  Divide      and explain all your steps. 
Multiply             and explain all your steps. 
                                                               Divide           and explain all your steps.

Evaluate your answer to part  when                . Did        Evaluate your answer to part  when
                                                              Did you get the same answer you got in part  ?
you get the same answer you got in part  ?
Why or why not?                                               Why or why not?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved your goals in this section! Reflect on the study skills you used so that
you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific!

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly as topics you do not master become potholes in your road to success.
Math is sequential - every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is critical and you must not ignore it. You need to get help immediately or you will quickly be
overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as possible to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan to
get you the help you need.

7.2 Add and Subtract Rational Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Add and subtract rational expressions with a common denominator
           Add and subtract rational expressions whose denominators are opposites
           Find the least common denominator of rational expressions
           Add and subtract rational expressions with unlike denominators
           Add and subtract rational functions
636 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

BE PREPARED 7.4                  Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
                                 Add:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.29.

BE PREPARED 7.5                  Subtract:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.28.

BE PREPARED 7.6                  Subtract:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.56.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with a Common Denominator

What is the first step you take when you add numerical fractions? You check if they have a common denominator. If they
do, you add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator. If they do not have a common
denominator, you find one before you add.

It is the same with rational expressions. To add rational expressions, they must have a common denominator. When the
denominators are the same, you add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.

Rational Expression Addition and Subtraction

If p, q, and r are polynomials where        then

To add or subtract rational expressions with a common denominator, add or subtract the numerators and place the
result over the common denominator.

We always simplify rational expressions. Be sure to factor, if possible, after you subtract the numerators so you can
identify any common factors.

Remember, too, we do not allow values that would make the denominator zero. What value of x should be excluded in
the next example?

  EXAMPLE 7.13

Add:                             we must exclude the value

     Solution
Since the denominator is

The fractions have a common denominator,
so add the numerators and place the sum
over the common denominator.

Write the degrees in descending order.

Factor the numerator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 637

Simplify by removing common factors.

Simplify.

The expression simplifies to  but the original expression had a denominator of  so

       TRY IT 7.25 Simplify:

       TRY IT 7.26 Simplify:

To subtract rational expressions, they must also have a common denominator. When the denominators are the same,
you subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator. Be careful of the signs when you
subtract a binomial or trinomial.

  EXAMPLE 7.14
Subtract:

     Solution

Subtract the numerators and place the
difference over the common denominator.
Distribute the sign in the numerator.
Combine like terms.
Factor the numerator and the denominator.

Simplify by removing common factors.

       TRY IT 7.27 Subtract:

       TRY IT 7.28 Subtract:

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions Whose Denominators are Opposites

When the denominators of two rational expressions are opposites, it is easy to get a common denominator. We just have
638 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       to multiply one of the fractions by
       Let's see how this works.

         Multiply the second fraction by
         The denominators are the same.
         Simplify.
       Be careful with the signs as you work with the opposites when the fractions are being subtracted.
         EXAMPLE 7.15
       Subtract:

            Solution

         The denominators are opposites, so multiply the
         second fraction by
         Simplify the second fraction.
         The denominators are the same. Subtract the numerators.
         Distribute.
         Combine like terms.
         Factor the numerator and denominator.
         Simplify by removing common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 7.29 Subtract:
              TRY IT 7.30 Subtract:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 639

Find the Least Common Denominator of Rational Expressions

When we add or subtract rational expressions with unlike denominators, we will need to get common denominators. If
we review the procedure we used with numerical fractions, we will know what to do with rational expressions.

Let's look at this example:  Since the denominators are not the same, the first step was to find the least
common denominator (LCD).

To find the LCD of the fractions, we factored 12 and 18 into primes, lining up any common primes in columns. Then we
"brought down" one prime from each column. Finally, we multiplied the factors to find the LCD.

When we add numerical fractions, once we found the LCD, we rewrote each fraction as an equivalent fraction with the
LCD by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the same number. We are now ready to add.

We do the same thing for rational expressions. However, we leave the LCD in factored form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the least common denominator of rational expressions.

Step 1.  Factor each denominator completely.
Step 2.  List the factors of each denominator. Match factors vertically when possible.
Step 3.  Bring down the columns by including all factors, but do not include common factors twice.
Step 4.  Write the LCD as the product of the factors.

Remember, we always exclude values that would make the denominator zero. What values of should we exclude in this
next example?

EXAMPLE 7.16

 Find the LCD for the expressions  and  rewrite them as equivalent rational expressions with

the lowest common denominator.

     Solution



  Find the LCD for

Factor each denominator completely, lining up common factors.
Bring down the columns.
Write the LCD as the product of the factors.


640 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

Factor each denominator.

Multiply each denominator by the `missing'
LCD factor and multiply each numerator by the same factor.

Simplify the numerators.

TRY IT 7.31   Find the LCD for the expressions                 rewrite them as equivalent rational

             expressions with the lowest common denominator.

TRY IT 7.32   Find the LCD for the expressions                 rewrite them as equivalent

             rational expressions with the lowest common denominator.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with Unlike Denominators

Now we have all the steps we need to add or subtract rational expressions with unlike denominators.

  EXAMPLE 7.17

How to Add Rational Expressions with Unlike Denominators
Add:

     Solution

       TRY IT 7.33 Add:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 641

TRY IT 7.34 Add:

The steps used to add rational expressions are summarized here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Add or subtract rational expressions.

Step 1.  Determine if the expressions have a common denominator.
           Yes - go to step 2.
           No - Rewrite each rational expression with the LCD.
           Find the LCD.
           Rewrite each rational expression as an equivalent rational expression with the LCD.

Step 2. Add or subtract the rational expressions.
Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

Avoid the temptation to simplify too soon. In the example above, we must leave the first rational expression as

         to be able to add it to       Simplify only after you have combined the numerators.

  EXAMPLE 7.18
Add:

     Solution

Do the expressions have a common denominator?                    No.

Rewrite each expression with the LCD.

Rewrite each rational expression as an
equivalent rational expression with the LCD.

Simplify the numerators.

Add the rational expressions.
642 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

Simplify the numerator.

                                                  The numerator is prime, so there are
                                                  no common factors.

       TRY IT 7.35 Add:

       TRY IT 7.36 Add:

The process we use to subtract rational expressions with different denominators is the same as for addition. We just
have to be very careful of the signs when subtracting the numerators.

  EXAMPLE 7.19
Subtract:

     Solution

Do the expressions have a common denominator?     No.

Rewrite each expression with the LCD.



Rewrite each rational expression as an
equivalent rational expression with the LCD.
Simplify the numerators.

Subtract the rational expressions.

Simplify the numerator.

Factor the numerator to look for common factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 643

Remove common factors
Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.37 Subtract:

       TRY IT 7.38 Subtract:

There are lots of negative signs in the next example. Be extra careful.
  EXAMPLE 7.20

Subtract:
     Solution

Factor the denominator.

Since  and  are opposites, we will

multiply the second rational expression by

Simplify. Remember,

Do the rational expressions have a
common denominator? No.

Rewrite each rational expression as an
equivalent rational expression with the LCD.
Simplify the numerators.

Add the rational expressions.

Simplify the numerator.
644 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

          Factor the numerator to look for common factors.
          Simplify.

              TRY IT 7.39 Subtract :
              TRY IT 7.40 Subtract:
       Things can get very messy when both fractions must be multiplied by a binomial to get the common denominator.
         EXAMPLE 7.21
       Subtract:
            Solution

          Factor the denominators.
          Do the rational expressions have a
          common denominator? No.

          Rewrite each rational expression as an
          equivalent rational expression with the LCD.
          Simplify the numerators.
          Subtract the rational expressions.
          Simplify the numerator.

          Look for common factors.
          Simplify.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 645

       TRY IT 7.41 Subtract:
       TRY IT 7.42 Subtract:
We follow the same steps as before to find the LCD when we have more than two rational expressions. In the next
example, we will start by factoring all three denominators to find their LCD.
  EXAMPLE 7.22
Simplify:
     Solution

  Do the expressions have a common denominator? No.
  Rewrite each expression with the LCD.

  Rewrite each rational expression as an
  equivalent rational expression with the LCD.

  Write as one rational expression.
  Simplify.
  Factor the numerator, and remove
  common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.43 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.44 Simplify:

Add and subtract rational functions

To add or subtract rational functions, we use the same techniques we used to add or subtract polynomial functions.
646 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

EXAMPLE 7.23

Find          where                           and

Solution

Substitute in the functions

Factor the denominators.

Do the expressions have a common denominator? No.
Rewrite each expression with the LCD.

Rewrite each rational expression as an
equivalent rational expression with the LCD.

Write as one rational expression.

Simplify.

Factor the numerator, and remove
common factors.

Simplify.

      TRY IT 7.45 Find                             where  and

      TRY IT 7.46 Find                             where  and

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with adding and subtracting rational expressions.
      Add and Subtract Rational Expressions- Unlike Denominators (https://openstax.org/l/37AddSubRatExp)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        7.2 · Add and Subtract Rational Expressions 647

        SECTION 7.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with a Common Denominator

In the following exercises, add.

75.                                    76.                      77.

78.                                    79.                      80.

81.                                    82.

In the following exercises, subtract.

83.                                    84.                      85.

86.                                    87.                      88.

89.                                    90.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions whose Denominators are Opposites
In the following exercises, add or subtract.

91.                                    92.                      93.

94.                                    95.                      96.

97.                                    98.

Find the Least Common Denominator of Rational Expressions

In the following exercises,  find the LCD for the given rational expressions  rewrite them as equivalent rational
expressions with the lowest common denominator.

99.                                    100.                     101.

102.                                   103.                     104.

105.                                   106.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with Unlike Denominators

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations.

107.                                   108.                     109.

110.                                   111.                     112.

113.                                   114.                     115.

116.                                   117.                     118.

119.                                   120.                     121.
648 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

122.                                        123.            124.

125.                                        126.            127.

128.                                        129.            130.

131.                                        132.            133.

134.                                        135.            136.

137.                                        138.            139.

140.                                        141.            142.

Add and Subtract Rational Functions

In the following exercises, find                     

143.                and                     144.       and  145.                     and

146.                and

Writing Exercises

147. Donald thinks that              is Is Donald      148. Explain how you find the Least Common
        correct? Explain.
                                                            Denominator of           and

149. Felipe thinks               is          Choose    150. Simplify the expression                and

      numerical values for x and y and evaluate             explain all your steps.

             Evaluate for the same values of
      x and y you used in part  .  Explain why
      Felipe is wrong.  Find the correct expression

      for

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 649

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

7.3 Simplify Complex Rational Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify a complex rational expression by writing it as division
           Simplify a complex rational expression by using the LCD

       BE PREPARED 7.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:

                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.27.

BE PREPARED 7.8  Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.31.

BE PREPARED 7.9  Solve:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.9.

Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Writing it as Division

Complex fractions are fractions in which the numerator or denominator contains a fraction. We previously simplified
complex fractions like these:

In this section, we will simplify complex rational expressions, which are rational expressions with rational expressions in
the numerator or denominator.

  Complex Rational Expression

  A complex rational expression is a rational expression in which the numerator and/or the denominator contains a
  rational expression.

Here are a few complex rational expressions:

Remember, we always exclude values that would make any denominator zero.
We will use two methods to simplify complex rational expressions.
We have already seen this complex rational expression earlier in this chapter.

We noted that fraction bars tell us to divide, so rewrote it as the division problem:
Then, we multiplied the first rational expression by the reciprocal of the second, just like we do when we divide two
650 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       fractions.
       This is one method to simplify complex rational expressions. We make sure the complex rational expression is of the
       form where one fraction is over one fraction. We then write it as if we were dividing two fractions.

         EXAMPLE 7.24

       Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

            Solution

Rewrite the complex fraction as division.
Rewrite as the product of first times the
reciprocal of the second.
Factor.

Multiply.

Remove common factors.

Simplify.

Are there any value(s) of x that should not be allowed? The original complex rational expression had denominators of

and        This expression would be undefined if  or

TRY IT 7.47 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

       TRY IT 7.48 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

Fraction bars act as grouping symbols. So to follow the Order of Operations, we simplify the numerator and
denominator as much as possible before we can do the division.

  EXAMPLE 7.25
Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 651

Solution

Simplify the numerator and denominator.
Find the LCD and add the fractions in the numerator.
Find the LCD and subtract the fractions in the
denominator.

Simplify the numerator and denominator.

Rewrite the complex rational expression as a division
problem.

Multiply the first by the reciprocal of the second.

Simplify.                                              3

       TRY IT 7.49 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

       TRY IT 7.50 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

We follow the same procedure when the complex rational expression contains variables.
  EXAMPLE 7.26

How to Simplify a Complex Rational Expression using Division
Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:
652 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

TRY IT 7.51 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

TRY IT 7.52 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:  .

We summarize the steps here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Simplify a complex rational expression by writing it as division.

  Step 1. Simplify the numerator and denominator.
  Step 2. Rewrite the complex rational expression as a division problem.
  Step 3. Divide the expressions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 653

  EXAMPLE 7.27
Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

     Solution

  Simplify the numerator and denominator.
  Find common denominators for the numerator and
  denominator.

  Simplify the numerators.

  Subtract the rational expressions in the numerator and
  add in the denominator.

  Simplify. (We now have one rational expression over
  one rational expression.)

  Rewrite as fraction division.
  Multiply the first times the reciprocal of the second.
  Factor any expressions if possible.
  Remove common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.53 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

       TRY IT 7.54 Simplify the complex rational expression by writing it as division:

Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Using the LCD

We "cleared" the fractions by multiplying by the LCD when we solved equations with fractions. We can use that strategy
here to simplify complex rational expressions. We will multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD of all the
654 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

rational expressions.

Let's look at the complex rational expression we simplified one way in Example 7.25. We will simplify it here by

multiplying the numerator and denominator by the LCD. When we multiply by  we are multiplying by 1, so the value

stays the same.

EXAMPLE 7.28

Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
     Solution

The LCD of all the fractions in the whole expression is 6.
Clear the fractions by multiplying the numerator and
denominator by that LCD.

Distribute.

Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.55 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
       TRY IT 7.56 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
We will use the same example as in Example 7.26. Decide which method works better for you.
  EXAMPLE 7.29
How to Simplify a Complex Rational Expressing using the LCD
Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 655

Solution

       TRY IT 7.57 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

       TRY IT 7.58 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Simplify a complex rational expression by using the LCD.
  Step 1. Find the LCD of all fractions in the complex rational expression.
  Step 2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD.
  Step 3. Simplify the expression.

Be sure to start by factoring all the denominators so you can find the LCD.
  EXAMPLE 7.30

Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
656 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

Find the LCD of all fractions in the complex rational

expression. The LCD is                      .

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD.

Simplify the expression.

Distribute in the denominator.

Simplify.

Simplify.
To simplify the denominator, distribute
and combine like terms.
Factor the denominator.

Remove common factors.

Simplify.
Notice that there are no more factors
common to the numerator and denominator.

       TRY IT 7.59 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
       TRY IT 7.60 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
Be sure to factor the denominators first. Proceed carefully as the math can get messy!

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 657

  EXAMPLE 7.31
Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

     Solution

  Find the LCD of all fractions in the
  complex rational expression.
  The LCD is
  Multiply the numerator and
  denominator by the LCD.

  Simplify.

  Simplify.
  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 7.61 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

       TRY IT 7.62 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:

  EXAMPLE 7.32
Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
658 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

         Find the LCD of all fractions in the complex rational expression.
         The LCD is
         Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD.

         Distribute in the denominator and simplify.
         Simplify.
         Simplify the denominator and leave the
         numerator factored.

         Factor the denominator and remove factors
         common with the numerator.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 7.63 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
              TRY IT 7.64 Simplify the complex rational expression by using the LCD:
              MEDIA
             Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with complex fractions.
             Complex Fractions (https://openstax.org/l/37CompFrac)

        Access for free at openstax.org
                  7.3 · Simplify Complex Rational Expressions 659

        SECTION 7.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Writing it as Division
In the following exercises, simplify each complex rational expression by writing it as division.

151.  152.  153.

154.  155.  156.

157.  158.  159.

160.  161.  162.

163.  164.  165.

166.

Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Using the LCD
In the following exercises, simplify each complex rational expression by using the LCD.

167.  168.  169.

170.  171.  172.

173.  174.  175.

176.  177.  178.

179.  180.  181.

182.  183.  184.

185.  186.
660 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

In the following exercises, simplify each complex rational expression using either method.

187.                                        188.                 189.

190.                                        191.                 192.

193.                                        194.

Writing Exercises

195. In this section, you learned to simplify the           196. Efraim wants to start simplifying the complex

      complex fraction           two ways: rewriting it as  fraction   by cancelling the variables from

      a division problem or multiplying the numerator       the numerator and denominator,
      and denominator by the LCD. Which method do           Explain what is wrong with Efraim's plan.
      you prefer? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

7.4 Solve Rational Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve rational equations
           Use rational functions
           Solve a rational equation for a specific variable

       BE PREPARED 7.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.9.

      BE PREPARED 7.11           Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.45.

      BE PREPARED 7.12           Solve the formula          for

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.31.

After defining the terms `expression' and `equation' earlier, we have used them throughout this book. We have simplified
many kinds of expressions and solved many kinds of equations. We have simplified many rational expressions so far in
this chapter. Now we will solve a rational equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 661

  Rational Equation
  A rational equation is an equation that contains a rational expression.

You must make sure to know the difference between rational expressions and rational equations. The equation contains
an equal sign.

Solve Rational Equations

We have already solved linear equations that contained fractions. We found the LCD of all the fractions in the equation
and then multiplied both sides of the equation by the LCD to "clear" the fractions.

We will use the same strategy to solve rational equations. We will multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD. Then,
we will have an equation that does not contain rational expressions and thus is much easier for us to solve. But because
the original equation may have a variable in a denominator, we must be careful that we don't end up with a solution that
would make a denominator equal to zero.

So before we begin solving a rational equation, we examine it first to find the values that would make any denominators
zero. That way, when we solve a rational equation we will know if there are any algebraic solutions we must discard.

An algebraic solution to a rational equation that would cause any of the rational expressions to be undefined is called an
extraneous solution to a rational equation.

  Extraneous Solution to a Rational Equation

  An extraneous solution to a rational equation is an algebraic solution that would cause any of the expressions in
  the original equation to be undefined.

We note any possible extraneous solutions, c, by writing  next to the equation.

  EXAMPLE 7.33
How to Solve a Rational Equation
Solve:

     Solution
662 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

TRY IT 7.65 Solve:

TRY IT 7.66 Solve:

The steps of this method are shown.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve equations with rational expressions.

Step 1.  Note any value of the variable that would make any denominator zero.
Step 2.  Find the least common denominator of all denominators in the equation.
Step 3.  Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD.
Step 4.  Solve the resulting equation.
Step 5.  Check:

           If any values found in Step 1 are algebraic solutions, discard them.
           Check any remaining solutions in the original equation.

We always start by noting the values that would cause any denominators to be zero.

  EXAMPLE 7.34

How to Solve a Rational Equation using the Zero Product Property
Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 663

  Solution

Note any value of the variable that would make
any denominator zero.
Find the least common denominator of all denominators in
the equation. The LCD is y2.
Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of
the equation by the LCD.

Distribute.

Multiply.
Solve the resulting equation. First
write the quadratic equation in standard form.
Factor.
Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve.
Check.
We did not get 0 as an algebraic solution.

                                                          The solution is

TRY IT 7.67 Solve:
TRY IT 7.68 Solve:
664 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       In the next example, the last denominators is a difference of squares. Remember to factor it first to find the LCD.
         EXAMPLE 7.35

       Solve:
            Solution

          Note any value of the variable
          that would make any denominator
          zero.
          Find the least common
          denominator of all denominators
          in the equation.
          The LCD is
          Clear the fractions by multiplying
          both sides of the equation by the
          LCD.

          Distribute.

          Remove common factors.

          Simplify.
          Distribute.

          Solve.

          Check:
          We did not get 2 or -2 as algebraic solutions.

                                 The solution is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 665

       TRY IT 7.69 Solve:

       TRY IT 7.70 Solve:

In the next example, the first denominator is a trinomial. Remember to factor it first to find the LCD.
  EXAMPLE 7.36

Solve:
     Solution

Note any value of the variable that
would make any denominator zero.
Use the factored form of the quadratic
denominator.

Find the least common denominator
of all denominators in the equation.
The LCD is

Clear the fractions by
multiplying both sides of the
equation by the LCD.

Distribute.

Remove common factors.

Simplify.

Solve the resulting equation.

Check.
The only algebraic solution
was 4, but we said that 4 would make
a denominator equal to zero. The algebraic
solution is an
extraneous solution.

                                            There is no solution to this equation.

TRY IT 7.71 Solve:
TRY IT 7.72 Solve:
666 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       The equation we solved in the previous example had only one algebraic solution, but it was an extraneous solution. That
       left us with no solution to the equation. In the next example we get two algebraic solutions. Here one or both could be
       extraneous solutions.

         EXAMPLE 7.37
       Solve:

            Solution

         Factor all the denominators,
         so we can note any value of
         the variable that would make
         any denominator zero.
         Find the least common denominator.
         The LCD is

         Clear the fractions.

         Simplify.
         Simplify.

         Solve the resulting equation.

         Check.

                                 The solution is

       TRY IT 7.73 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 667

       TRY IT 7.74 Solve:

In some cases, all the algebraic solutions are extraneous.
  EXAMPLE 7.38

Solve:
     Solution

We will start by factoring all
denominators, to make it easier
to identify extraneous solutions and the LCD.

Note any value of the variable
that would make any denominator zero.

Find the least common
denominator.
The LCD is

Clear the fractions.

Simplify.

Simplify.

Solve the resulting equation.

Check.          are extraneous solutions.
           and

                                                            The equation has no solution.

       TRY IT 7.75 Solve:
       TRY IT 7.76 Solve:
  EXAMPLE 7.39
Solve:
668 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

         Factor all the denominators, so
         we can note any value of the
         variable that would make any
         denominator
         zero.
         Find the least common
         denominator. The LCD is

         Clear the fractions.

Simplify.
Distribute.
Simplify.

The only algebraic solution was
         but we said that

would make a denominator
equal to zero. The algebraic
solution is an extraneous
solution.

                                             There is no solution to this equation.

TRY IT 7.77 Solve:

TRY IT 7.78 Solve:

Use Rational Functions

Working with functions that are defined by rational expressions often lead to rational equations. Again, we use the same
techniques to solve them.

EXAMPLE 7.40

For rational function,                       find the domain of the function,  solve  and  find the

points on the graph at this function value.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 669

     Solution

 The domain of a rational function is all real numbers except those that make the rational expression undefined. So

to find them, we will set the denominator equal to zero and solve.

  Factor the trinomial.
  Use the Zero Product Property.
  Solve.

                                                   The domain is all real numbers except



Substitute in the rational expression.
Factor the denominator.
Multiply both sides by the LCD,

Simplify.
Solve.
Factor.
Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve.

However,  is outside the domain of this function, so we discard that root as extraneous.

 The value of the function is 1 when    So the points on the graph of this function when  is

TRY IT 7.79  For rational function,      find the domain of the function                  solve

                                 find the points on the graph at this function value.

TRY IT 7.80  For rational function,      find the domain of the function                  solve

              find the points on the graph at this function value.

Solve a Rational Equation for a Specific Variable

When we solved linear equations, we learned how to solve a formula for a specific variable. Many formulas used in
business, science, economics, and other fields use rational equations to model the relation between two or more
variables. We will now see how to solve a rational equation for a specific variable.
670 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

       When we developed the point-slope formula from our slope formula, we cleared the fractions by multiplying by the LCD.

In the next example, we will use the same technique with the formula for slope that we used to get the point-slope form

of an equation of a line through the point        We will add one more step to solve for y.

EXAMPLE 7.41

Solve:         for

Solution

Note any value of the variable that would
make any denominator zero.

Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of
the equation by the LCD,

Simplify.

Isolate the term with y.

TRY IT 7.81 Solve:               for

TRY IT 7.82 Solve:               for

Remember to multiply both sides by the LCD in the next example.

EXAMPLE 7.42

Solve:         for c.
     Solution

Note any value of the variable that would make
any denominator zero.

Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of
the equations by the LCD, cm.

Distribute.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 7.4 · Solve Rational Equations 671

Simplify.                                       from the original equation, we must also now state that
Collect the terms with c to the right.
Factor the expression on the right.
To isolate c, divide both sides by
Simplify by removing common factors.
Notice that even though we excluded

      TRY IT 7.83 Solve:                for a.

      TRY IT 7.84 Solve:                for y.

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with equations with rational expressions.
      Equations with Rational Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/37EqRatExp)

        SECTION 7.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Rational Equations

In the following exercises, solve each rational equation.

197.                                                       198.

199.                                                       200.

201.                                                       202.

203.                                                       204.

205.                                                       206.

207.                                                       208.

209.                                                       210.

211.                                                       212.

213.                                                       214.

215.                                                       216.

217.                                                       218.
672 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

219.                                                        220.

221.                                                        222.

223.                                                        224.

225.                                                        226.

227.                                                        228.

229.                                                        230.

Solve Rational Equations that Involve Functions

231. For rational function,                        find     232. For rational function,             find

      the domain of the function  solve                           the domain of the function  solve
       find the points on the graph at this function               find the points on the graph at this function

      value.                                                      value.

233. For rational function,                        find     234. For rational function,

      the domain of the function  solve                          find the domain of the function
       find the points on the graph at this function             solve
                                                                 the points on the graph at this function
      value.
                                                                    value.

Solve a Rational Equation for a Specific Variable

In the following exercises, solve.

235.  for                                   236.  for             237.                   for

238.  for                                   239.  for             240.                   for

241.  for                                   242.       for        243.                        for

244.       for                              245.   for            246.                   for

247.  for                                   248.  for             249.                        for

250.       for

Writing Exercises                                           252. Alek thinks the equation                       has
                                                                                                   Explain why
251. Your class mate is having trouble in this section.           two solutions,         and
        Write down the steps you would use to explain
        how to solve a rational equation.                         Alek is wrong.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                         7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 673

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of         how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How

can you improve this?

7.5 Solve Applications with Rational Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve proportions
           Solve similar figure applications
           Solve uniform motion applications
           Solve work applications
           Solve direct variation problems
           Solve inverse variation problems

BE PREPARED 7.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                       Solve:
                       If you missed this problem, review Example 2.13.

BE PREPARED 7.14       An express train and a charter bus leave Chicago to travel to Champaign. The express
                       train can make the trip in two hours and the bus takes five hours for the trip. The speed
                       of the express train is 42 miles per hour faster than the speed of the bus. Find the speed
                       of the bus.
                       If you missed this problem, review Example 2.43.

BE PREPARED 7.15       Solve
                       If you missed this problem, review Example 2.9.

Solve Proportions

When two rational expressions are equal, the equation relating them is called a proportion.

Proportion

A proportion is an equation of the form           where
The proportion is read "a is to b as c is to d."

The equation    is a proportion because the two fractions are equal. The proportion          is read "1 is to 2 as 4 is
to 8."

Since a proportion is an equation with rational expressions, we will solve proportions the same way we solved rational
equations. We'll multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD to clear the fractions and then solve the resulting
equation.
674 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         EXAMPLE 7.43
       Solve:

            Solution

         Multiply both sides by LCD.
         Remove common factors on each side.
         Simplify.
         Solve for n.

         Check.

  Simplify.
  Show common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.85 Solve the proportion:
       TRY IT 7.86 Solve the proportion:
Notice in the last example that when we cleared the fractions by multiplying by the LCD, the result is the same as if we
had cross-multiplied.

For any proportion,              we get the same result when we clear the fractions by multiplying by the LCD as when we
cross-multiply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 675

To solve applications with proportions, we will follow our usual strategy for solving applications But when we set up the
proportion, we must make sure to have the units correct--the units in the numerators must match each other and the
units in the denominators must also match each other.

EXAMPLE 7.44

When pediatricians prescribe acetaminophen to children, they prescribe 5 milliliters (ml) of acetaminophen for every 25
pounds of the child's weight. If Zoe weighs 80 pounds, how many milliliters of acetaminophen will her doctor prescribe?

Solution

Identify what we are asked to find,               How many ml of acetaminophen will the
and choose a variable to represent it.            doctor prescribe?

                                                  Let a = ml of acetaminophen.

Write a sentence that gives the                   If 5 ml is prescribed for every
information to find it.                           25 pounds, how much will be
                                                  prescribed for 80 pounds?

Translate into a proportion--be
careful of the units.

Multiply both sides by the LCD, 400.

Remove common factors on each side.
Simplify, but don't multiply on the left. Notice
what the next step will be.
Solve for a.
676 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         Check.
         Is the answer reasonable?

Write a complete sentence.                  The pediatrician would prescribe 16 ml of
                                            acetaminophen to Zoe.

    TRY IT 7.87    Pediatricians prescribe 5 milliliters (ml) of acetaminophen for every 25 pounds of a child's
                   weight. How many milliliters of acetaminophen will the doctor prescribe for Emilia, who weighs
                   60 pounds?

    TRY IT 7.88    For every 1 kilogram (kg) of a child's weight, pediatricians prescribe 15 milligrams (mg) of a fever
                   reducer. If Isabella weighs 12 kg, how many milligrams of the fever reducer will the pediatrician
                   prescribe?

Solve similar figure applications

When you shrink or enlarge a photo on a phone or tablet, figure out a distance on a map, or use a pattern to build a
bookcase or sew a dress, you are working with similar figures. If two figures have exactly the same shape, but different
sizes, they are said to be similar. One is a scale model of the other. All their corresponding angles have the same
measures and their corresponding sides have the same ratio.

  Similar Figures

  Two figures are similar if the measures of their corresponding angles are equal and their corresponding sides have
  the same ratio.

For example, the two triangles in Figure 7.2 are similar. Each side of                    is four times the length of the corresponding
side of

                                                                              Figure 7.2
This is summed up in the Property of Similar Triangles.

Property of Similar Triangles

If  is similar to                then their corresponding angle measure are equal and their corresponding sides have

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 677

the same ratio.

To solve applications with similar figures we will follow the Problem-Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications we used
earlier.

  EXAMPLE 7.45

On a map, San Francisco, Las Vegas, and Los Angeles form a triangle. The distance between the cities is measured in
inches. The figure on the left below represents the triangle formed by the cities on the map. If the actual distance from
Los Angeles to Las Vegas is 270 miles, find the distance from Los Angeles to San Francisco.

     Solution
Since the triangles are similar, the corresponding sides are proportional.

Read the problem. Draw the figures and label  The figures are shown above.
it with the given information.

Identify what we are looking for.             the actual distance from Los Angeles
                                              to San Francisco

Name the variables.                           Let x = distance from Los Angeles
                                              to San Francisco.

Translate into an equation.
Since the triangles are similar, the
corresponding sides are proportional. We'll
make the numerators "miles" and
the denominators "inches".

Solve the equation.
678 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         Check.
         On the map, the distance from Los Angeles
         to San Francisco is more than
         the distance from Los Angeles to
         Las Vegas. Since 351 is more than 270
         the answer makes sense.

Answer the question.                                The distance from Los Angeles to
                                                    San Francisco is 351 miles.

On the map, Seattle, Portland, and Boise form a triangle. The distance between the cities is measured in inches. The
figure on the left below represents the triangle formed by the cities on the map. The actual distance from Seattle to
Boise is 400 miles.

       TRY IT 7.89 Find the actual distance from Seattle to Portland.

       TRY IT 7.90 Find the actual distance from Portland to Boise.

We can use similar figures to find heights that we cannot directly measure.
  EXAMPLE 7.46

Tyler is 6 feet tall. Late one afternoon, his shadow was 8 feet long. At the same time, the shadow of a tree was 24 feet
long. Find the height of the tree.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 679

  Solution
Read the problem and draw a figure.

We are looking for h, the height of the tree.

We will use similar triangles to write an equation.
The small triangle is similar to the large triangle.
Solve the proportion.

Simplify.
Check.

TRY IT 7.91  A telephone pole casts a shadow that is 50 feet long. Nearby, an 8 foot tall traffic sign casts a
             shadow that is 10 feet long. How tall is the telephone pole?

TRY IT 7.92  A pine tree casts a shadow of 80 feet next to a 30 foot tall building which casts a 40 feet shadow.
             How tall is the pine tree?

Solve Uniform Motion Applications                               in previous chapters. We used a table like the one

We have solved uniform motion problems using the formula
below to organize the information and lead us to the equation.
680 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

The formula   assumes we know r and t and use them to find D. If we know D and r and need to find t, we would

solve the equation for t and get the formula

We have also explained how flying with or against the wind affects the speed of a plane. We will revisit that idea in the
next example.

EXAMPLE 7.47

An airplane can fly 200 miles into a 30 mph headwind in the same amount of time it takes to fly 300 miles with a 30 mph
tailwind. What is the speed of the airplane?

     Solution
This is a uniform motion situation. A diagram will help us visualize the situation.

We fill in the chart to organize the information.              Let r = the speed of the airplane.

We are looking for the speed of the airplane.

When the plane flies with the wind,
the wind increases its speed and so the rate is r + 30.

When the plane flies against the wind,
the wind decreases its speed and the rate is r - 30.

Write in the rates.
Write in the distances.

Since         we solve for and get

We divide the distance by the rate in each row, and place the
expression in the time column.

We know the times are equal and so we write
our equation.

We multiply both sides by the LCD.

Simplify.

Solve.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 681

Check.
Is 150 mph a reasonable speed for an airplane? Yes.
If the plane is traveling 150 mph and the wind is 30 mph,

The times are equal, so it checks.                             The plane was traveling 150 mph.

TRY IT 7.93  Link can ride his bike 20 miles into a 3 mph headwind in the same amount of time he can ride
             30 miles with a 3 mph tailwind. What is Link's biking speed?

TRY IT 7.94  Danica can sail her boat 5 miles into a 7 mph headwind in the same amount of time she can sail
             12 miles with a 7 mph tailwind. What is the speed of Danica's boat without a wind?

In the next example, we will know the total time resulting from travelling different distances at different speeds.

  EXAMPLE 7.48

Jazmine trained for 3 hours on Saturday. She ran 8 miles and then biked 24 miles. Her biking speed is 4 mph faster than
her running speed. What is her running speed?

     Solution
This is a uniform motion situation. A diagram will help us visualize the situation.

We fill in the chart to organize the information.

We are looking for Jazmine's running speed.                    Let r = Jazmine's running speed.
                                                               r + 4 = her biking speed
Her biking speed is 4 miles faster than her
running speed.                                                 Her time plus the time biking is 3 hours.

The distances are given, enter them into the chart.

Since  we solve for and get

We divide the distance by the rate in each row, and place the
expression in the time column.

Write a word sentence.

Translate the sentence to get the equation.
682 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         Solve.

Check.

A negative speed does not make sense in this problem,

so      is the solution.

Is 8 mph a reasonable running speed? Yes.

If Jazmine's running rate is 4, then her biking rate,

    which is

                 Total 3 hours.                        Jazmine's running speed is 8 mph.

    TRY IT 7.95  Dennis went cross-country skiing for 6 hours on Saturday. He skied 20 mile uphill and then 20
                 miles back downhill, returning to his starting point. His uphill speed was 5 mph slower than his
                 downhill speed. What was Dennis' speed going uphill and his speed going downhill?

    TRY IT 7.96  Joon drove 4 hours to his home, driving 208 miles on the interstate and 40 miles on country
                 roads. If he drove 15 mph faster on the interstate than on the country roads, what was his rate
                 on the country roads?

Once again, we will use the uniform motion formula solved for the variable

  EXAMPLE 7.49

Hamilton rode his bike downhill 12 miles on the river trail from his house to the ocean and then rode uphill to return
home. His uphill speed was 8 miles per hour slower than his downhill speed. It took him 2 hours longer to get home than
it took him to get to the ocean. Find Hamilton's downhill speed.

     Solution
This is a uniform motion situation. A diagram will help us visualize the situation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 683

We fill in the chart to organize the information.

We are looking for Hamilton's downhill speed.                  Let h = Hamilton's downhill speed.
                                                               h - 8 = Hamilton's uphill speed
His uphill speed is 8 miles per hour slower.
Enter the rates into the chart.                                He took 2 hours longer uphill than downhill.
                                                               The uphill time is 2 more than the downhill
The distance is the same in both directions.                   time.
12 miles.

Since   we solve for and get

We divide the distance by the rate in each row, and place the
expression in the time column.

Write a word sentence about the line.

Translate the sentence to get the equation.

Solve.

Check.
Is 12 mph a reasonable speed for biking downhill? Yes.

The uphill time is 2 hours more that the downhill time.

                                                               Hamilton's downhill speed is 12 mph.

TRY IT 7.97 Kayla rode her bike 75 miles home from college one weekend and then rode the bus back to
684 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

             college. It took her 2 hours less to ride back to college on the bus than it took her to ride home
             on her bike, and the average speed of the bus was 10 miles per hour faster than Kayla's biking
             speed. Find Kayla's biking speed.

TRY IT 7.98  Victoria jogs 12 miles to the park along a flat trail and then returns by jogging on an 20 mile hilly
             trail. She jogs 1 mile per hour slower on the hilly trail than on the flat trail, and her return trip
             takes her two hours longer. Find her rate of jogging on the flat trail.

Solve Work Applications

The weekly gossip magazine has a big story about the Princess' baby and the editor wants the magazine to be printed as
soon as possible. She has asked the printer to run an extra printing press to get the printing done more quickly. Press #1
takes 6 hours to do the job and Press #2 takes 12 hours to do the job. How long will it take the printer to get the
magazine printed with both presses running together?
This is a typical `work' application. There are three quantities involved here--the time it would take each of the two
presses to do the job alone and the time it would take for them to do the job together.
If Press #1 can complete the job in 6 hours, in one hour it would complete of the job.

If Press #2 can complete the job in 12 hours, in one hour it would complete of the job.

We will let t be the number of hours it would take the presses to print the magazines with both presses running together.
So in 1 hour working together they have completed of the job.

We can model this with the word equation and then translate to a rational equation. To find the time it would take the
presses to complete the job if they worked together, we solve for
A chart will help us organize the information. We are looking for how many hours it would take to complete the job with
both presses running together.

  Let t = the number of hours needed to
  complete the job together.

  Enter the hours per job for Press #1,
  Press #2, and when they work together.

  If a job on Press #1 takes 6 hours, then in 1 hour
  of the job is completed.

  Similarly find the part of the job completed/hours
  for Press #2 and when thet both together.

  Write a word sentence.

                                                                                The part completed by Press #1 plus the part completed by
                                                                                Press #2 equals the amount completed together.

Translate into an equation.

Solve.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 685

Mutiply by the LCD, 12t

Simplify.

                                           When both presses are running it
                                               takes 4 hours to do the job.

Keep in mind, it should take less time for two presses to complete a job working together than for either press to do it
alone.

  EXAMPLE 7.50

Suppose Pete can paint a room in 10 hours. If he works at a steady pace, in 1 hour he would paint of the room. If
Alicia would take 8 hours to paint the same room, then in 1 hour she would paint of the room. How long would it take
Pete and Alicia to paint the room if they worked together (and didn't interfere with each other's progress)?

     Solution
This is a `work' application. A chart will help us organize the information. We are looking for the numbers of hours it will
take them to paint the room together.
In one hour Pete did of the job. Alicia did of the job. And together they did of the job.

Let t be the number of hours needed
to paint the room together.

Enter the hours per job for Pete, Alicia,
and when they work together.

In 1 hour working together, they have
completed of the job.
Similarly, find the part of the job
completed/hour by Pete and then by
Alicia.

                                           The work completed by Pete plus the work
                                           completed by Alicia equals the total
                                           work completed.

                                                            Work completed by:

Write a word sentence.

Multiply by the LCD, 40t.
Distribute.
686 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

Simplify and solve.

We'll write as a mixed number
so that we can convert it to hours
and minutes.

Remember, 1 hour = 60 minutes.

Multiply, and then round to the
nearest minute.

                                                 It would take Pete and Alica about
                                            4 hours and 27 minutes to paint the room.

TRY IT 7.99   One gardener can mow a golf course in 4 hours, while another gardener can mow the same golf
              course in 6 hours. How long would it take if the two gardeners worked together to mow the golf
              course?

TRY IT 7.100            Daria can weed the garden in 7 hours, while her mother can do it in 3. How long will it take the
                        two of them working together?

  EXAMPLE 7.51

Ra'shon can clean the house in 7 hours. When his sister helps him it takes 3 hours. How long does it take his sister when
she cleans the house alone?

     Solution
This is a work problem. A chart will help us organize the information.
We are looking for how many hours it would take Ra'shon's sister to complete the job by herself.

  Let s be the number of hours Ra'shon's
  sister takes to clean the house alone.

  Enter the hours per job for Ra'shon, his
  sister, and when they work together.
  If Ra'shon takes 7 hours, then in 1 hour
  of the job is completed.
  If Ra'shon's sister takes s hours, then in
  1 hour of the job is completed.

Write a word sentence.                      The part completed by Ra'shon plus the part
                                            by his sister equals the amount completed together.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 687

Translate to an equation.

Solve.
Multiply by the LCD, 21s.

Simplify.
Write as a mixed number to
convert it to hours and minutes.
There are 60 minutes in 1 hour.

                                  It would take Ra'shon's sister 5 hours and
                                  15 minutes to clean the house alone.

TRY IT 7.101  Alice can paint a room in 6 hours. If Kristina helps her it takes them 4 hours to paint the room.
              How long would it take Kristina to paint the room by herself?

TRY IT 7.102  Tracy can lay a slab of concrete in 3 hours, with Jordan's help they can do it in 2 hours. If Jordan
              works alone, how long will it take?

Solve Direct Variation Problems

When two quantities are related by a proportion, we say they are proportional to each other. Another way to express this
relation is to talk about the variation of the two quantities. We will discuss direct variation and inverse variation in this
section.

Lindsay gets paid $15 per hour at her job. If we let s be her salary and h be the number of hours she has worked, we
could model this situation with the equation

Lindsay's salary is the product of a constant, 15, and the number of hours she works. We say that Lindsay's salary varies
directly with the number of hours she works. Two variables vary directly if one is the product of a constant and the other.

  Direct Variation

  For any two variables x and y, y varies directly with x if

The constant k is called the constant of variation.

In applications using direct variation, generally we will know values of one pair of the variables and will be asked to find
the equation that relates x and y. Then we can use that equation to find values of y for other values of x.
688 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

We'll list the steps here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve direct variation problems.

Step 1.  Write the formula for direct variation.
Step 2.  Substitute the given values for the variables.
Step 3.  Solve for the constant of variation.
Step 4.  Write the equation that relates x and y using the constant of variation.

Now we'll solve an application of direct variation.

EXAMPLE 7.52

When Raoul runs on the treadmill at the gym, the number of calories, c, he burns varies directly with the number of
minutes, m, he uses the treadmill. He burned 315 calories when he used the treadmill for 18 minutes.

 Write the equation that relates c and m.  How many calories would he burn if he ran on the treadmill for 25

minutes?

     Solution



                                                     The number of calories, c, varies directly with

                                                     the number of minutes, m, on the treadmill,

                                                     and  when         .

Write the formula for direct variation.

We will use c in place of y and m in place of x.

Substitute the given values for the variables.

Solve for the constant of variation.

  Write the equation that relates c and m.        Find c when m = 25.
  Substitute in the constant of variation.



  Write the equation that relates c and m.
  Substitute the given value for m.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 689

Simplify.

                                   Raoul would burn 437.5 calories if
                                   he used the treadmill for 25 minutes.

TRY IT 7.103       The number of calories, c, burned varies directly with the amount of time, t, spent exercising.
                   Arnold burned 312 calories in 65 minutes exercising.

                    Write the equation that relates c and t.  How many calories would he burn if he

                   exercises for 90 minutes?

TRY IT 7.104       The distance a moving body travels, d, varies directly with time, t, it moves. A train travels 100
                   miles in 2 hours

                    Write the equation that relates d and t.  How many miles would it travel in 5 hours?

Solve Inverse Variation Problems

Many applications involve two variable that vary inversely. As one variable increases, the other decreases. The equation
that relates them is

Inverse Variation

For any two variables x and y, y varies inversely with x if

The constant k is called the constant of variation.

The word `inverse' in inverse variation refers to the multiplicative inverse. The multiplicative inverse of x is

We solve inverse variation problems in the same way we solved direct variation problems. Only the general form of the
equation has changed. We will copy the procedure box here and just change `direct' to `inverse'.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve inverse variation problems.

Step 1.  Write the formula for inverse variation.
Step 2.  Substitute the given values for the variables.
Step 3.  Solve for the constant of variation.
Step 4.  Write the equation that relates x and y using the constant of variation.

  EXAMPLE 7.53

The frequency of a guitar string varies inversely with its length. A 26 in.-long string has a frequency of 440 vibrations per
second.

 Write the equation of variation.  How many vibrations per second will there be if the string's length is reduced to

20 inches by putting a finger on a fret?
690 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions                 The frequency varies
                                                           inversely with the length.
            Solution                                       Let f = frequency.

                                                              L = length

          Name the variables.                                     Find when
          Write the formula for inverse variation.
         We will use f in place of y and L in place of x.         A 20-guitar string has frequency 572
          Substitute the given values for the variables.          vibrations per second.

          Solve for the constant of variation
         Write the equation that relates f and L.
          Substitute the constant of variation

    

          Write the equation that relates
          Substitute the given value for
          Simplify.

TRY IT 7.105  The number of hours it takes for ice to melt varies inversely with the air temperature. Suppose
              a block of ice melts in 2 hours when the temperature is 65 degrees Celsius.

               Write the equation of variation.  How many hours would it take for the same block of

              ice to melt if the temperature was 78 degrees?

TRY IT 7.106  Xander's new business found that the daily demand for its product was inversely proportional
              to the price, When the price is $5, the demand is 700 units.

               Write the equation of variation.  What is the demand if the price is raised to $7?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 691

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with applications of rational expressions
      Applications of Rational Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/37AppRatExp)

        SECTION 7.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Proportions

In the following exercises, solve each proportion.

253.                                254.                                 255.

256.                                257.                                 258.

259.                                260.                                 261.

262.

In the following exercises, solve.  264. Jesse's car gets 30 miles       265. Pediatricians prescribe 5
                                            per gallon of gas.                   milliliters (ml) of
263. Kevin wants to keep his                                                     acetaminophen for every
        heart rate at 160 beats          If Las Vegas is 285                     25 pounds of a child's
        per minute while training.                                               weight. How many
        During his workout he               miles away, how many                 milliliters of
        counts 27 beats in 10               gallons of gas are needed            acetaminophen will the
        seconds.                            to get there and then                doctor prescribe for
                                                                                 Jocelyn, who weighs 45
     How many beats per                 home?  If gas is $3.09                   pounds?
    minute is this?  Has
                                            per gallon, what is the      268. One 12-ounce can of soda
        Kevin met his target heart          total cost of the gas for            has 150 calories. If Josiah
        rate?                               the trip?                            drinks the big 32-ounce
                                                                                 size from the local mini-
266. A veterinarian prescribed      267. A new energy drink                      mart, how many calories
        Sunny, a 65-pound dog,              advertises 106 calories for          does he get?
        an antibacterial medicine           8 ounces. How many
        in case an infection                calories are in 12 ounces    271. Ronald needs a morning
        emerges after her teeth             of the drink?                        breakfast drink that will
        were cleaned. If the                                                     give him at least 390
        dosage is 5 mg for every    270. Maurice is traveling to                 calories. Orange juice has
        pound, how much                     Mexico and needs to                  130 calories in one cup.
        medicine was Sunny                  exchange $450 into                   How many cups does he
        given?                              Mexican pesos. If each               need to drink to reach his
                                            dollar is worth 12.29                calorie goal?
269. Kyra is traveling to                   pesos, how many pesos
        Canada and will change              will he get for his trip?
        $250 US dollars into
        Canadian dollars. At the
        current exchange rate, $1
        US is equal to $1.3
        Canadian. How many
        Canadian dollars will she
        get for her trip?
692 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

272. Sonya drinks a 32-ounce                273. Phil wants to fertilize his    274. An oatmeal cookie recipe
        energy drink containing                     lawn. Each bag of                   calls for cup of butter
        80 calories per 12 ounce.                   fertilizer covers about
        How many calories did                       4,000 square feet of lawn.          to make 4 dozen cookies.
        she drink?                                  Phil's lawn is                      Hilda needs to make 10
                                                    approximately 13,500                dozen cookies for the
                                                    square feet. How many               bake sale. How many
                                                    bags of fertilizer will he          cups of butter will she
                                                    have to buy?                        need?

Solve Similar Figure Applications

In the following exercises, the triangles are similar. Find the length of the indicated side.

275.                                                  276.

                                                     side d  side q

     side x  side b

In the following exercises, use the map shown. On the map, New York City, Chicago, and Memphis form a triangle. The
actual distance from New York to Chicago is 800 miles.

277. Find the actual distance from New York to        278. Find the actual distance from Chicago to
        Memphis.                                              Memphis.

In the following exercises, use the map shown. On the map, Atlanta, Miami, and New Orleans form a triangle. The actual
distance from Atlanta to New Orleans is 420 miles.

279. Find the actual distance from New Orleans to     280. Find the actual distance from Atlanta to Miami.
        Miami.
                                                      282. Larry and Tom were standing next to each other
In the following exercises, answer each question.             in the backyard when Tom challenged Larry to
                                                              guess how tall he was. Larry knew his own height
281. A 2-foot-tall dog casts a 3-foot shadow at the           is 6.5 feet and when they measured their
        same time a cat casts a one foot shadow. How          shadows, Larry's shadow was 8 feet and Tom's
        tall is the cat ?                                     was 7.75 feet long. What is Tom's height?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 693

283. The tower portion of a windmill is 212 feet tall. A  284. The height of the Statue of Liberty is 305 feet.
        six foot tall person standing next to the tower           Nikia, who is standing next to the statue, casts a
        casts a seven-foot shadow. How long is the                6-foot shadow and she is 5 feet tall. How long
        windmill's shadow?                                        should the shadow of the statue be?

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

In the following exercises, solve the application problem provided.

285. Mary takes a sightseeing        286. A private jet can fly 1,210      287. A boat travels 140 miles
        tour on a helicopter that            miles against a 25-mph                downstream in the same
        can fly 450 miles against a          headwind in the same                  time as it travels 92 miles
        35-mph headwind in the               amount of time it can fly             upstream. The speed of
        same amount of time it               1694 miles with a 25-mph              the current is 6mph. What
        can travel 702 miles with            tailwind. Find the speed              is the speed of the boat?
        a 35-mph tailwind. Find              of the jet.
        the speed of the                                                   290. Laney wanted to lose
        helicopter.                                                                some weight so she
                                                                                   planned a day of
288. Darrin can skateboard 2         289. Jane spent 2 hours                       exercising. She spent a
        miles against a 4-mph                exploring a mountain                  total of 2 hours riding her
        wind in the same amount              with a dirt bike. First, she          bike and jogging. She
        of time he skateboards 6             rode 40 miles uphill. After           biked for 12 miles and
        miles with a 4-mph wind.             she reached the peak she              jogged for 6 miles. Her
        Find the speed Darrin                rode for 12 miles along               rate for jogging was 10
        skateboards with no wind.            the summit. While going               mph less than biking rate.
                                             uphill, she went 5 mph                What was her rate when
                                             slower than when she                  jogging?
                                             was on the summit. What
                                             was her rate along the        293. Chester rode his bike
                                             summit?                               uphill 24 miles and then
                                                                                   back downhill at 2 mph
291. Byron wanted to try out         292. Nancy took a 3-hour                      faster than his uphill. If it
        different water craft. He            drive. She went 50 miles              took him 2 hours longer
        went 62 miles                        before she got caught in a            to ride uphill than
        downstream in a motor                storm. Then she drove 68              downhill, what was his
        boat and 27 miles                    miles at 9 mph less than              uphill rate?
        downstream on a jet ski.             she had driven when the
        His speed on the jet ski             weather was good. What        296. Nathan walked on an
        was 10 mph faster than in            was her speed driving in              asphalt pathway for 12
        the motor boat. Bill spent           the storm?                            miles. He walked the 12
        a total of 4 hours on the                                                  miles back to his car on a
        water. What was his rate                                                   gravel road through the
        of speed in the motor                                                      forest. On the asphalt he
        boat?                                                                      walked 2 miles per hour
                                                                                   faster than on the gravel.
294. Matthew jogged to his           295. Hudson travels 1080                      The walk on the gravel
        friend's house 12 miles              miles in a jet and then               took one hour longer
        away and then got a ride             240 miles by car to get to            than the walk on the
        back home. It took him 2             a business meeting. The               asphalt. How fast did he
        hours longer to jog there            jet goes 300 mph faster               walk on the gravel.
        than ride back. His                  than the rate of the car,
        jogging rate was 25 mph              and the car ride takes 1
        slower than the rate when            hour longer than the jet.
        he was riding. What was              What is the speed of the
        his jogging rate?                    car?
694 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

297. John can fly his airplane              298. Jim's speedboat can travel      299. Hazel needs to get to her
        2800 miles with a wind                      20 miles upstream                    granddaughter's house
        speed of 50 mph in the                      against a 3-mph current              by taking an airplane and
        same time he can travel                     in the same amount of                a rental car. She travels
        2400 miles against the                      time it travels 22 miles             900 miles by plane and
        wind. If the speed of the                   downstream with a 3-mph              250 miles by car. The
        wind is 50 mph, find the                    current speed . Find the             plane travels 250 mph
        speed of his airplane.                      speed of the Jim's boat.             faster than the car. If she
                                                                                         drives the rental car for 2
300. Stu trained for 3 hours                301. When driving the 9-hour                 hours more than she rode
        yesterday. He ran 14                        trip home, Sharon drove              the plane, find the speed
        miles and then biked 40                     390 miles on the                     of the car.
        miles. His biking speed is                  interstate and 150 miles
        6 mph faster than his                       on country roads. Her        302. Two sisters like to
        running speed. What is                      speed on the interstate              compete on their bike
        his running speed?                          was 15 more than on                  rides. Tamara can go 4
                                                    country roads. What was              mph faster than her
303. Dana enjoys taking her                         her speed on country                 sister, Samantha. If it
        dog for a walk, but                         roads?                               takes Samantha 1 hours
        sometimes her dog gets                                                           longer than Tamara to go
        away, and she has to run            304. Ken and Joe leave their                 80 miles, how fast can
        after him. Dana walked                      apartment to go to a                 Samantha ride her bike?
        her dog for 7 miles but                     football game 45 miles
        then had to run for 1                       away. Ken drives his car
        mile, spending a total                      30 mph faster Joe can ride
        time of 2.5 hours with her                  his bike. If it takes Joe 2
        dog. Her running speed                      hours longer than Ken to
        was 3 mph faster than                       get to the game, what is
        her walking speed. Find                     Joe's speed?
        her walking speed.

Solve Work Applications                     306. It takes Sam 4 hours to         307. Mia can clean her
                                                    rake the front lawn while            apartment in 6 hours
305. Mike, an experienced                           his brother, Dave, can               while her roommate can
        bricklayer, can build a wall                rake the lawn in 2 hours.            clean the apartment in 5
        in 3 hours, while his son,                  How long will it take them           hours. If they work
        who is learning, can do                     to rake the lawn working             together, how long would
        the job in 6 hours. How                     together?                            it take them to clean the
        long does it take for them                                                       apartment?
        to build a wall together?           309. Josephine can correct her
                                                    students test papers in 5    310. Washing his dad's car
308. Brian can lay a slab of                        hours, but if her teacher's          alone, eight year old Levi
        concrete in 6 hours, while                  assistant helps, it would            takes 2.5 hours. If his dad
        Greg can do it in 4 hours.                  take them 3 hours. How               helps him, then it takes 1
        If Brian and Greg work                      long would it take the               hour. How long does it
        together, how long will it                  assistant to do it alone?            take Levi's dad to wash
        take?                                                                            the car by himself?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 695

311. At the end of the day            312. Ronald can shovel the
        Dodie can clean her hair              driveway in 4 hours, but if
        salon in 15 minutes. Ann,             his brother Donald helps
        who works with her, can               it would take 2 hours.
        clean the salon in 30                 How long would it take
        minutes. How long would               Donald to shovel the
        it take them to clean the             driveway alone?
        shop if they work
        together?

Solve Direct Variation Problems

In the following exercises, solve.

313. If varies directly as            314. If varies directly as           315. If varies directly as

and   when                            and    when                          and    when

         find the equation                     find the equation                    find the equation
that relates and                      that relates and                     that relates and

316. If varies directly as            317. The price, that Eric            318. Joseph is traveling on a
                                              pays for gas varies                  road trip. The distance,
and   when                                    directly with the number             he travels before stopping
                                              of gallons, he buys. It              for lunch varies directly
     find the                                 costs him $50 to buy 20              with the speed, he
                                              gallons of gas.                      travels. He can travel 120
equation that relates                                                              miles at a speed of 60
and                                        Write the equation                      mph.
                                          that relates and 
                                                                                Write the equation
                                              How much would 33                that relates and 
                                              gallons cost Eric?
                                                                                   How far would he travel
                                                                                   before stopping for lunch
                                                                                   at a rate of 65 mph?

319. The mass of a liquid             320. The length that a spring        321. The maximum load a
        varies directly with its              stretches varies directly            beam will support varies
        volume. A liquid with                 with a weight placed at              directly with the square of
        mass 16 kilograms has a               the end of the spring.               the diagonal of the
        volume of 2 liters.                   When Sarah placed a                  beam's cross-section. A
                                              10-pound watermelon on               beam with diagonal 6
     Write the equation                       a hanging scale, the                 inch will support a
                                              spring stretched 5 inches.           maximum load of 108
        that relates the mass to                                                   pounds.
                                           Write the equation
    the volume.  What is                                                        Write the equation
                                              that relates the length of
        the volume of this liquid if          the spring to the weight.            that relates the load to
        its mass is 128 kilograms?                                                 the diagonal of the cross-
                                           What weight of
                                                                               section.  What load will
                                              watermelon would stretch
                                              the spring 6 inches?                 a beam with a 10-inch
                                                                                   diagonal support?
696 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

322. The area of a circle varies
        directly as the square of
        the radius. A circular pizza
        with a radius of 6 inches
        has an area of 113.04
        square inches.

     Write the equation

        that relates the area to

    the radius.  What is

        the area of a personal
        pizza with a radius 4
        inches?

Solve Inverse Variation Problems

In the following exercises, solve.

323. If varies inversely with               324. If varies inversely with         325. If varies inversely with

and  when                                   and  when               ,             and  when

find the equation that                      find the equation that                     find the equation

relates and                                 relates and                           that relates and

326. If varies inversely with

and  when

find the equation that
relates and

In the following exercises, write an inverse variation equation to solve the following problems.

327. The fuel consumption                   328. A car's value varies             329. The time required to
        (mpg) of a car varies                       inversely with its age.               empty a tank varies
        inversely with its weight.                  Jackie bought a 10-year-              inversely as the rate of
        A Toyota Corolla weighs                     old car for $2,400.                   pumping. It took Ada 5
        2800 pounds getting 33                                                            hours to pump her
        mpg on the highway.                      Write the equation                       flooded basement using a
                                                                                          pump that was rated at
     Write the equation                             that relates the car's value          200 gpm (gallons per
                                                                                          minute).
        that relates the mpg to                 to its age.  What will
                                                                                       Write the equation
    the car's weight.  What                         be the value of Jackie's car
                                                    when it is 15 years old?              that relates the number
        would the fuel                                                                    of hours to the pump
        consumption be for a
        Toyota Sequoia that                                                           rate.  How long would
        weighs 5500 pounds?
                                                                                          it take Ada to pump her
                                                                                          basement if she used a
                                                                                          pump rated at 400 gpm?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          7.5 · Solve Applications with Rational Equations 697

330. On a string instrument,          331. Paul, a dentist,               332. Boyle's law states that if
        the length of a string                determined that the                 the temperature of a gas
        varies inversely as the               number of cavities that             stays constant, then the
        frequency of its                      develops in his patient's           pressure varies inversely
        vibrations. An 11-inch                mouth each year varies              to the volume of the gas.
        string on a violin has a              inversely to the number             Braydon, a scuba diver,
        frequency of 400 cycles               of minutes spent                    has a tank that holds air
        per second.                           brushing each night. His            under a pressure of 220
                                              patient, Lori, had four             psi.
     Write the equation                       cavities when brushing
                                              her teeth 30 seconds (0.5        Write the equation
        that relates the string               minutes) each night.
        length to its frequency.                                                  that relates pressure to
                                           Write the equation
     What is the frequency                                                    volume.  If the
                                              that relates the number
        of a 10 inch string?                  of cavities to the time             pressure increases to 330
                                                                                  psi, how much air can
333. The cost of a ride service           spent brushing.  How                    Braydon's tank hold?
        varies directly with the
        distance traveled. It costs           many cavities would Paul
        $35 for a ride from the               expect Lori to have if she
        city center to the airport,           had brushed her teeth for
        14 miles away.                        2 minutes each night?

     Write the equation               334. The number of hours it
                                              takes Jack to drive from
        that relates the cost, c,             Boston to Bangor is
        with the number of miles,             inversely proportional to
                                              his average driving speed.
        What would it cost                    When he drives at an
                                              average speed of 40 miles
        to travel 22 miles with this          per hour, it takes him 6
        service?                              hours for the trip.

                                           Write the equation

                                              that relates the number
                                              of hours, with the

                                          speed,  How long

                                              would the trip take if his
                                              average speed was 75
                                              miles per hour?

Writing Exercises

335. Marisol solves the proportion    by `cross          336. Paula and Yuki are roommates. It takes Paula 3
                                                                 hours to clean their apartment. It takes Yuki 4
multiplying,' so her first step looks like                       hours to clean the apartment. The equation
                     Explain how this differs from the                           can be used to find t, the number of

method of solution shown in Example 7.44.                        hours it would take both of them, working
                                                                 together, to clean their apartment. Explain how
337. In your own words, explain the difference                   this equation models the situation.
        between direct variation and inverse variation.
                                                         338. Make up an example from your life experience of
                                                                 inverse variation.
698 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

7.6 Solve Rational Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve rational inequalities
           Solve an inequality with rational functions

BE PREPARED 7.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Find the value of  when                           

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

BE PREPARED 7.17                 Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.52.

BE PREPARED 7.18                 Write in interval notation:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.49.

Solve Rational Inequalities

We learned to solve linear inequalities after learning to solve linear equations. The techniques were very much the same
with one major exception. When we multiplied or divided by a negative number, the inequality sign reversed.
Having just learned to solve rational equations we are now ready to solve rational inequalities. A rational inequality is
an inequality that contains a rational expression.

  Rational Inequality

  A rational inequality is an inequality that contains a rational expression.

Inequalities such as                                and    are rational inequalities as they each contain a

rational expression.

When we solve a rational inequality, we will use many of the techniques we used solving linear inequalities. We especially
must remember that when we multiply or divide by a negative number, the inequality sign must reverse.

Another difference is that we must carefully consider what value might make the rational expression undefined and so
must be excluded.

When we solve an equation and the result is         we know there is one solution, which is 3.

When we solve an inequality and the result is       we know there are many solutions. We graph the result to better

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                 7.6 · Solve Rational Inequalities 699

help show all the solutions, and we start with 3. Three becomes a critical point and then we decide whether to shade to
the left or right of it. The numbers to the right of 3 are larger than 3, so we shade to the right.

To solve a rational inequality, we first must write the inequality with only one quotient on the left and 0 on the right.

Next we determine the critical points to use to divide the number line into intervals. A critical point is a number which
make the rational expression zero or undefined.

We then will evaluate the factors of the numerator and denominator, and find the quotient in each interval. This will
identify the interval, or intervals, that contains all the solutions of the rational inequality.

We write the solution in interval notation being careful to determine whether the endpoints are included.

EXAMPLE 7.54

Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

     Solution
Step 1. Write the inequality as one quotient on the left and zero on the right.

Our inequality is in this form.

Step 2. Determine the critical points--the points where the rational expression will be zero or undefined.

The rational expression will be zero when the numerator is zero. Since           when       then is a critical point.

The rational expression will be undefined when the denominator is zero. Since          when      then is a
critical point.

The critical points are 1 and

Step 3. Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.

The number line is divided into three intervals:

                                                                           

Step 4. Test a value in each interval. Above the number line show the sign of each factor of the rational expression in
each interval. Below the number line show the sign of the quotient.

To find the sign of each factor in an interval, we choose any point in that interval and use it as a test point. Any point in
the interval will give the expression the same sign, so we can choose any point in the interval.

The number is in the interval           Test        in the expression in the numerator and the denominator.

Above the number line, mark the factor  negative and mark the factor             negative.

Since a negative divided by a negative is positive, mark the quotient positive in the interval 
700 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

The number 0 is in the interval             Test

Above the number line, mark the factor            negative and mark  positive.

Since a negative divided by a positive is negative, the quotient is marked negative in the interval

The number 2 is in the interval  Test

Above the number line, mark the factor            positive and mark  positive.

Since a positive divided by a positive is positive, mark the quotient positive in the interval 

Step 5. Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. Write the solution in interval notation.

We want the quotient to be greater than or equal to zero, so the numbers in the intervals            and  are

solutions.

But what about the critical points?

The critical point  makes the denominator 0, so it must be excluded from the solution and we mark it with a
parenthesis.

The critical point  makes the whole rational expression 0. The inequality requires that the rational expression be

greater than or equal to 0. So, 1 is part of the solution and we will mark it with a bracket.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            7.6 · Solve Rational Inequalities 701

Recall that when we have a solution made up of more than one interval we use the union symbol,  to connect the two

intervals. The solution in interval notation is   

TRY IT 7.107 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

TRY IT 7.108 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

We summarize the steps for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a rational inequality.

Step 1.  Write the inequality as one quotient on the left and zero on the right.
Step 2.  Determine the critical points-the points where the rational expression will be zero or undefined.
Step 3.  Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.
Step 4.  Test a value in each interval. Above the number line show the sign of each factor of the numerator and
         denominator in each interval. Below the number line show the sign of the quotient.
Step 5.  Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. Write the solution in interval notation.

The next example requires that we first get the rational inequality into the correct form.
  EXAMPLE 7.55

Solve and write the solution in interval notation:
     Solution

Subtract 1 to get zero on the right.
Rewrite 1 as a fraction using the LCD.
Subtract the numerators and place the
difference over the common denominator.
Simplify.
Factor the numerator to show all factors.
Find the critical points.
702 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

         The quotient will be zero when the numerator is zero.
         The quotient is undefined when the denominator is zero.
         Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.

         Test a value in each interval.

         Above the number line show the sign of each factor of the rational expression in each interval.
         Below the number line show the sign of the quotient.

         Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. We want the quotient to be negative, so the solution includes
         the points between -2 and 6. Since the inequality is strictly less than, the endpoints are not included.
         We write the solution in interval notation as (-2, 6).

              TRY IT 7.109 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:
              TRY IT 7.110 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:
       In the next example, the numerator is always positive, so the sign of the rational expression depends on the sign of the
       denominator.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        7.6 · Solve Rational Inequalities 703

  EXAMPLE 7.56
Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

     Solution
  The inequality is in the correct form.

Factor the denominator.

Find the critical points.
The quotient is 0 when the numerator is 0.
Since the numerator is always 5, the quotient cannot be 0.

The quotient will be undefined when the

denominator is zero.                                

Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.

  Test values in each interval.
  Above the number line show the sign of each
  factor of the denominator in each interval.
  Below the number line, show the sign of the quotient.
  Write the solution in interval notation.

       TRY IT 7.111 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

       TRY IT 7.112 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

The next example requires some work to get it into the needed form.
  EXAMPLE 7.57

Solve and write the solution in interval notation:
704 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

            Solution

          Subtract to get zero on the right.
          Rewrite to get each fraction with the LCD
          Simplify.
          Subtract the numerators and place the
          difference over the common denominator.
          Factor the numerator.

          Find the critical points.

          Use the critical points to divide the number
          line into intervals.

Above the number line show the sign of each
factor in each interval. Below the number line, show the sign of the quotient.

Since, 0 is excluded, the solution is the two

intervals,  and

       TRY IT 7.113 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

       TRY IT 7.114 Solve and write the solution in interval notation:

Solve an Inequality with Rational Functions

When working with rational functions, it is sometimes useful to know when the function is greater than or less than a
particular value. This leads to a rational inequality.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.6 · Solve Rational Inequalities 705

EXAMPLE 7.58

Given the function             find the values of x that make the function less than or equal to 0.

     Solution
We want the function to be less than or equal to 0.

Substitute the rational expression for
Find the critical points.
Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.

Test values in each interval. Above the
number line, show the sign of each factor
in each interval. Below the number line,
show the sign of the quotient

Write the solution in interval notation. Since
5 is excluded we, do not include it in the interval.

  TRY IT 7.115      Given the function                find the values of x that make the function less than or equal
                    to 0.

  TRY IT 7.116      Given the function                find the values of x that make the function less than or equal
                    to 0.

In economics, the function     is used to represent the cost of producing x units of a commodity. The average cost per
unit can be found by dividing     by the number of items Then, the average cost per unit is

EXAMPLE 7.59

The function                   represents the cost to produce number of items. Find   the average cost function,

   how many items should be produced so that the average cost is less than $40.

  Solution


706 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

The average cost function is

To find the average cost function, divide the
cost function by

                                                  The average cost function is

                                 to be less than

  We want the function

Substitute the rational expression for

Subtract 40 to get 0 on the right.

Rewrite the left side as one quotient by finding
the LCD and performing the subtraction.

Factor the numerator to show all factors.
Find the critical points.

More than 100 items must be produced to keep the average cost below $40 per item.

TRY IT 7.117            The function                 represents the cost to produce number of items. Find 
                        the average cost function,   how many items should be produced so that the average
                        cost is less than $60?

TRY IT 7.118            The function                  represents the cost to produce number of items. Find  the
                        average cost function,       how many items should be produced so that the average cost is
                        less than $20?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.6 · Solve Rational Inequalities 707

        SECTION 7.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Rational Inequalities

In the following exercises, solve each rational inequality and write the solution in interval notation.

339.                                 340.                                   341.

342.                                 343.                                   344.

345.                                 346.                                   347.

348.                                 349.                                   350.

351.                                 352.                                   353.

354.                                 355.                                   356.

357.                                 358.                                   359.

360.                                 361.                                   362.

363.                                 364.                                   365.

366.                                 367.                                   368.

369.                                 370.

Solve an Inequality with Rational Functions

In the following exercises, solve each rational function inequality and write the solution in interval notation.

371. Given the function              372. Given the function                373. Given the function
                           find the                             find the                              , find the

        values of that make the              values of that make the                values of x that make the
        function less than or                function greater than or               function less than or
        equal to 0.                          equal to 0.                            equal to 0.

374. Given the function
                           find the

        values of x that make the
        function less than or
        equal to 0.

Writing Exercises

375. Write the steps you would use to explain solving  376. Create a rational inequality whose solution is
        rational inequalities to your little brother.
                                                                                  
708 7 · Rational Expressions and Functions

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
        After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 7 · Chapter Review 709

Chapter Review

Key Terms

complex rational expression A complex rational expression is a rational expression in which the numerator and/or
    denominator contains a rational expression.

critical point of a rational inequality The critical point of a rational inequality is a number which makes the rational
    expression zero or undefined.

extraneous solution to a rational equation An extraneous solution to a rational equation is an algebraic solution that
    would cause any of the expressions in the original equation to be undefined.

proportion When two rational expressions are equal, the equation relating them is called a proportion.
rational equation A rational equation is an equation that contains a rational expression.
rational expression A rational expression is an expression of the form where p and q are polynomials and

rational function A rational function is a function of the form         where  and               are polynomial

functions and     is not zero.

rational inequality A rational inequality is an inequality that contains a rational expression.

similar figures Two figures are similar if the measures of their corresponding angles are equal and their

corresponding sides have the same ratio.

simplified rational expression A simplified rational expression has no common factors, other than 1, in its numerator

and denominator.

Key Concepts

7.1 Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions

  · Determine the values for which a rational expression is undefined.
      Step 1. Set the denominator equal to zero.
      Step 2. Solve the equation.

· Equivalent Fractions Property             then                 and
   If a, b, and c are numbers where

· How to simplify a rational expression.
    Step 1. Factor the numerator and denominator completely.
    Step 2. Simplify by dividing out common factors.

· Opposites in a Rational Expression

The opposite of                 is

                An expression and its opposite divide to  then
· Multiplication of Rational Expressions

   If p, q, r, and s are polynomials where

· How to multiply rational expressions.
    Step 1. Factor each numerator and denominator completely.
    Step 2. Multiply the numerators and denominators.
    Step 3. Simplify by dividing out common factors.

· Division of Rational Expressions                              then
   If p, q, r, and s are polynomials where

· How to divide rational expressions.
    Step 1. Rewrite the division as the product of the first rational expression and the reciprocal of the second.
    Step 2. Factor the numerators and denominators completely.
    Step 3. Multiply the numerators and denominators together.
    Step 4. Simplify by dividing out common factors.

· How to determine the domain of a rational function.
    Step 1. Set the denominator equal to zero.
    Step 2. Solve the equation.
    Step 3. The domain is all real numbers excluding the values found in Step 2.
710 7 · Chapter Review

7.2 Add and Subtract Rational Expressions

  · Rational Expression Addition and Subtraction

If p, q, and r are polynomials where       then

                                 and

· How to find the least common denominator of rational expressions.

Step 1. Factor each expression completely.

Step 2. List the factors of each expression. Match factors vertically when possible.

Step 3. Bring down the columns.

Step 4. Write the LCD as the product of the factors.

· How to add or subtract rational expressions.

Step 1.  Determine if the expressions have a common denominator.
           Yes - go to step 2.
           No - Rewrite each rational expression with the LCD.
           Find the LCD.
           Rewrite each rational expression as an equivalent rational expression with the LCD.

Step 2. Add or subtract the rational expressions.
Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

7.3 Simplify Complex Rational Expressions

  · How to simplify a complex rational expression by writing it as division.
      Step 1. Simplify the numerator and denominator.
      Step 2. Rewrite the complex rational expression as a division problem.
      Step 3. Divide the expressions.

· How to simplify a complex rational expression by using the LCD.
    Step 1. Find the LCD of all fractions in the complex rational expression.
    Step 2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the LCD.
    Step 3. Simplify the expression.

7.4 Solve Rational Equations

  · How to solve equations with rational expressions.

      Step 1. Note any value of the variable that would make any denominator zero.

      Step 2. Find the least common denominator of all denominators in the equation.

      Step 3. Clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD.

      Step 4. Solve the resulting equation.

      Step 5. Check:
                     If any values found in Step 1 are algebraic solutions, discard them.
                     Check any remaining solutions in the original equation.

7.5 Solve Applications with Rational Equations

· A proportion is an equation of the form        where             The proportion is read "a is to b as c is to d."

· Property of Similar Triangles

If       is similar to  then their corresponding angle measure are equal and their corresponding sides

have the same ratio.

  · Direct Variation                                               where       The constant k is called the constant
       For any two variables x and y, y varies directly with x if
           of variation.
       How to solve direct variation problems.
           Step 1. Write the formula for direct variation.
           Step 2. Substitute the given values for the variables.
           Step 3. Solve for the constant of variation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  7 · Exercises 711

      Step 4. Write the equation that relates and

· Inverse Variation                                                where  The constant k is called the
    For any two variables x and y, y varies inversely with x if

        constant of variation.
    How to solve inverse variation problems.

        Step 1. Write the formula for inverse variation.
        Step 2. Substitute the given values for the variables.
        Step 3. Solve for the constant of variation.
        Step 4. Write the equation that relates x and y.

7.6 Solve Rational Inequalities

  · Solve a rational inequality.
      Step 1. Write the inequality as one quotient on the left and zero on the right.
      Step 2. Determine the critical points-the points where the rational expression will be zero or undefined.
      Step 3. Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.
      Step 4. Test a value in each interval. Above the number line show the sign of each factor of the rational expression
                  in each interval. Below the number line show the sign of the quotient.
      Step 5. Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. Write the solution in interval notation.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Simplify, Multiply, and Divide Rational Expressions

Determine the Values for Which a Rational Expression is Undefined

In the following exercises, determine the values for which the rational expression is undefined.

377.                                   378.                        379.

380.

Simplify Rational Expressions
In the following exercises, simplify.

381.                                   382.                        383.

384.

Multiply Rational Expressions
In the following exercises, multiply.

385.                                   386.                        387.

388.

Divide Rational Expressions
In the following exercises, divide.

389.                                   390.                        391.

392.                                   393.                        394.
712 7 · Exercises

Multiply and Divide Rational Functions

395. Find                         where           396. Find               where  and

      and

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions
Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with a Common Denominator
In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations.

397.                              398.                              399.

400.                              401.                              402.

403.                              404.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions Whose Denominators Are Opposites
In the following exercises, add and subtract.

405.                              406.                              407.

408.

Find the Least Common Denominator of Rational Expressions

In the following exercises, find the LCD.

409.                              410.                              411.

Add and Subtract Rational Expressions with Unlike Denominators

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations.

412.                              413.                              414.

415.                              416.                              417.

418.                              419.                              420.

421.                              422.

Add and Subtract Rational Functions        where               and  are given.
In the following exercises, find
423.                                              424.

In the following exercises, find           where               and  are given.
425.
                                                  426.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 7 · Exercises 713

Simplify Complex Rational Expressions
Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Writing It as Division
In the following exercises, simplify.

427.                                428.                          429.

430.

Simplify a Complex Rational Expression by Using the LCD
In the following exercises, simplify.

431.                                432.                          433.

434.

7.4 Solve Rational Equations

Solve Rational Equations

In the following exercises, solve.

435.                                436.                          437.

438.                                439.                          440.

Solve Rational Equations that Involve Functions

441. For rational function,                  find              442. For rational function,        find

      the domain of the function  solve                        the domain of the function  solve
       find the points on the graph at this function            find the points on the graph at this function

      value.                                                   value.

Solve a Rational Equation for a Specific Variable
In the following exercises, solve for the indicated variable.

443.  for                           444.         for              445.                      for

446.  for

Solve Applications with Rational Equations

Solve Proportions

In the following exercises, solve.

447.                                448.                          449.

450.
714 7 · Exercises

Solve Using Proportions                                   452. Leo went to Mexico over Christmas break and
                                                                  changed $525 dollars into Mexican pesos. At that
In the following exercises, solve.                                time, the exchange rate had $1 US is equal to
                                                                  16.25 Mexican pesos. How many Mexican pesos
451. Rachael had a 21-ounce strawberry shake that                 did he get for his trip?
        has 739 calories. How many calories are there in
        a 32-ounce shake?                                 454. On a map of Europe, Paris, Rome, and Vienna
                                                                  form a triangle whose sides are shown in the
Solve Similar Figure Applications                                 figure below. If the actual distance from Rome to
                                                                  Vienna is 700 miles, find the distance from
In the following exercises, solve.
                                                               Paris to Rome
453.  is similar to                 The lengths of two         Paris to Vienna

      sides of each triangle are given in the figure.

      Find the lengths of the third sides.

455. Francesca is 5.75 feet tall. Late one afternoon,     456. The height of a lighthouse in Pensacola, Florida
        her shadow was 8 feet long. At the same time,             is 150 feet. Standing next to the statue, 5.5-foot-
        the shadow of a nearby tree was 32 feet long.             tall Natasha cast a 1.1-foot shadow. How long
        Find the height of the tree.                              would the shadow of the lighthouse be?

Solve Uniform Motion Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

457. When making the 5-hour         458. Mark is riding on a plane       459. Josue can ride his bicycle
        drive home from visiting            that can fly 490 miles with          8 mph faster than Arjun
        her parents, Lolo ran into          a tailwind of 20 mph in              can ride his bike. It takes
        bad weather. She was                the same time that it can            Arjun 3 hours longer than
        able to drive 176 miles             fly 350 miles against a              Josue to ride 48 miles.
        while the weather was               tailwind of 20 mph. What             How fast can Josue ride
        good, but then driving 10           is the speed of the plane?           his bike?
        mph slower, went 81
        miles when it turned bad.
        How fast did she drive
        when the weather was
        bad?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              7 · Exercises 715

460. Curtis was training for a
        triathlon. He ran 8
        kilometers and biked 32
        kilometers in a total of 3
        hours. His running speed
        was 8 kilometers per hour
        less than his biking speed.
        What was his running
        speed?

Solve Work Applications              462. Prem takes 3 hours to          463. Jeffrey can paint a house
                                             mow the lawn while her              in 6 days, but if he gets a
In the following exercises, solve.           cousin, Barb, takes 2               helper he can do it in 4
                                             hours. How long will it             days. How long would it
461. Brandy can frame a room                 take them working                   take the helper to paint
        in 1 hour, while Jake takes          together?                           the house alone?
        4 hours. How long could
        they frame a room
        working together?

464. Marta and Deb work
        together writing a book
        that takes them 90 days.
        If Marta worked alone it
        would take her 120 days.
        How long would it take
        Deb to write the book
        alone?

Solve Direct Variation Problems

In the following exercises, solve.

465. If varies directly as           466. If varies inversely as         467. Vanessa is traveling to see
                                                                                 her fiancé. The distance,
when       and                       when       and                                 varies directly with the
                                                                                 speed, she drives. If
find when                            find when                                   she travels 258 miles
                                                                                 driving 60 mph, how far
                                                                                 would she travel going 70
                                                                                 mph?

468. If the cost of a pizza          469. The distance to stop a car
        varies directly with its             varies directly with the
        diameter, and if an 8"               square of its speed. It
        diameter pizza costs $12,            takes 200 feet to stop a
        how much would a 6"                  car going 50 mph. How
        diameter pizza cost?                 many feet would it take to
                                             stop a car going 60 mph?
716 7 · Exercises

Solve Inverse Variation Problems

In the following exercises, solve.

470. If varies inversely with        471. The number of tickets for       472. On a string instrument,
                                             a music fundraiser varies            the length of a string
      the square of when                     inversely with the price of          varies inversely with the
                                             the tickets. If Madelyn has          frequency of its
            and    find                      just enough money to                 vibrations. If an 11-inch
                                             purchase 12 tickets for $6,          string on a violin has a
      when                                   how many tickets can                 frequency of 360 cycles
                                             Madelyn afford to buy if             per second, what
                                             the price increased to $8?           frequency does a 12-inch
                                                                                  string have?

Solve Rational Inequalities
Solve Rational Inequalities
In the following exercises, solve each rational inequality and write the solution in interval notation.

473.                                 474.                                 475.

476.                                 477.                                 478.

Solve an Inequality with Rational Functions

In the following exercises, solve each rational function inequality and write the solution in interval notation

479. Given the function,             480. Given the function,             481. The function
                           find the                             find the
                                                                                  represents the cost to
        values of that make the              values of that make the              produce number of
        function greater than or             function less than or
        equal to 0.                          equal to 0.                      items. Find  the

                                                                                  average cost function,

                                                                                   how many items

                                                                                  should be produced so
                                                                                  that the average cost is
                                                                                  less than $160.

482. Tillman is starting his own
        business by selling tacos
        at the beach. Accounting
        for the cost of his food
        truck and ingredients for
        the tacos, the function

      represents the cost for
      Tillman to produce

      tacos. Find  the

      average cost function,
            for Tillman's Tacos

       how many tacos

      should Tillman produce
      so that the average cost is
      less than $4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            7 · Exercises 717

Practice Test

In the following exercises, simplify.

483.                                     484.

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and simplify.

485.                                     486.                           487.

488.                                     489.                           490.

491.

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

492.                                     493.                           494.

In the following exercises, solve each rational inequality and write the solution in interval notation.

495.                                     496.                           497.

In the following exercises, find         given                    and

498.                                     499.                           500.

501. Given the function,                                                504. Matheus can ride his bike
                                   find                                         for 30 miles with the wind
                                                                                in the same amount of
      the values of that make                                                   time that he can go 21
      the function less than or                                                 miles against the wind. If
      equal to 0.                                                               the wind's speed is 6 mph,
                                                                                what is Matheus' speed
In the following exercises, solve.                                              on his bike?

502. If varies directly with ,           503. If varies inversely with

      and  when                                the square of and

      find when                                when  find when
718 7 · Exercises

505. Oliver can split a              506. The volume of a gas in a        507. The cities of Dayton,
        truckload of logs in 8               container varies inversely           Columbus, and Cincinnati
        hours, but working with              with the pressure on the             form a triangle in southern
        his dad they can get it              gas. If a container of               Ohio. The diagram gives the
        done in 3 hours. How                 nitrogen has a volume of             map distances between
        long would it take Oliver's          29.5 liters with 2000 psi,           these cities in inches.
        dad working alone to split           what is the volume if the
        the logs?                            tank has a 14.7 psi rating?          The actual distance from
                                             Round to the nearest                 Dayton to Cincinnati is 48
                                             whole number.                        miles. What is the actual
                                                                                  distance between Dayton
                                                                                  and Columbus?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      8 · Introduction 719

8  ROOTS AND RADICALS

Figure 8.1 Graphene is an incredibly strong and flexible material made from carbon. It can also conduct electricity.
Notice the hexagonal grid pattern. (credit: "AlexanderAIUS" / Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Simplify Expressions with Roots
  8.2 Simplify Radical Expressions
  8.3 Simplify Rational Exponents
  8.4 Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions
  8.5 Divide Radical Expressions
  8.6 Solve Radical Equations
  8.7 Use Radicals in Functions
  8.8 Use the Complex Number System

      Introduction

Imagine charging your cell phone is less than five seconds. Consider cleaning radioactive waste from contaminated
water. Think about filtering salt from ocean water to make an endless supply of drinking water. Ponder the idea of bionic
devices that can repair spinal injuries. These are just of few of the many possible uses of a material called graphene.
Materials scientists are developing a material made up of a single layer of carbon atoms that is stronger than any other
material, completely flexible, and conducts electricity better than most metals. Research into this type of material
requires a solid background in mathematics, including understanding roots and radicals. In this chapter, you will learn to
simplify expressions containing roots and radicals, perform operations on radical expressions and equations, and
evaluate radical functions.

8.1 Simplify Expressions with Roots

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions with roots
           Estimate and approximate roots
           Simplify variable expressions with roots

   BE PREPARED 8.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

   Simplify:   
   If you missed this problem, review Example 2.21.
720 8 · Roots and Radicals

  BE PREPARED 8.2                Round       to the nearest hundredth.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.34.

  BE PREPARED 8.3                Simplify:                           

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.12.

Simplify Expressions with Roots

In Foundations, we briefly looked at square roots. Remember that when a real number n is multiplied by itself, we write
    and read it `n squared'. This number is called the square of n, and n is called the square root. For example,

Square and Square Root of a number
Square

Square Root

Notice (-13)2 = 169 also, so -13 is also a square root of 169. Therefore, both 13 and -13 are square roots of 169.

So, every positive number has two square roots--one positive and one negative. What if we only wanted the positive

square root of a positive number? We use a radical sign, and write,     which denotes the positive square root of m.

The positive square root is also called the principal square root. This symbol, as well as other radicals to be introduced

later, are grouping symbols.

We also use the radical sign for the square root of zero. Because                  Notice that zero has only one square
root.

Square Root Notation

We know that every positive number has two square roots and the radical sign indicates the positive one. We write
                  If we want to find the negative square root of a number, we place a negative in front of the radical sign. For

example,

EXAMPLE 8.1

Simplify:                   

  Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 721

Since

                   and the negative is in front of the radical sign.

  Since

       TRY IT 8.1  Simplify:                
       TRY IT 8.2
Can we simplify    Simplify:                

                   Is there a number whose square is

Any positive number squared is positive. Any negative number squared is positive. There is no real number equal to
          The square root of a negative number is not a real number.

EXAMPLE 8.2

Simplify:          

  Solution



There is no real number whose square is



  The negative is in front of the radical.

  TRY IT 8.3 Simplify:                      

  TRY IT 8.4 Simplify:                      

So far we have only talked about squares and square roots. Let's now extend our work to include higher powers and
722 8 · Roots and Radicals

       higher roots.
       Let's review some vocabulary first.

       The terms `squared' and `cubed' come from the formulas for area of a square and volume of a cube.
       It will be helpful to have a table of the powers of the integers from -5 to 5. See Figure 8.2.

                                                                                     Figure 8.2
       Notice the signs in the table. All powers of positive numbers are positive, of course. But when we have a negative
       number, the even powers are positive and the odd powers are negative. We'll copy the row with the powers of -2 to help
       you see this.

       We will now extend the square root definition to higher roots.
         nth Root of a Number

       Just like we use the word `cubed' for b3, we use the term `cube root' for
       We can refer to Figure 8.2 to help find higher roots.

       Could we have an even root of a negative number? We know that the square root of a negative number is not a real
       number. The same is true for any even root. Even roots of negative numbers are not real numbers. Odd roots of negative
       numbers are real numbers.

         Properties of
         When n is an even number and

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 723

  ·         then is a real number.

  ·         then is not a real number.

When n is an odd number, is a real number for all values of a.

We will apply these properties in the next two examples.

EXAMPLE 8.3

Simplify:      

  Solution



Since



  Since



  Since

     TRY IT 8.5 Simplify:               

     TRY IT 8.6 Simplify:               

In this example be alert for the negative signs as well as even and odd powers.

EXAMPLE 8.4

Simplify:      

  Solution


724 8 · Roots and Radicals

Since

                            No real number raised to the fourth power is negative. Not a real number.

  Think,



  Since

     TRY IT 8.7 Simplify:                    

     TRY IT 8.8 Simplify:                    

Estimate and Approximate Roots

When we see a number with a radical sign, we often don't think about its numerical value. While we probably know that

the          what is the value of  or        In some situations a quick estimate is meaningful and in others it is

convenient to have a decimal approximation.

To get a numerical estimate of a square root, we look for perfect square numbers closest to the radicand. To find an

estimate of  we see 11 is between perfect square numbers 9 and 16, closer to 9. Its square root then will be

between 3 and 4, but closer to 3.

Similarly, to estimate           we see 91 is between perfect cube numbers 64 and 125. The cube root then will be between
4 and 5.

EXAMPLE 8.5

Estimate each root between two consecutive whole numbers:   

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                        8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 725

     Solution

 Think of the perfect square numbers closest to 105. Make a small table of these perfect squares and their squares

roots.

  Locate 105 between two consecutive perfect squares.
            is between their square roots.

 Similarly we locate 43 between two perfect cube numbers.

Locate 43 between two consecutive perfect cubes.
       is between their cube roots.

TRY IT 8.9   Estimate each root between two consecutive whole numbers:

             

TRY IT 8.10  Estimate each root between two consecutive whole numbers:

             

There are mathematical methods to approximate square roots, but nowadays most people use a calculator to find
square roots. To find a square root you will use the key on your calculator. To find a cube root, or any root with
higher index, you will use the key.

When you use these keys, you get an approximate value. It is an approximation, accurate to the number of digits shown
on your calculator's display. The symbol for an approximation is and it is read `approximately'.

Suppose your calculator has a 10 digit display. You would see that
726 8 · Roots and Radicals

       How do we know these values are approximations and not the exact values? Look at what happens when we square
       them:

Their squares are close to 5, but are not exactly equal to 5. The fourth powers are close to 93, but not equal to 93.

EXAMPLE 8.6

Round to two decimal places:           

  Solution



Use the calculator square root key.
Round to two decimal places.



  Use the calculator key.
  Round to two decimal places.



  Use the calculator key.
  Round to two decimal places.

  TRY IT 8.11  Round to two decimal places:

               

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 727

TRY IT 8.12        Round to two decimal places:

                   

Simplify Variable Expressions with Roots

The odd root of a number can be either positive or negative. For example,

But what about an even root? We want the principal root, so
But notice,

How can we make sure the fourth root of -5 raised to the fourth power is 5? We can use the absolute value.       So

we say that when n is even      This guarantees the principal root is positive.

Simplifying Odd and Even Roots

For any integer

We must use the absolute value signs when we take an even root of an expression with a variable in the radical.

EXAMPLE 8.7

Simplify:                       

Solution

 We use the absolute value to be sure to get the positive root.

  Since the index is even,

 This is an odd indexed root so there is no need for an absolute value sign.
728 8 · Roots and Radicals

  Since the index is odd,



  Since the index



  Since the index is odd,

  TRY IT 8.13 Simplify:                         

  TRY IT 8.14 Simplify:                         

What about square roots of higher powers of variables? The Power Property of Exponents says  So if we
square am, the exponent will become 2m.

Looking now at the square root,

We apply this concept in the next example.

EXAMPLE 8.8

Simplify:                   

  Solution



Since
Since the index is even

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 729



Since
Since the index is even
In this case the absolute value sign is not needed as is positive.

  TRY IT 8.15 Simplify:   

  TRY IT 8.16 Simplify:   

The next example uses the same idea for highter roots.

EXAMPLE 8.9

Simplify:      

  Solution



Since
Since is odd,



Since
Since is positive, we do not need an absolute value sign.

  TRY IT 8.17 Simplify:   

  TRY IT 8.18 Simplify:   
730 8 · Roots and Radicals                                                                   works in much the

       In the next example, we now have a coefficient in front of the variable. The concept
       same way.

But notice                and no absolute value sign is needed as u4 is always positive.

  EXAMPLE 8.10       

Simplify: 

     Solution



Since
Since the index is even



  Since
  Since the index is even

  TRY IT 8.19 Simplify:          

  TRY IT 8.20 Simplify:          

This example just takes the idea farther as it has roots of higher index.
  EXAMPLE 8.11

Simplify:            

  Solution



Rewrite     as

Take the cube root.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 731



  Rewrite the radicand as a fourth power.
  Take the fourth root.

  TRY IT 8.21 Simplify:                    

  TRY IT 8.22 Simplify:                    

The next examples have two variables.
  EXAMPLE 8.12

Simplify:                              

  Solution



Since
Take the square root.



  Since
  Take the square root.


732 8 · Roots and Radicals

Since
Take the cube root.

TRY IT 8.23 Simplify:                            

TRY IT 8.24 Simplify:                            

MEDIA
Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with simplifying expressions with roots.
Simplifying Variables Exponents with Roots using Absolute Values (https://openstax.org/l/37SimVarAbVal)

        SECTION 8.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions with Roots

In the following exercises, simplify.

1.                                     2.          3.                               
                                       5.          6.                               
4.                                     8.          9.                                
                                       11.         12.                              
7.                                             

10.   

13.                                    14.        15.                                    

16.                               17.              18.                                     
                                                                                         

Estimate and Approximate Roots

In the following exercises, estimate each root between two consecutive whole numbers.

19.                                    20.         21.                              

22.   

In the following exercises, approximate each root and round to two decimal places.

23.                                    24.         25.  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                8.1 · Simplify Expressions with Roots 733

26.                

Simplify Variable Expressions with Roots
In the following exercises, simplify using absolute values as necessary.

27.                  28.                                                  29.   
                     31.                                                  32.   
30.                  34.                                                  35.   
                     37.                                                  38.   
33.                  40.                                                  41. 
                                                                                    
36.         
                                                                                  
39.                                                                                  

42.                  43.                                                  44.      
                                                                          47.          
45.                  46.   
                                                                                 
48.                  49.                                                  50. 
                           

Writing Exercises

51. Why is there no real number equal to                52. What is the difference between and
53. Explain what is meant by the nth root of a number.
                                                        54. Explain the difference of finding the nth root of a
                                                              number when the index is even compared to
                                                              when the index is odd.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
734 8 · Roots and Radicals

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

8.2 Simplify Radical Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the Product Property to simplify radical expressions
           Use the Quotient Property to simplify radical expressions

       BE PREPARED 8.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:

                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 5.13.

BE PREPARED 8.5                  Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.13.

BE PREPARED 8.6                  Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.17.

Use the Product Property to Simplify Radical Expressions

We will simplify radical expressions in a way similar to how we simplified fractions. A fraction is simplified if there are no
common factors in the numerator and denominator. To simplify a fraction, we look for any common factors in the
numerator and denominator.

A radical expression, is considered simplified if it has no factors of  So, to simplify a radical expression, we look
for any factors in the radicand that are powers of the index.

Simplified Radical Expression

For real numbers a and m, and

For example, is considered simplified because there are no perfect square factors in 5. But  is not simplified
because 12 has a perfect square factor of 4.

Similarly, is simplified because there are no perfect cube factors in 4. But       is not simplified because 24 has a
perfect cube factor of 8.

To simplify radical expressions, we will also use some properties of roots. The properties we will use to simplify radical

expressions are similar to the properties of exponents. We know that               The corresponding of Product

Property of Roots says that

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 735

Product Property of nth Roots  is an integer, then
If and are real numbers, and

We use the Product Property of Roots to remove all perfect square factors from a square root.

  EXAMPLE 8.13

Simplify Square Roots Using the Product Property of Roots
Simplify:

     Solution

TRY IT 8.25 Simplify:

TRY IT 8.26 Simplify:

Notice in the previous example that the simplified form of      is  which is the product of an integer and a square

root. We always write the integer in front of the square root.

Be careful to write your integer so that it is not confused with the index. The expression  is very different from

             ...

                 HOW TO

Simplify a radical expression using the Product Property.

Step 1.  Find the largest factor in the radicand that is a perfect power of the index. Rewrite the radicand as a product
         of two factors, using that factor.
Step 2.  Use the product rule to rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Step 3.  Simplify the root of the perfect power.

We will apply this method in the next example. It may be helpful to have a table of perfect squares, cubes, and fourth
powers.
736 8 · Roots and Radicals

EXAMPLE 8.14

Simplify:                   

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.
Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the greatest perfect cube factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the greatest perfect fourth power factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.

  TRY IT 8.27 Simplify:          

  TRY IT 8.28 Simplify:            

The next example is much like the previous examples, but with variables. Don't forget to use the absolute value signs
when taking an even root of an expression with a variable in the radical.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 737

EXAMPLE 8.15

Simplify:       

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.
Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect cube factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the greatest perfect fourth power factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.

  TRY IT 8.29 Simplify:     

  TRY IT 8.30 Simplify:     

We follow the same procedure when there is a coefficient in the radicand. In the next example, both the constant and
the variable have perfect square factors.
738 8 · Roots and Radicals

EXAMPLE 8.16

Simplify:                        

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.
Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using perfect cube factors.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Rewrite the first radicand as
  Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using perfect fourth power factors.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Rewrite the first radicand as
  Simplify.

  TRY IT 8.31 Simplify:              
                                      
  TRY IT 8.32 Simplify:            

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 739

In the next example, we continue to use the same methods even though there are more than one variable under the
radical.

EXAMPLE 8.17

Simplify:       

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.
Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Rewrite the first radicand as
Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect cube factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Rewrite the first radicand as
  Simplify.



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect fourth power factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Rewrite the first radicand as
  Simplify.
740 8 · Roots and Radicals

  TRY IT 8.33                 Simplify:                        
  TRY IT 8.34                 Simplify: 
                                                                 

EXAMPLE 8.18

Simplify:                   

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using perfect cube factors.
Take the cube root.

                                            Not a real number.

  There is no real number where

  TRY IT 8.35 Simplify:                   

  TRY IT 8.36 Simplify:                   

We have seen how to use the order of operations to simplify some expressions with radicals. In the next example, we
have the sum of an integer and a square root. We simplify the square root but cannot add the resulting expression to the
integer since one term contains a radical and the other does not. The next example also includes a fraction with a radical
in the numerator. Remember that in order to simplify a fraction you need a common factor in the numerator and
denominator.

  EXAMPLE 8.19

Simplify:                   

  Solution



Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 741

  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.
The terms cannot be added as one has a radical and the other does not. Trying to add an integer and a radical is like
trying to add an integer and a variable. They are not like terms!



  Rewrite the radicand as a product using the largest perfect square factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.
  Factor the common factor from the numerator.
  Remove the common factor, 2, from the numerator and denominator.
  Simplify.

TRY IT 8.37 Simplify:   

TRY IT 8.38 Simplify:   

Use the Quotient Property to Simplify Radical Expressions

Whenever you have to simplify a radical expression, the first step you should take is to determine whether the radicand
is a perfect power of the index. If not, check the numerator and denominator for any common factors, and remove them.
You may find a fraction in which both the numerator and the denominator are perfect powers of the index.

EXAMPLE 8.20

Simplify:        

     Solution


742 8 · Roots and Radicals

Simplify inside the radical first.
Rewrite showing the common factors of the numerator and denominator.
Simplify the fraction by removing common factors.
Simplify. Note



  Simplify inside the radical first.
  Rewrite showing the common factors of the numerator and denominator.
  Simplify the fraction by removing common factors.
  Simplify. Note



  Simplify inside the radical first.
  Rewrite showing the common factors of the numerator and denominator.
  Simplify the fraction by removing common factors.
  Simplify. Note

TRY IT 8.39 Simplify:              

TRY IT 8.40 Simplify:              

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 743

In the last example, our first step was to simplify the fraction under the radical by removing common factors. In the next
example we will use the Quotient Property to simplify under the radical. We divide the like bases by subtracting their
exponents,

EXAMPLE 8.21

Simplify:        

     Solution



  Simplify the fraction inside the radical first.
  Divide the like bases by subtracting the exponents.
  Simplify.



  Use the Quotient Property of exponents to simplify the fraction under the radical first.
  Simplify.



Use the Quotient Property of exponents to simplify the fraction under the radical first.
Rewrite the radicand using perfect fourth power factors.
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.41 Simplify:                                  
744 8 · Roots and Radicals

TRY IT 8.42 Simplify:                                

Remember the Quotient to a Power Property? It said we could raise a fraction to a power by raising the numerator and
denominator to the power separately.

We can use a similar property to simplify a root of a fraction. After removing all common factors from the numerator and
denominator, if the fraction is not a perfect power of the index, we simplify the numerator and denominator separately.

  Quotient Property of Radical Expressions

If and are real numbers,    and for any integer        then,

  EXAMPLE 8.22
How to Simplify the Quotient of Radical Expressions
Simplify:

     Solution

       TRY IT 8.43 Simplify:

       TRY IT 8.44 Simplify:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Simplify a square root using the Quotient Property.
  Step 1. Simplify the fraction in the radicand, if possible.
  Step 2. Use the Quotient Property to rewrite the radical as the quotient of two radicals.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 745

Step 3. Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.

EXAMPLE 8.23

Simplify:        

     Solution



  We cannot simplify the fraction in the radicand. Rewrite using the Quotient Property.
  Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.
  Simplify.



  The fraction in the radicand cannot be simplified. Use the Quotient Property to write as two
  radicals.
  Rewrite each radicand as a product using perfect cube factors.
  Rewrite the numerator as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.


746 8 · Roots and Radicals

The fraction in the radicand cannot be simplified.
Use the Quotient Property to write as two radicals. Rewrite each radicand as a product using
perfect fourth power factors.

Rewrite the numerator as the product of two radicals.

Simplify.

TRY IT 8.45 Simplify:                                        

TRY IT 8.46 Simplify:                

Be sure to simplify the fraction in the radicand first, if possible.
  EXAMPLE 8.24

Simplify:                        

     Solution



Simplify the fraction in the radicand, if possible.
Rewrite using the Quotient Property.
Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                             8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 747



  Simplify the fraction in the radicand, if possible.
  Rewrite using the Quotient Property.
  Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.
  Simplify.



Simplify the fraction in the radicand, if possible.
Rewrite using the Quotient Property.
Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.47 Simplify:                                          

TRY IT 8.48 Simplify:                                          

In the next example, there is nothing to simplify in the denominators. Since the index on the radicals is the same, we can
use the Quotient Property again, to combine them into one radical. We will then look to see if we can simplify the
expression.
748 8 · Roots and Radicals

EXAMPLE 8.25

Simplify:                        

     Solution



  The denominator cannot be simplified, so use the Quotient Property to write as one radical.
  Simplify the fraction under the radical.
  Simplify.



  The denominator cannot be simplified, so use the Quotient Property to write as one radical.
  Simplify the fraction under the radical.
  Rewrite the radicand as a product using perfect cube factors.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
  Simplify.



The denominator cannot be simplified, so use the Quotient Property to write as one radical.
Simplify the fraction under the radical.
Rewrite the radicand as a product using perfect fourth power factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           8.2 · Simplify Radical Expressions 749

Rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
Simplify.

     TRY IT 8.49 Simplify:                               

     TRY IT 8.50 Simplify:                               

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with simplifying radical expressions.

     Simplifying Square Root and Cube Root with Variables (https://openstax.org/l/37SimRtwithVar1)
     Express a Radical in Simplified Form-Square and Cube Roots with Variables and Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/
     37SimRtwithVar2)
     Simplifying Cube Roots (https://openstax.org/l/37SimRtwithVar3)

        SECTION 8.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Product Property to Simplify Radical Expressions
In the following exercises, use the Product Property to simplify radical expressions.

55.        56.                                             57.

58.        59.                                             60.

61.        62.                                             63.                         
                                                           66.                           
64.        65.  

In the following exercises, simplify using absolute value signs as needed.

67.        68.                                             69.                         

70.        71.                                             72.                          
73.                                                           
76.                                                                                         
79.        74.                                             75.                         
82.                                                    
                                                           78.                             
           77.                                                                         
                                                           81.                         
           80.                                             84. 
           83.                                                                           
750 8 · Roots and Radicals

85.                                86.                   

Use the Quotient Property to Simplify Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, use the Quotient Property to simplify square roots.

87.                                88.                          89.                   

90.                               91.                            92.                  

93.                                94.                         95.

96.                                97.                          98.               
99.                                                             101.
102.                               100.                                             
                                                                104.             
105.                               103.                             
                                                                                    
                                                                107.             
108.                               106. 
                                                                110. 

                                   109. 

111.                              112.                          113.                
                                             
                                                                                 is not equal to
                                     Then explain why
114.              

      

Writing Exercises

115. Explain why                                           116. Explain why

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 751

117. Explain how you know that                118. Explain why                is not a real number but
                                                                is.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

8.3 Simplify Rational Exponents

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions with
           Simplify expressions with
           Use the properties of exponents to simplify expressions with rational exponents

       BE PREPARED 8.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Add:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.28.

    BE PREPARED 8.8  Simplify:
                     If you missed this problem, review Example 5.18.

    BE PREPARED 8.9  Simplify:
                     If you missed this problem, review Example 5.14.

Simplify Expressions with

Rational exponents are another way of writing expressions with radicals. When we use rational exponents, we can apply
the properties of exponents to simplify expressions.

The Power Property for Exponents says that    when m and n are whole numbers. Let's assume we are now
not limited to whole numbers.

Suppose we want to find a number p such that  We will use the Power Property of Exponents to find the value
of p.

So          But we know also                  Then it must be that

This same logic can be used for any positive integer exponent n to show that
752 8 · Roots and Radicals

Rational Exponent                then
If is a real number and

The denominator of the rational exponent is the index of the radical.
There will be times when working with expressions will be easier if you use rational exponents and times when it will be
easier if you use radicals. In the first few examples, you'll practice converting expressions between these two notations.

  EXAMPLE 8.26

Write as a radical expression:                

  Solution

We want to write each expression in the form



  The denominator of the rational exponent is 2, so
  the index of the radical is 2. We do not show the
  index when it is 2.



  The denominator of the exponent is 3, so the
  index is 3.



The denominator of the exponent is 4, so the
index is 4.

  TRY IT 8.51               Write as a radical expression:     

  TRY IT 8.52 Write as a radial expression:                    

In the next example, we will write each radical using a rational exponent. It is important to use parentheses around the
entire expression in the radicand since the entire expression is raised to the rational power.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 753

EXAMPLE 8.27

Write with a rational exponent:               

  Solution

We want to write each radical in the form



  No index is shown, so it is 2.
  The denominator of the exponent will be 2.

  Put parentheses around the entire
  expression



  The index is 3, so the denominator of the
  exponent is 3. Include parentheses



The index is 4, so the denominator of the
exponent is 4. Put parentheses only around
the since 3 is not under the radical sign.

  TRY IT 8.53 Write with a rational exponent:   

  TRY IT 8.54 Write with a rational exponent:     

In the next example, you may find it easier to simplify the expressions if you rewrite them as radicals first.
  EXAMPLE 8.28

Simplify:       

  Solution


754 8 · Roots and Radicals

  Rewrite as a square root.
  Simplify.



  Rewrite as a cube root.
  Recognize 64 is a perfect cube.
  Simplify.



  Rewrite as a fourth root.
  Recognize 256 is a perfect fourth power.
  Simplify.

TRY IT 8.55 Simplify:                       

TRY IT 8.56 Simplify:                       

Be careful of the placement of the negative signs in the next example. We will need to use the property  in one
case.

EXAMPLE 8.29

Simplify:                   

     Solution



Rewrite as a fourth root.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 755

  Simplify.



  The exponent only applies to the 16.
  Rewrite as a fouth root.
  Rewrite 16 as
  Simplify.



Rewrite using the property
Rewrite as a fourth root.
Rewrite 16 as
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.57 Simplify:                       

TRY IT 8.58 Simplify:                         

Simplify Expressions with

We can look at in two ways. Remember the Power Property tells us to multiply the exponents and so  and

both equal  If we write these expressions in radical form, we get

This leads us to the following definition.
756 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Rational Exponent
         For any positive integers m and n,

Which form do we use to simplify an expression? We usually take the root first--that way we keep the numbers in the
radicand smaller, before raising it to the power indicated.

  EXAMPLE 8.30

Write with a rational exponent:                

  Solution

We want to use                   to write each radical in the form







  TRY IT 8.59 Write with a rational exponent:                         

  TRY IT 8.60 Write with a rational exponent:                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 757

Remember that     The negative sign in the exponent does not change the sign of the expression.
  EXAMPLE 8.31

Simplify:         

  Solution

We will rewrite the expression as a radical first using the defintion,  This form lets us take the root first

and so we keep the numbers in the radicand smaller than if we used the other form.



The power of the radical is the numerator of the exponent, 2.
The index of the radical is the denominator of the
exponent, 3.

Simplify.

 We will rewrite each expression first using  and then change to radical form.

Rewrite using

Change to radical form. The power of the radical is the
numerator of the exponent, 3. The index is the denominator
of the exponent, 2.

Simplify.



  Rewrite using
  Change to radical form.
  Rewrite the radicand as a power.
758 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Simplify.

  TRY IT 8.61 Simplify:              

  TRY IT 8.62 Simplify:              

EXAMPLE 8.32

Simplify:                        

  Solution



  Rewrite in radical form.
  Simplify the radical.
  Simplify.



  Rewrite using

  Rewrite in radical form.
  Simplify the radical.
  Simplify.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 759

Rewrite in radical form.
There is no real number whose square root

TRY IT 8.63 Simplify:                                

TRY IT 8.64 Simplify:                                

Use the Properties of Exponents to Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents

The same properties of exponents that we have already used also apply to rational exponents. We will list the Properties
of Exponenets here to have them for reference as we simplify expressions.

Properties of Exponents

If a and b are real numbers and m and n are rational numbers, then

We will apply these properties in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 8.33

Simplify:                

     Solution

 The Product Property tells us that when we multiply the same base, we add the exponents.

The bases are the same, so we add the
exponents.
760 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Add the fractions.
         Simplify the exponent.

     The Power Property tells us that when we raise a power to a power, we multiply the exponents.

         To raise a power to a power, we multiply
         the exponents.
         Simplify.

     The Quotient Property tells us that when we divide with the same base, we subtract the exponents.

To divide with the same base, we subtract
the exponents.

Simplify.

TRY IT 8.65 Simplify:                        

TRY IT 8.66 Simplify:                        

Sometimes we need to use more than one property. In the next example, we will use both the Product to a Power
Property and then the Power Property.

  EXAMPLE 8.34

Simplify:      

     Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 761

  First we use the Product to a Power
  Property.

  Rewrite 27 as a power of 3.

  To raise a power to a power, we multiply
  the exponents.
  Simplify.



First we use the Product to a Power
Property.

To raise a power to a power, we multiply
the exponents.

TRY IT 8.67 Simplify:                       

TRY IT 8.68 Simplify:                       

We will use both the Product Property and the Quotient Property in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 8.35

Simplify:      

     Solution


762 8 · Roots and Radicals

  Use the Product Property in the numerator,
  add the exponents.

  Use the Quotient Property, subtract the
  exponents.

  Simplify.

 Follow the order of operations to simplify inside the parenthese first.

Use the Quotient Property, subtract the
exponents.

Simplify.

Use the Product to a Power Property,
multiply the exponents.

TRY IT 8.69 Simplify:                    

TRY IT 8.70 Simplify:                    

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with simplifying rational exponents.
Review-Rational Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/37RatExpont1)
Using Laws of Exponents on Radicals: Properties of Rational Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/37RatExpont2)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        8.3 · Simplify Rational Exponents 763

        SECTION 8.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify expressions with
In the following exercises, write as a radical expression.

119.                                   120.                    121.   

122.   

In the following exercises, write with a rational exponent.

123.                                   124.                    125.         

126.                                   127.                    128.   

In the following exercises, simplify.

129.                                   130.                    131.   

132.                                   133.                    134.       
                                                                      
                                                               137. 
                                                                        
135.                                   136.   
                                                               140.     
                                                                   

138.                                   139.     

                                       

Simplify Expressions with

In the following exercises, write with a rational exponent.

141.                        142.                               143.           
                                     
144.  
                           

In the following exercises, simplify.

145.                                   146.                    147.         
764 8 · Roots and Radicals

148.                              149.                     150.                         

Use the Laws of Exponents to Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify. Assume all variables are positive.

151.                              152.                     153.            
                                                                             
                                  
                                                                           
154.                              155.                     156. 



157.                              158.                     159. 

160.                              161.                     162.              

Writing Exercises

163. Show two different algebraic methods to simplify  164. Explain why the expression  cannot be
              Explain all your steps.                          evaluated.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

8.4 Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Add and subtract radical expressions
           Multiply radical expressions
           Use polynomial multiplication to multiply radical expressions

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 765

  BE PREPARED 8.10    Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                      Add:
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 5.5.

  BE PREPARED 8.11    Simplify:
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 5.28.

  BE PREPARED 8.12    Simplify:
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 5.31.

Add and Subtract Radical Expressions

Adding radical expressions with the same index and the same radicand is just like adding like terms. We call radicals with
the same index and the same radicand like radicals to remind us they work the same as like terms.

  Like Radicals

  Like radicals are radical expressions with the same index and the same radicand.

We add and subtract like radicals in the same way we add and subtract like terms. We know that  is  Similarly

we add        and the result is

Think about adding like terms with variables as you do the next few examples. When you have like radicals, you just add
or subtract the coefficients. When the radicals are not like, you cannot combine the terms.

EXAMPLE 8.36

Simplify:                                       

  Solution



  Since the radicals are like, we subtract the
  coefficients.



  Since the radicals are like, we add the
  coefficients.



The indices are the same but the radicals are different. These are not like radicals. Since the radicals are not like, we
cannot subtract them.
766 8 · Roots and Radicals

  TRY IT 8.71 Simplify:                              

  TRY IT 8.72 Simplify:                              

For radicals to be like, they must have the same index and radicand. When the radicands contain more than one variable,
as long as all the variables and their exponents are identical, the radicands are the same.

EXAMPLE 8.37

Simplify:                              

  Solution



  Since the radicals are like, we combine them.
  Simplify.



Since the radicals are like, we combine them.

  TRY IT 8.73 Simplify:                            

  TRY IT 8.74 Simplify:                            

Remember that we always simplify radicals by removing the largest factor from the radicand that is a power of the index.
Once each radical is simplified, we can then decide if they are like radicals.

  EXAMPLE 8.38

Simplify:                                

  Solution



Simplify the radicals, when possible.

Combine the like radicals.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                    8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 767



  Simplify the radicals.
  Combine the like radicals.



  Simplify the radicals.

Combine the like radicals.

  TRY IT 8.75 Simplify:           

  TRY IT 8.76 Simplify:           

In the next example, we will remove both constant and variable factors from the radicals. Now that we have practiced
taking both the even and odd roots of variables, it is common practice at this point for us to assume all variables are
greater than or equal to zero so that absolute values are not needed. We will use this assumption throughout the rest of
this chapter.

  EXAMPLE 8.39

Simplify:                     

  Solution



Simplify the radicals.
768 8 · Roots and Radicals

  The radicals are not like and so cannot be
  combined.



  Simplify the radicals.

Combine the like radicals.

TRY IT 8.77 Simplify:                          

TRY IT 8.78 Simplify:                         

Multiply Radical Expressions

We have used the Product Property of Roots to simplify square roots by removing the perfect square factors. We can use
the Product Property of Roots `in reverse' to multiply square roots. Remember, we assume all variables are greater than
or equal to zero.

We will rewrite the Product Property of Roots so we see both ways together.

Product Property of Roots

For any real numbers, and and for any integer

When we multiply two radicals they must have the same index. Once we multiply the radicals, we then look for factors
that are a power of the index and simplify the radical whenever possible.

Multiplying radicals with coefficients is much like multiplying variables with coefficients. To multiply  we multiply

the coefficients together and then the variables. The result is 12xy. Keep this in mind as you do these examples.

EXAMPLE 8.40

Simplify:                        

     Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 769

  Multiply using the Product Property.
  Simplify the radical.
  Simplify.



  Multiply using the Product Property.
  Simplify the radical.
  Simplify.

TRY IT 8.79 Simplify:                   

TRY IT 8.80 Simplify:                   

We follow the same procedures when there are variables in the radicands.
  EXAMPLE 8.41

Simplify:              

     Solution



Multiply.
Simplify the radical.
770 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Simplify.

 When the radicands involve large numbers, it is often advantageous to factor them in order to find the perfect

powers.

Multiply.
Simplify the radical.
Simplify.
Multiply.

TRY IT 8.81 Simplify:              

TRY IT 8.82 Simplify:              

Use Polynomial Multiplication to Multiply Radical Expressions

In the next a few examples, we will use the Distributive Property to multiply expressions with radicals. First we will
distribute and then simplify the radicals when possible.

  EXAMPLE 8.42

Simplify:                        

     Solution



  Multiply.
  Simplify.
  Simplify.
  Combine like radicals.



Access for free at openstax.org
                              8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 771

Distribute.
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.83 Simplify:     

TRY IT 8.84 Simplify:     

When we worked with polynomials, we multiplied binomials by binomials. Remember, this gave us four products before
we combined any like terms. To be sure to get all four products, we organized our work--usually by the FOIL method.

  EXAMPLE 8.43

Simplify:               

     Solution



  Multiply.
  Simplify.
  Combine like terms.



  Multiply.
  Combine like terms.

TRY IT 8.85 Simplify:       

TRY IT 8.86 Simplify:       
772 8 · Roots and Radicals

         EXAMPLE 8.44
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Multiply.
         Simplify.
         Combine like terms.

              TRY IT 8.87 Simplify:
              TRY IT 8.88 Simplify:
       Recognizing some special products made our work easier when we multiplied binomials earlier. This is true when we
       multiply radicals, too. The special product formulas we used are shown here.
         Special Products

We will use the special product formulas in the next few examples. We will start with the Product of Binomial Squares
Pattern.

  EXAMPLE 8.45

Simplify:               

     Solution           term when squaring a binomial.
Be sure to include the



Multiply, using the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 773

  Simplify.
  Combine like terms.



Multiply, using the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern.
Simplify.

Combine like terms.

TRY IT 8.89 Simplify:                               

TRY IT 8.90 Simplify:   

In the next example, we will use the Product of Conjugates Pattern. Notice that the final product has no radical.
  EXAMPLE 8.46

Simplify:
     Solution

Multiply, using the Product of Conjugates Pattern.
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.91 Simplify:
TRY IT 8.92 Simplify:
774 8 · Roots and Radicals

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with adding, subtracting, and multiplying
radical expressions.

Multiplying Adding Subtracting Radicals (https://openstax.org/l/37Radicals1)
Multiplying Special Products: Square Binomials Containing Square Roots (https://openstax.org/l/37Radicals2)
Multiplying Conjugates (https://openstax.org/l/37Radicals3)

        SECTION 8.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Add and Subtract Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, simplify.

165.                                   166.           167.              
                            

168.                                   169.           170. 
                                                          

171.                                   172.           173.                
                                           

174.                                   175.           176.              
                                                                      
                                                      179. 
177.                              178.                                     
                                                                182.
180.                              181.

Multiply Radical Expressions
In the following exercises, simplify.

183.                                   184.           185.                
                                           
                                                      188. 
186.                                   187.               
                                           

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     8.4 · Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions 775

189.                190. 
                        

Use Polynomial Multiplication to Multiply Radical Expressions
In the following exercises, multiply.

191.                192.                                       193. 
                                                                   
194.               195.
                                                               196.

197.                198.                                       199. 
                                                                   

200.                201.                                           202.
    
                              204.                                       205.     
203.

206.                207.                                       208.             

209.                210.                                       211.
                                                               214.
212.                213.
                                                               219.
215.                216.                                       222.
                                                               225.
Mixed Practice                                                 228.
                                                               231.
217.                218.                                       234.

220.                221.

223.                224.

226.                227.

229.                230.

232.                233.
776 8 · Roots and Radicals

235.                             236.                     237.

238.                             239.                     240.

Writing Exercises

241. Explain when a radical expression is in simplest     242. Explain the process for determining whether two
        form.                                                     radicals are like or unlike. Make sure your
                                                                  answer makes sense for radicals containing both
243.                             is always non-negative,          numbers and variables.
                                 is always non-positive,
     Explain why                                          244. Use the binomial square pattern to simplify

        for                                                                         Explain all your steps.

     Explain why

        for

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

8.5 Divide Radical Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Divide radical expressions
           Rationalize a one term denominator
           Rationalize a two term denominator

       BE PREPARED 8.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.24.

      BE PREPARED 8.14           Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.12.

      BE PREPARED 8.15           Multiply:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

Divide Radical Expressions

We have used the Quotient Property of Radical Expressions to simplify roots of fractions. We will need to use this
property `in reverse' to simplify a fraction with radicals.

We give the Quotient Property of Radical Expressions again for easy reference. Remember, we assume all variables are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 777

greater than or equal to zero so that no absolute value bars are needed.
  Quotient Property of Radical Expressions

If and are real numbers,                  and for any integer  then,

We will use the Quotient Property of Radical Expressions when the fraction we start with is the quotient of two radicals,
and neither radicand is a perfect power of the index. When we write the fraction in a single radical, we may find common
factors in the numerator and denominator.

  EXAMPLE 8.47

Simplify:      

     Solution



Rewrite using the quotient property,

  Remove common factors.
  Simplify.
  Simplify the radical.



Rewrite using the quotient property,

Simplify the fraction under the radical.
Simplify the radical.
778 8 · Roots and Radicals

TRY IT 8.93 Simplify:                     

TRY IT 8.94 Simplify:                     

EXAMPLE 8.48

Simplify:                   

     Solution



  Rewrite using the quotient property.
  Remove common factors in the fraction.
  Simplify the radical.



Rewrite using the quotient property.
Simplify the fraction under the radical.
Simplify the radical.

TRY IT 8.95 Simplify:                       

TRY IT 8.96 Simplify:                       

Access for free at openstax.org
                8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 779

  EXAMPLE 8.49
Simplify:

     Solution

  Rewrite using the quotient property.

  Remove common factors in the fraction.

  Rewrite the radicand as a product
  using the largest perfect square factor.
  Rewrite the radical as the product of two
  radicals.

  Simplify.

       TRY IT 8.97 Simplify:

       TRY IT 8.98 Simplify:

Rationalize a One Term Denominator

Before the calculator became a tool of everyday life, approximating the value of a fraction with a radical in the
denominator was a very cumbersome process!
For this reason, a process called rationalizing the denominator was developed. A fraction with a radical in the
denominator is converted to an equivalent fraction whose denominator is an integer. Square roots of numbers that are
not perfect squares are irrational numbers. When we rationalize the denominator, we write an equivalent fraction with a
rational number in the denominator.
This process is still used today, and is useful in other areas of mathematics, too.

  Rationalizing the Denominator
  Rationalizing the denominator is the process of converting a fraction with a radical in the denominator to an
  equivalent fraction whose denominator is an integer.

Even though we have calculators available nearly everywhere, a fraction with a radical in the denominator still must be
rationalized. It is not considered simplified if the denominator contains a radical.
Similarly, a radical expression is not considered simplified if the radicand contains a fraction.
780 8 · Roots and Radicals

Simplified Radical Expressions

A radical expression is considered simplified if there are
  · no factors in the radicand have perfect powers of the index
  · no fractions in the radicand
  · no radicals in the denominator of a fraction

To rationalize a denominator with a square root, we use the property that      If we square an irrational square
root, we get a rational number.
We will use this property to rationalize the denominator in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 8.50

Simplify:                        

     Solution
To rationalize a denominator with one term, we can multiply a square root by itself. To keep the fraction equivalent, we
multiply both the numerator and denominator by the same factor.



  Multiply both the numerator and denominator by
  Simplify.

 We always simplify the radical in the denominator first, before we rationalize it. This way the numbers stay smaller

and easier to work with.

The fraction is not a perfect square, so rewrite using the
Quotient Property.
Simplify the denominator.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by
Simplify.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 781



Multiply the numerator and denominator by
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.99 Simplify:                             

TRY IT 8.100 Simplify:                            

When we rationalized a square root, we multiplied the numerator and denominator by a square root that would give us a
perfect square under the radical in the denominator. When we took the square root, the denominator no longer had a
radical.

We will follow a similar process to rationalize higher roots. To rationalize a denominator with a higher index radical, we
multiply the numerator and denominator by a radical that would give us a radicand that is a perfect power of the index.
When we simplify the new radical, the denominator will no longer have a radical.

For example,

We will use this technique in the next examples.
  EXAMPLE 8.51

Simplify     

     Solution
To rationalize a denominator with a cube root, we can multiply by a cube root that will give us a perfect cube in the
radicand in the denominator. To keep the fraction equivalent, we multiply both the numerator and denominator by the
same factor.
782 8 · Roots and Radicals

    

         The radical in the denominator has one factor of 6.
         Multiply both the numerator and denominator by
         which gives us 2 more factors of 6.
         Multiply. Notice the radicand in the denominator
         has 3 powers of 6.
         Simplify the cube root in the denominator.

     We always simplify the radical in the denominator first, before we rationalize it. This way the numbers stay smaller

       and easier to work with.

The fraction is not a perfect cube, so
rewrite using the Quotient Property.

Simplify the denominator.

Multiply the numerator and denominator

by         This will give us 3 factors of 3.

Simplify.

  Remember,
  Simplify.



Rewrite the radicand to show the factors.

Multiply the numerator and denominator by
This will get us 3 factors of 2 and 3 factors of x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 783

Simplify.
Simplify the radical in the denominator.

  TRY IT 8.101 Simplify:                    

  TRY IT 8.102 Simplify:                    

EXAMPLE 8.52

Simplify:       

     Solution
To rationalize a denominator with a fourth root, we can multiply by a fourth root that will give us a perfect fourth power
in the radicand in the denominator. To keep the fraction equivalent, we multiply both the numerator and denominator by
the same factor.



  The radical in the denominator has one factor of 2.
  Multiply both the numerator and denominator by
  which gives us 3 more factors of 2.

  Multiply. Notice the radicand in the denominator
  has 4 powers of 2.

  Simplify the fourth root in the denominator.

 We always simplify the radical in the denominator first, before we rationalize it. This way the numbers stay smaller

and easier to work with.

The fraction is not a perfect fourth power, so rewrite
using the Quotient Property.

Rewrite the radicand in the denominator to show the factors.
784 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Simplify the denominator.
         Multiply the numerator and denominator by
         This will give us 4 factors of 2.
         Simplify.
         Remember,
         Simplify.

    

Rewrite the radicand to show the factors.
Multiply the numerator and denominator by
This will get us 4 factors of 2 and 4 factors of x.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical in the denominator.
Simplify the fraction.

TRY IT 8.103 Simplify:                               

TRY IT 8.104 Simplify:                               

Rationalize a Two Term Denominator

When the denominator of a fraction is a sum or difference with square roots, we use the Product of Conjugates Pattern
to rationalize the denominator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 785

When we multiply a binomial that includes a square root by its conjugate, the product has no square roots.
  EXAMPLE 8.53

Simplify:
     Solution

  Multiply the numerator and denominator by the
  conjugate of the denominator.
  Multiply the conjugates in the denominator.

  Simplify the denominator.
  Simplify the denominator.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 8.105 Simplify:
       TRY IT 8.106 Simplify:
Notice we did not distribute the 5 in the answer of the last example. By leaving the result factored we can see if there are
any factors that may be common to both the numerator and denominator.
  EXAMPLE 8.54
Simplify:
     Solution

  Multiply the numerator and denominator by the
  conjugate of the denominator.
  Multiply the conjugates in the denominator.

  Simplify the denominator.
786 8 · Roots and Radicals

              TRY IT 8.107 Simplify:

              TRY IT 8.108 Simplify:
       Be careful of the signs when multiplying. The numerator and denominator look very similar when you multiply by the
       conjugate.

         EXAMPLE 8.55
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Multiply the numerator and denominator by the
         conjugate of the denominator.
         Multiply the conjugates in the denominator.
         Simplify the denominator.
       We do not square the numerator. Leaving it in factored form, we can see there are no common factors to remove from
       the numerator and denominator.

              TRY IT 8.109 Simplify:

              TRY IT 8.110 Simplify:
              MEDIA
             Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with dividing radical expressions.
             Rationalize the Denominator (https://openstax.org/l/37RatDenom1)
             Dividing Radical Expressions and Rationalizing the Denominator (https://openstax.org/l/37RatDenom2)
             Simplifying a Radical Expression with a Conjugate (https://openstax.org/l/37RatDenom3)
             Rationalize the Denominator of a Radical Expression (https://openstax.org/l/37RatDenom4)

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         8.5 · Divide Radical Expressions 787

        SECTION 8.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Divide Square Roots
In the following exercises, simplify.

245.                                                      246.   
                                                          248.     
247.                                                      250.     
                                                          252.      
249.                                                      254.        

251.                                                      256.

253.       

255.

257.                                                      258.

Rationalize a One Term Denominator
In the following exercises, rationalize the denominator.

259.                                   260.                      261.    

262.                                   263.                      264.    

265.                                   266.                      267.    

268.                                   269.                      270.    

Rationalize a Two Term Denominator

In the following exercises, simplify.

271.                                   272.                      273.
788 8 · Roots and Radicals

274.                             275.                    276.

277.                             278.                    279.

280.                             281.                    282.

Writing Exercises

283.                                                     284. Explain what is meant by the word rationalize in
                                                                 the phrase, "rationalize a denominator."
       Simplify             and explain all your steps.

       Simplify             and explain all your steps.

       Why are the two methods of simplifying
      square roots different?

285. Explain why multiplying     by its                  286. Explain why multiplying by       does not
                                                                 rationalize the denominator.
      conjugate results in an expression with no

      radicals.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

8.6 Solve Radical Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve radical equations
           Solve radical equations with two radicals
           Use radicals in applications

       BE PREPARED 8.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 5.31.

      BE PREPARED 8.17           Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

      BE PREPARED 8.18           Solve
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.45.

Solve Radical Equations

In this section we will solve equations that have a variable in the radicand of a radical expression. An equation of this
type is called a radical equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 789

  Radical Equation
  An equation in which a variable is in the radicand of a radical expression is called a radical equation.
As usual, when solving these equations, what we do to one side of an equation we must do to the other side as well.
Once we isolate the radical, our strategy will be to raise both sides of the equation to the power of the index. This will
eliminate the radical.
Solving radical equations containing an even index by raising both sides to the power of the index may introduce an
algebraic solution that would not be a solution to the original radical equation. Again, we call this an extraneous solution
as we did when we solved rational equations.
In the next example, we will see how to solve a radical equation. Our strategy is based on raising a radical with index n to
the nth power. This will eliminate the radical.
  EXAMPLE 8.56
How to Solve a Radical Equation
Solve:

     Solution

       TRY IT 8.111 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.112 Solve:
790 8 · Roots and Radicals

...

     HOW TO

Solve a radical equation with one radical.

Step 1.  Isolate the radical on one side of the equation.
Step 2.  Raise both sides of the equation to the power of the index.
Step 3.  Solve the new equation.
Step 4.  Check the answer in the original equation.

When we use a radical sign, it indicates the principal or positive root. If an equation has a radical with an even index
equal to a negative number, that equation will have no solution.

  EXAMPLE 8.57

Solve:
     Solution

  To isolate the radical, subtract 1 to both sides.
  Simplify.
Because the square root is equal to a negative number, the equation has no solution.

       TRY IT 8.113 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.114 Solve:
If one side of an equation with a square root is a binomial, we use the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern when we
square it.
  Binomial Squares

Don't forget the middle term!
  EXAMPLE 8.58

Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 791

  Solution

To isolate the radical, subtract 1 from both sides.
Simplify.
Square both sides of the equation.
Simplify, using the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern on the
right. Then solve the new equation.
It is a quadratic equation, so get zero on one side.
Factor the right side.
Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve each equation.
Check the answers.

                                                                                                The solutions are

       TRY IT 8.115 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.116 Solve:
When the index of the radical is 3, we cube both sides to remove the radical.

  EXAMPLE 8.59
Solve:

     Solution

  To isolate the radical, subtract 8 from both sides.
792 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Cube both sides of the equation.
         Simplify.
         Solve the equation.

         Check the answer.

                                                       The solution is

TRY IT 8.117 Solve:

TRY IT 8.118 Solve:

Sometimes an equation will contain rational exponents instead of a radical. We use the same techniques to solve the

equation as when we have a radical. We raise each side of the equation to the power of the denominator of the rational

exponent. Since                  we have for example,

Remember,        and

EXAMPLE 8.60

Solve:
     Solution

To isolate the term with the rational exponent,
subtract 3 from both sides.

Raise each side of the equation to the fourth power.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                     8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 793

Solve the equation.
Check the answer.

                                                                                The solution is

       TRY IT 8.119 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.120 Solve:
Sometimes the solution of a radical equation results in two algebraic solutions, but one of them may be an extraneous
solution!

  EXAMPLE 8.61
Solve:

     Solution

  Isolate the radical.
  Square both sides of the equation.
  Simplify and then solve the equation
  It is a quadratic equation, so get zero on
  one side.
  Factor the right side.
  Use the Zero Product Property.
  Solve the equation.
  Check your answer.
794 8 · Roots and Radicals

                                                                                                         The solution is r = 5.

                                                                                                                    is an extraneous solution.

              TRY IT 8.121 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.122 Solve:
       When there is a coefficient in front of the radical, we must raise it to the power of the index, too.
         EXAMPLE 8.62
       Solve:
            Solution

         Isolate the radical term.
         Isolate the radical by dividing both sides by 3.
         Square both sides of the equation.
         Simplify, then solve the new equation.

         Solve the equation.
         Check the answer.

                                 The solution is

       TRY IT 8.123 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 795

       TRY IT 8.124 Solve:

Solve Radical Equations with Two Radicals

If the radical equation has two radicals, we start out by isolating one of them. It often works out easiest to isolate the
more complicated radical first.
In the next example, when one radical is isolated, the second radical is also isolated.

  EXAMPLE 8.63
Solve:

     Solution
  The radical terms are isolated.
  Since the index is 3, cube both sides of the
  equation.
  Simplify, then solve the new equation.

  Check the answer.
  We leave it to you to show that 5 checks!

       TRY IT 8.125 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.126 Solve:
Sometimes after raising both sides of an equation to a power, we still have a variable inside a radical. When that
happens, we repeat Step 1 and Step 2 of our procedure. We isolate the radical and raise both sides of the equation to the
power of the index again.

  EXAMPLE 8.64
How to Solve a Radical Equation
Solve:

     Solution
796 8 · Roots and Radicals

TRY IT 8.127 Solve:

TRY IT 8.128 Solve:

We summarize the steps here. We have adjusted our previous steps to include more than one radical in the equation
This procedure will now work for any radical equations.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a radical equation.

Step 1.  Isolate one of the radical terms on one side of the equation.
Step 2.  Raise both sides of the equation to the power of the index.
Step 3.  Are there any more radicals?
         If yes, repeat Step 1 and Step 2 again.
Step 4.  If no, solve the new equation.
         Check the answer in the original equation.

Be careful as you square binomials in the next example. Remember the pattern is  or

  EXAMPLE 8.65
Solve:

     Solution

The radical on the right is isolated. Square
both sides.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 797

Simplify.

There is still a radical in the equation so
we must repeat the previous steps. Isolate
the radical.

Square both sides. It would not help to
divide both sides by 6. Remember to
square both the 6 and the

Simplify, then solve the new equation.

Distribute.

It is a quadratic equation, so get zero on
one side.

Factor the right side.

Use the Zero Product Property.               The solutions are  and
The checks are left to you.

TRY IT 8.129 Solve:

TRY IT 8.130 Solve:

Use Radicals in Applications

As you progress through your college courses, you'll encounter formulas that include radicals in many disciplines. We will
modify our Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications slightly to give us a plan for solving applications with
formulas from any discipline.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a problem solving strategy for applications with formulas.

Step 1.  Read the problem and make sure all the words and ideas are understood. When appropriate, draw a figure
         and label it with the given information.
Step 2.  Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what we are looking for by choosing a variable to represent it.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
         given information.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.
798 8 · Roots and Radicals

       One application of radicals has to do with the effect of gravity on falling objects. The formula allows us to determine how
       long it will take a fallen object to hit the gound.

         Falling Objects
         On Earth, if an object is dropped from a height of h feet, the time in seconds it will take to reach the ground is found
         by using the formula

For example, if an object is dropped from a height of 64 feet, we can find the time it takes to reach the ground by

substituting  into the formula.

Take the square root of 64.
Simplify the fraction.

It would take 2 seconds for an object dropped from a height of 64 feet to reach the ground.
  EXAMPLE 8.66

Marissa dropped her sunglasses from a bridge 400 feet above a river. Use the formula         to find how many seconds
it took for the sunglasses to reach the river.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.          the time it takes for the
                                                   sunglasses to reach the river

Step 3. Name what we are looking.                  Let time.

Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the
appropriate formula. Substitute in the given
information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 799

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make
sure it makes sense.

Does 5 seconds seem like a reasonable length of   Yes.
time?
                                                  It will take 5 seconds for the
Step 7. Answer the question.                      sunglasses to reach the river.

TRY IT 8.131 A helicopter dropped a rescue package from a height of 1,296 feet. Use the formula                 to

              find how many seconds it took for the package to reach the ground.

TRY IT 8.132  A window washer dropped a squeegee from a platform 196 feet above the sidewalk Use the

              formula                 to find how many seconds it took for the squeegee to reach the sidewalk.

Police officers investigating car accidents measure the length of the skid marks on the pavement. Then they use square
roots to determine the speed, in miles per hour, a car was going before applying the brakes.

  Skid Marks and Speed of a Car

  If the length of the skid marks is d feet, then the speed, s, of the car before the brakes were applied can be found by
  using the formula

  EXAMPLE 8.67                                                                       to find the speed of the

After a car accident, the skid marks for one car measured 190 feet. Use the formula
car before the brakes were applied. Round your answer to the nearest tenth.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.      the speed of a car

Step 3. Name what weare looking for,           Let the speed.

Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing
the appropriate formula. Substitute in the
given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
800 8 · Roots and Radicals

          Round to 1 decimal place.

                                              The speed of the car before the brakes were applied
                                              was 67.5 miles per hour.

      TRY IT 8.133  An accident investigator measured the skid marks of the car. The length of the skid marks was

                    76 feet. Use the formula  to find the speed of the car before the brakes were applied.

                    Round your answer to the nearest tenth.

      TRY IT 8.134  The skid marks of a vehicle involved in an accident were 122 feet long. Use the formula
                                   to find the speed of the vehicle before the brakes were applied. Round your answer

                    to the nearest tenth.

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving radical equations.

      Solving an Equation Involving a Single Radical (https://openstax.org/l/37RadEquat1)
      Solving Equations with Radicals and Rational Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/37RadEquat2)
      Solving Radical Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37RadEquat3)
      Solve Radical Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37RadEquat4)
      Radical Equation Application (https://openstax.org/l/37RadEquat5)

        SECTION 8.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Radical Equations
In the following exercises, solve.

287.                                 288.                    289.

290.                                 291.                    292.

293.                                 294.                    295.

296.                                 297.                    298.

299.                                 300.                    301.

302.                                 303.                    304.

305.                                 306.                    307.

308.                                 309.                    310.

311.                                 312.                    313.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                8.6 · Solve Radical Equations 801

314.                              315.                                316.

317.                              318.                                319.

320.                              321.                                322.

Solve Radical Equations with Two Radicals
In the following exercises, solve.

323.                              324.                                325.
                                                                      328.
326.                              327.
                                                                                          331.
329.                                      330.                        334.
                                                                      337.
332.                              333.                                340.

335.                              336.

338.                              339.

341.                              342.

Use Radicals in Applications

In the following exercises, solve. Round approximations to one decimal place.

343. Landscaping Reed wants       344. Landscaping Vince wants        345. Gravity A hang glider
                                                                              dropped his cell phone
      to have a square garden           to make a square patio in             from a height of 350 feet.

      plot in his backyard. He          his yard. He has enough               Use the formula
                                                                              to find how many seconds
      has enough compost to             concrete to pave an area              it took for the cell phone
                                                                              to reach the ground.
      cover an area of 75               of 130 square feet. Use

      square feet. Use the              the formula          to

      formula           to find         find the length of each

      the length of each side of        side of his patio. Round

      his garden. Round your            your answer to the

      answer to the nearest             nearest tenth of a foot.

      tenth of a foot.

346. Gravity A construction       347. Accident investigation         348. Accident investigation
        worker dropped a
        hammer while building           The skid marks for a car            An accident investigator
        the Grand Canyon
        skywalk, 4000 feet above        involved in an accident             measured the skid marks
        the Colorado River. Use
                                        measured 216 feet. Use              of one of the vehicles

                                        the formula               to        involved in an accident.

                                        find the speed of the car           The length of the skid

      the formula           to          before the brakes were              marks was 175 feet. Use

      find how many seconds it          applied. Round your                 the formula             to
      took for the hammer to
      reach the river.                  answer to the nearest               find the speed of the

                                        tenth.                              vehicle before the brakes

                                                                            were applied. Round your

                                                                            answer to the nearest

                                                                            tenth.

Writing Exercises

349. Explain why an equation of the form             350.  Solve the equation                                 
        has no solution.                                         Explain why one of the "solutions" that was

                                                                 found was not actually a solution to the

                                                                 equation.
802 8 · Roots and Radicals

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

8.7 Use Radicals in Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Evaluate a radical function
           Find the domain of a radical function
           Graph radical functions

       BE PREPARED 8.19 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.50.

BE PREPARED 8.20                 For      evaluate

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.48.

BE PREPARED 8.21                 Graph  State the domain and range of the function in interval notation.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.56.

Evaluate a Radical Function

In this section we will extend our previous work with functions to include radicals. If a function is defined by a radical
expression, we call it a radical function.
The square root function is
The cube root function is

  Radical Function

  A radical function is a function that is defined by a radical expression.

To evaluate a radical function, we find the value of f(x) for a given value of x just as we did in our previous work with
functions.

EXAMPLE 8.68

For the function                 find   

     Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               8.7 · Use Radicals in Functions 803

To evaluate       substitute 5 for

Simplify.

Take the square root.



To evaluate          substitute -2 for
Simplify.

Since the square root of a negative number is not a real number, the function does not have a value at

  TRY IT 8.135 For the function                       find   

  TRY IT 8.136 For the function                       find   

We follow the same procedure to evaluate cube roots.
  EXAMPLE 8.69

For the function       find             

     Solution



To evaluate          substitute 14 for

Simplify.

Take the cube root.



To evaluate          substitute -2 for
804 8 · Roots and Radicals

Simplify.
Take the cube root.

  TRY IT 8.137 For the function                   find   

  TRY IT 8.138 For the function                   find   

The next example has fourth roots.

EXAMPLE 8.70

For the function                 find           

     Solution



To evaluate                 substitute 4 for

Simplify.

Take the fourth root.



To evaluate                 substitute -12 for
Simplify.

Since the fourth root of a negative number is not a real number, the function does not have a value at

  TRY IT 8.139 For the function                   find   

  TRY IT 8.140 For the function                   find   

Find the Domain of a Radical Function

To find the domain and range of radical functions, we use our properties of radicals. For a radical with an even index, we
said the radicand had to be greater than or equal to zero as even roots of negative numbers are not real numbers. For
an odd index, the radicand can be any real number. We restate the properties here for reference.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.7 · Use Radicals in Functions 805

Properties of

When n is an even number and:

·              then is a real number.

·              then is not a real number.

When n is an odd number, is a real number for all values of a.

So, to find the domain of a radical function with even index, we set the radicand to be greater than or equal to zero. For
an odd index radical, the radicand can be any real number.

  Domain of a Radical Function

  When the index of the radical is even, the radicand must be greater than or equal to zero.
  When the index of the radical is odd, the radicand can be any real number.

EXAMPLE 8.71

Find the domain of the function,                   Write the domain in interval notation.

     Solution

Since the function,                 has a radical with an index of 2, which is even, we know the radicand must be

greater than or equal to 0. We set the radicand to be greater than or equal to 0 and then solve to find the domain.

Solve.

The domain of                       is all values  and we write it in interval notation as 

     TRY IT 8.141 Find the domain of the function,              Write the domain in interval notation.
     TRY IT 8.142 Find the domain of the function,              Write the domain in interval notation.

EXAMPLE 8.72

Find the domain of the function,                   Write the domain in interval notation.

     Solution                       has a radical with an index of 2, which is even, we know the radicand must be greater
Since the function,
than or equal to 0.

The radicand cannot be zero since the numerator is not zero.

For     to be greater than zero, the denominator must be positive since the numerator is positive. We know a positive

divided by a positive is positive.
806 8 · Roots and Radicals

We set         and solve.

Solve.

Also, since the radicand is a fraction, we must realize that the denominator cannot be zero.

We solve                    to find the value that must be eliminated from the domain.

  Solve.                                    and we write it as 
Putting this together we get the domain is

TRY IT 8.143 Find the domain of the function,                    Write the domain in interval notation.

TRY IT 8.144 Find the domain of the function,                    Write the domain in interval notation.

The next example involves a cube root and so will require different thinking.
  EXAMPLE 8.73

Find the domain of the function,            Write the domain in interval notation.

Solution

Since the function,               has a radical with an index of 3, which is odd, we know the radicand can be any

real number. This tells us the domain is any real number. In interval notation, we write  

The domain of                     is all real numbers and we write it in interval notation as  

TRY IT 8.145 Find the domain of the function,                                  Write the domain in interval notation.

TRY IT 8.146 Find the domain of the function,                                  Write the domain in interval notation.

Graph Radical Functions

Before we graph any radical function, we first find the domain of the function. For the function,  the index is
even, and so the radicand must be greater than or equal to 0.

This tells us the domain is       and we write this in interval notation as 

Previously we used point plotting to graph the function,  We chose x-values, substituted them in and then

created a chart. Notice we chose points that are perfect squares in order to make taking the square root easier.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               8.7 · Use Radicals in Functions 807

Once we see the graph, we can find the range of the function. The y-values of the function are greater than or equal to

zero. The range then is 

EXAMPLE 8.74

For the function

 find the domain  graph the function  use the graph to determine the range.

Solution

 Since the radical has index 2, we know the radicand must be greater than or equal to zero. If  then

This tells us the domain is all values  and written in interval notation as  

 To graph the function, we choose points in the interval   that will also give us a radicand which will be easy

to take the square root.

 Looking at the graph, we see the y-values of the function are greater than or equal to zero. The range then is

   

TRY IT 8.147      For the function                    find the domain  graph the function  use the
                  graph to determine the range.

TRY IT 8.148      For the function                    find the domain  graph the function  use the
                  graph to determine the range.

In our previous work graphing functions, we graphed       but we did not graph the function     We will
do this now in the next example.

EXAMPLE 8.75

For the function   find the domain  graph the function  use the graph to determine the range.
808 8 · Roots and Radicals

     Solution

 Since the radical has index 3, we know the radicand can be any real number. This tells us the domain is all real

numbers and written in interval notation as  

 To graph the function, we choose points in the interval    that will also give us a radicand which will be easy

to take the cube root.

 Looking at the graph, we see the y-values of the function are all real numbers. The range then is  

TRY IT 8.149                For the function

                             find the domain  graph the function  use the graph to determine the range.

TRY IT 8.150                For the function

                             find the domain  graph the function  use the graph to determine the range.

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with radical functions.

Domain of a Radical Function (https://openstax.org/l/37RadFuncDom1)
Domain of a Radical Function 2 (https://openstax.org/l/37RadFuncDom2)
Finding Domain of a Radical Function (https://openstax.org/l/37RadFuncDom3)

        SECTION 8.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Evaluate a Radical Function

In the following exercises, evaluate each function.

351.                        find  352.                    find  353.            find 
                                                                                find 
                                                                                find 
                            find  355.                    find  356.            find 
354.                                                                         

                            find  358.                    find  359.
                                                                            
357.
                            find  361.                    find  362.
                                                                              

360.

        

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            8.7 · Use Radicals in Functions 809

363. For the function     364. For the function       365. For the function

                 find                      find                          find 
                                                              

366. For the function

                   find 
          

Find the Domain of a Radical Function

In the following exercises, find the domain of the function and write the domain in interval notation.

367.                      368.                        369.

370.                      371.                        372.

373.                      374.                        375.

376.                      377.                        378.

379.                      380.                        381.

382.

Graph Radical Functions

In the following exercises,  find the domain of the function  graph the function  use the graph to determine the
range.

383.                      384.                        385.

386.                      387.                        388.

389.                      390.                        391.

392.                      393.                        394.

395.                      396.                        397.

398.                      399.                        400.

401.                      402.                        403.

404.

Writing Exercises

405. Explain how to find the domain of a fourth root  406. Explain how to find the domain of a fifth root
        function.                                             function.

407. Explain why         is a function.               408. Explain why the process of finding the domain of
                                                              a radical function with an even index is different
                                                              from the process when the index is odd.
810 8 · Roots and Radicals

     Self Check

       After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

8.8 Use the Complex Number System

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Evaluate the square root of a negative number
           Add and subtract complex numbers
           Multiply complex numbers
           Divide complex numbers
           Simplify powers of

BE PREPARED 8.22 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Given the numbers                   list the      rational numbers, 

                                 irrational numbers,  real numbers.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.42.

BE PREPARED 8.23                 Multiply:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.28.

BE PREPARED 8.24                 Rationalize the denominator:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

Evaluate the Square Root of a Negative Number

Whenever we have a situation where we have a square root of a negative number we say there is no real number that

equals that square root. For example, to simplify   we are looking for a real number x so that x2 = -1. Since all real

numbers squared are positive numbers, there is no real number that equals -1 when squared.

Mathematicians have often expanded their numbers systems as needed. They added 0 to the counting numbers to get
the whole numbers. When they needed negative balances, they added negative numbers to get the integers. When they
needed the idea of parts of a whole they added fractions and got the rational numbers. Adding the irrational numbers

allowed numbers like All of these together gave us the real numbers and so far in your study of mathematics, that
has been sufficient.

But now we will expand the real numbers to include the square roots of negative numbers. We start by defining the
imaginary unit as the number whose square is -1.

Imaginary Unit

The imaginary unit i is the number whose square is -1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 811

We will use the imaginary unit to simplify the square roots of negative numbers.
  Square Root of a Negative Number
  If b is a positive real number, then

We will use this definition in the next example. Be careful that it is clear that the i is not under the radical. Sometimes you

will see this written as  to emphasize the i is not under the radical. But the           is considered

standard form.

EXAMPLE 8.76

Write each expression in terms of i and simplify if possible:

 

     Solution



  Use the definition of the square root of negative numbers.
  Simplify.



  Use the definition of the square root of negative            Be careful that it is clear that is not under the radical
  numbers.                                                                                       sign.

  Simplify.



Use the definition of the square root of negative numbers.
Simplify

TRY IT 8.151              Write each expression in terms of i and simplify if possible:
TRY IT 8.152
                           

                          Write each expression in terms of i and simplify if possible:
812 8 · Roots and Radicals

                          

      Now that we are familiar with the imaginary number i, we can expand our concept of the number system to include
      imaginary numbers. The complex number system includes the real numbers and the imaginary numbers. A complex
      number is of the form a + bi, where a, b are real numbers. We call a the real part and b the imaginary part.

         Complex Number
        A complex number is of the form a + bi, where a and b are real numbers.

A complex number is in standard form when written as  where a and b are real numbers.

If  then  becomes                         and is a real number.

If  then  is an imaginary number.

If  then  becomes        and is called a pure imaginary number.

We summarize this here.

                                                      Real number

                                                      Imaginary number
                                                      Pure imaginary number

The standard form of a complex number is  so this explains why the preferred form is   when

The diagram helps us visualize the complex number system. It is made up of both the real numbers and the imaginary
numbers.

Add or Subtract Complex Numbers

We are now ready to perform the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division on the complex
numbers--just as we did with the real numbers.
Adding and subtracting complex numbers is much like adding or subtracting like terms. We add or subtract the real

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 813

parts and then add or subtract the imaginary parts. Our final result should be in standard form.
  EXAMPLE 8.77

Add:
     Solution

  Use the definition of the square root of negative numbers.
  Simplify the square roots.
  Add.

  TRY IT 8.153 Add:

  TRY IT 8.154 Add:

Remember to add both the real parts and the imaginary parts in this next example.

EXAMPLE 8.78

Simplify:            

  Solution



  Use the Associative Property to put the real
  parts and the imaginary parts together.
  Simplify.



Distribute.

Use the Associative Property to put the real
parts and the imaginary parts together.

Simplify.

  TRY IT 8.155 Simplify:                        
814 8 · Roots and Radicals

TRY IT 8.156 Simplify:           

Multiply Complex Numbers

Multiplying complex numbers is also much like multiplying expressions with coefficients and variables. There is only one
special case we need to consider. We will look at that after we practice in the next two examples.

EXAMPLE 8.79

Multiply:
     Solution

Distribute.
Simplify
Multiply.
Write in standard form.

       TRY IT 8.157 Multiply:
       TRY IT 8.158 Multiply:
In the next example, we multiply the binomials using the Distributive Property or FOIL.
  EXAMPLE 8.80
Multiply:
     Solution

  Use FOIL.
  Simplify and combine like terms.
  Multiply.
  Combine the real parts.

       TRY IT 8.159 Multiply:
       TRY IT 8.160 Multiply:
In the next example, we could use FOIL or the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 815

  EXAMPLE 8.81
Multiply:

     Solution

Use the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern,
Simplify.
Simplify
Simplify.

TRY IT 8.161 Multiply using the Binomial Squares pattern:

TRY IT 8.162 Multiply using the Binomial Squares pattern:

Since the square root of a negative number is not a real number, when we have the square roots of two negative

numbers, we cannot use the Product Property for Radicals. In order to multiply square roots of negative numbers we

should first write them as complex numbers, using              This is one place students tend to make errors, so be

careful when you see multiplying with a negative square root.

EXAMPLE 8.82

Multiply:

     Solution
To multiply square roots of negative numbers, we first write them as complex numbers.

  Write as complex numbers using
  Simplify.
  Multiply.
  Simplify and multiply.

       TRY IT 8.163 Multiply:
       TRY IT 8.164 Multiply:
In the next example, each binomial has a square root of a negative number. Before multiplying, each square root of a
816 8 · Roots and Radicals

      negative number must be written as a complex number.
         EXAMPLE 8.83

      Multiply:
            Solution

      To multiply square roots of negative numbers, we first write them as complex numbers.

Write as complex numbers using
Use FOIL.
Combine like terms and simplify
Multiply and combine like terms.

TRY IT 8.165 Multiply:

TRY IT 8.166 Multiply:

We first looked at conjugate pairs when we studied polynomials. We said that a pair of binomials that each have the
same first term and the same last term, but one is a sum and one is a difference is called a conjugate pair and is of the
form

A complex conjugate pair is very similar. For a complex number of the form  its conjugate is  Notice they

have the same first term and the same last term, but one is a sum and one is a difference.

Complex Conjugate Pair

A complex conjugate pair is of the form

We will multiply a complex conjugate pair in the next example.
  EXAMPLE 8.84

Multiply:
     Solution

Use FOIL.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 817

Combine like terms and simplify

Multiply and combine like terms.  13

TRY IT 8.167 Multiply:

TRY IT 8.168 Multiply:

From our study of polynomials, we know the product of conjugates is always of the form                       The

result is called a difference of squares. We can multiply a complex conjugate pair using this pattern.

The last example we used FOIL. Now we will use the Product of Conjugates Pattern.

Notice this is the same result we found in Example 8.84.                                which simplifies to
When we multiply complex conjugates, the product of the last terms will always have an

This leads us to the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern:
  Product of Complex Conjugates
  If a and b are real numbers, then

  EXAMPLE 8.85
Multiply using the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern:

     Solution

  Use the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern,
818 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Simplify the squares.
         Add.

              TRY IT 8.169 Multiply using the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern:
              TRY IT 8.170 Multiply using the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern:

    Divide Complex Numbers

      Dividing complex numbers is much like rationalizing a denominator. We want our result to be in standard form with no
      imaginary numbers in the denominator.

         EXAMPLE 8.86
      How to Divide Complex Numbers
      Divide:

            Solution

              TRY IT 8.171 Divide:
              TRY IT 8.172 Divide:
      We summarize the steps here.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         How to divide complex numbers.
         Step 1. Write both the numerator and denominator in standard form.
         Step 2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 819

  Step 3. Simplify and write the result in standard form.

  EXAMPLE 8.87
Divide, writing the answer in standard form:

     Solution

  Multiply the numerator and denominator by the
  complex conjugate of the denominator.
  Multiply in the numerator and use the Product of
  Complex Conjugates Pattern in the denominator.
  Simplify.
  Write in standard form.

       TRY IT 8.173 Divide, writing the answer in standard form:
       TRY IT 8.174 Divide, writing the answer in standard form:
Be careful as you find the conjugate of the denominator.
  EXAMPLE 8.88
Divide:
     Solution

  Write the denominator in standard form.
  Multiply the numerator and denominator by
  the complex conjugate of the denominator.
  Simplify.
  Multiply.
  Simplify the
820 8 · Roots and Radicals

         Rewrite in standard form.
         Simplify the fractions.

              TRY IT 8.175 Divide:
              TRY IT 8.176 Divide:

    Simplify Powers of i

       The powers of make an interesting pattern that will help us simplify higher powers of i. Let's evaluate the powers of to
       see the pattern.

We summarize this now.

If we continued, the pattern would keep repeating in blocks of four. We can use this pattern to help us simplify powers of
i. Since i4 = 1, we rewrite each power, in, as a product using i4 to a power and another power of i.

We rewrite it in the form        where the exponent, q, is the quotient of n divided by 4 and the exponent, r, is

the remainder from this division. For example, to simplify i57, we divide 57 by 4 and we get 14 with a remainder of 1. In

other words,                     So we write  and then simplify from there.

  EXAMPLE 8.89
Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 821

Solution

Divide 86 by 4 and rewrite  in the
                    form.

Simplify.
Simplify.

      TRY IT 8.177 Simplify:

      TRY IT 8.178 Simplify:

      MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the complex number system.
      Expressing Square Roots of Negative Numbers with i (https://openstax.org/l/37CompNumb1)
      Subtract and Multiply Complex Numbers (https://openstax.org/l/37CompNumb2)
      Dividing Complex Numbers (https://openstax.org/l/37CompNumb3)
      Rewriting Powers of i (https://openstax.org/l/37CompNumb4)

        SECTION 8.8 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Evaluate the Square Root of a Negative Number

In the following exercises, write each expression in terms of i and simplify if possible.

409.                        410.                  411.                                     
                                                       

412.         

Add or Subtract Complex Numbers In the following exercises, add or subtract.

413.                        414.                 415.

416.                        417.                 418.

419.                        420.                 421.

422.                        423.                 424.
822 8 · Roots and Radicals

425.                                   426.

427.                                         428.

Multiply Complex Numbers

In the following exercises, multiply.

429.                                   430.        431.

432.                                   433.        434.

435.                                   436.

In the following exercises, multiply using the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern.

437.                                   438.        439.

440.

In the following exercises, multiply.

441.                                   442.        443.
                                                      446.
444.                                   445.

447.                                   448.              449.

450.                                   451.        452.

In the following exercises, multiply using the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern.

453.                                   454.        455.

456.

Divide Complex Numbers

In the following exercises, divide.

457.                                   458.        459.

460.                                   461.        462.

463.                                   464.        465.

466.                                   467.        468.

Simplify Powers of i

In the following exercises, simplify.

469.                                   470.        471.

472.                                   473.        474.

475.                                   476.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    8.8 · Use the Complex Number System 823

Writing Exercises                                   478. Aniket multiplied as follows and he got the
                                                            wrong answer. What is wrong with his reasoning?
477. Explain the relationship between real numbers
        and complex numbers.

479. Why is            but                          480. Explain how dividing complex numbers is similar
                                                            to rationalizing a denominator.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of         how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How

can you improve this?
824 8 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

complex conjugate pair A complex conjugate pair is of the form a + bi, a - bi.

complex number A complex number is of the form a + bi, where a and b are real numbers. We call a the real part and b

the imaginary part.

complex number system The complex number system is made up of both the real numbers and the imaginary

    numbers.
imaginary unit The imaginary unit is the number whose square is -1. i2 = -1 or

like radicals Like radicals are radical expressions with the same index and the same radicand.

radical equation An equation in which a variable is in the radicand of a radical expression is called a radical equation.

radical function A radical function is a function that is defined by a radical expression.

rationalizing the denominator Rationalizing the denominator is the process of converting a fraction with a radical in

    the denominator to an equivalent fraction whose denominator is an integer.
square of a number If n2 = m, then m is the square of n.
square root of a number If n2 = m, then n is a square root of m.

standard form A complex number is in standard form when written as              where a, b are real numbers.

Key Concepts

8.1 Simplify Expressions with Roots

  · Square Root Notation

     is read `the square root of m'

 If n2 = m, then                 for

 The square root of m,           is a positive number whose square is m.

· nth Root of a Number

 If  then b is an nth root of a.

 The principal nth root of a is written

 n is called the index of the radical.

· Properties of

 When n is an even number and

     then is a real number

     then is not a real number

 When n is an odd number, is a real number for all values of a.

· Simplifying Odd and Even Roots
    For any integer
    when n is odd

    when n is even

 We must use the absolute value signs when we take an even root of an expression with a variable in the radical.

8.2 Simplify Radical Expressions

  · Simplified Radical Expression
       For real numbers a, m and

                is considered simplified if a has no factors of

· Product Property of nth Roots          and for any integer
    For any real numbers, and

                                and

· How to simplify a radical expression using the Product Property
    Step 1. Find the largest factor in the radicand that is a perfect power of the index.
               Rewrite the radicand as a product of two factors, using that factor.
    Step 2. Use the product rule to rewrite the radical as the product of two radicals.
    Step 3. Simplify the root of the perfect power.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               8 · Chapter Review 825

· Quotient Property of Radical Expressions

 If and are real numbers,        and for any integer                       then,

and

· How to simplify a radical expression using the Quotient Property.
    Step 1. Simplify the fraction in the radicand, if possible.
    Step 2. Use the Quotient Property to rewrite the radical as the quotient of two radicals.
    Step 3. Simplify the radicals in the numerator and the denominator.

8.3 Simplify Rational Exponents

· Rational Exponent

 If is a real number and   then

  · Rational Exponent
       For any positive integers m and n,
                                and

  · Properties of Exponents
       If a, b are real numbers and m, n are rational numbers, then
       Product Property
       Power Property
       Product to a Power
       Quotient Property
       Zero Exponent Definition
       Quotient to a Power Property
       Negative Exponent Property

8.4 Add, Subtract, and Multiply Radical Expressions

  · Product Property of Roots
       For any real numbers, and and for any integer

                                   and

  · Special Products

8.5 Divide Radical Expressions

  · Quotient Property of Radical Expressions

 If and are real numbers,        and for any integer                       then,

and

  · Simplified Radical Expressions
       A radical expression is considered simplified if there are:
       no factors in the radicand that have perfect powers of the index
       no fractions in the radicand
       no radicals in the denominator of a fraction

8.6 Solve Radical Equations

  · Binomial Squares

· Solve a Radical Equation
    Step 1. Isolate one of the radical terms on one side of the equation.
    Step 2. Raise both sides of the equation to the power of the index.
    Step 3. Are there any more radicals?
826 8 · Chapter Review

                  If yes, repeat Step 1 and Step 2 again.
                  If no, solve the new equation.
      Step 4. Check the answer in the original equation.
  · Problem Solving Strategy for Applications with Formulas
      Step 1. Read the problem and make sure all the words and ideas are understood. When appropriate, draw a figure
                  and label it with the given information.
      Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what we are looking for by choosing a variable to represent it.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
                  given information.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
  · Falling Objects
       On Earth, if an object is dropped from a height of h feet, the time in seconds it will take to reach the ground is
           found by using the formula
  · Skid Marks and Speed of a Car
       If the length of the skid marks is d feet, then the speed, s, of the car before the brakes were applied can be found
           by using the formula

8.7 Use Radicals in Functions

  · Properties of
       When n is an even number and:
                    then is a real number.
                    then is not a real number.
       When n is an odd number, is a real number for all values of a.

  · Domain of a Radical Function
       When the index of the radical is even, the radicand must be greater than or equal to zero.
       When the index of the radical is odd, the radicand can be any real number.

8.8 Use the Complex Number System

  · Square Root of a Negative Number
       If b is a positive real number, then

                                                                                         Real number

                                                                                         Imaginary number

                                                                                         Pure imaginary number

                                                         Table 8.1
       A complex number is in standard form when written as a + bi, where a, b are real numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   8 · Exercises 827

· Product of Complex Conjugates
    If a, b are real numbers, then

  · How to Divide Complex Numbers
      Step 1. Write both the numerator and denominator in standard form.
      Step 2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator.
      Step 3. Simplify and write the result in standard form.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Simplify Expressions with Roots

Simplify Expressions with Roots

In the following exercises, simplify.

481.                                   482.                               483.   

484.     


Estimate and Approximate Roots

In the following exercises, estimate each root between two consecutive whole numbers.

485.   

In the following exercises, approximate each root and round to two decimal places.

486.   

Simplify Variable Expressions with Roots

In the following exercises, simplify using absolute values as necessary.

487.                                   488.                               489.

                                                                              
                                                                              

490.                                   491.                               492.

                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
828 8 · Exercises

Simplify Radical Expressions

Use the Product Property to Simplify Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, use the Product Property to simplify radical expressions.

493.                                   494.                  495.                      

In the following exercises, simplify using absolute value signs as needed.

496.                                   497.                  498.

                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 

499.                                   500.

                                           
                                           

Use the Quotient Property to Simplify Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, use the Quotient Property to simplify square roots.

501.                                   502.                   503.

504.                                   505.                  506.

                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 

Simplify Rational Exponents                                  511.

Simplify expressions with                                        
In the following exercises, write as a radical expression.       
                                                                 
507.   

In the following exercises, write with a rational exponent.

508.               

In the following exercises, simplify.

509.                                   510.

                                             

                                             

                                             

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           8 · Exercises 829

Simplify Expressions with

In the following exercises, write with a rational exponent.

512.

    
    
    

In the following exercises, simplify.

513.                                   514.

                                           
                                           
                                           

Use the Laws of Exponents to Simplify Expressions with Rational Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify.

515.                                   516.

                                           
    
                                                         

                                           

Add, Subtract and Multiply Radical Expressions

Add and Subtract Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, simplify.

517.                                   518.                  519.

                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                       521.
520.

    
    

Multiply Radical Expressions

In the following exercises, simplify.

522.                                   523.

                                           
                                           
830 8 · Exercises

Use Polynomial Multiplication to Multiply Radical Expressions
In the following exercises, multiply.

524.                                   525.                    526.

                                             

      

527.                                   528.                    529.

      
      

Divide Radical Expressions

Divide Square Roots

In the following exercises, simplify.

530.                                   531.

                                             

                                             

Rationalize a One Term Denominator
In the following exercises, rationalize the denominator.

532.                                   533.                    534.             

Rationalize a Two Term Denominator
In the following exercises, simplify.

535.                                   536.                    537.

Solve Radical Equations                                        540.
                                                               543.
Solve Radical Equations
                                                                          548.
In the following exercises, solve.

538.                                   539.

541.                                   542.

544.                                   545.

Solve Radical Equations with Two Radicals
In the following exercises, solve.

546.                                   547.

549.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        8 · Exercises 831

Use Radicals in Applications

In the following exercises, solve. Round approximations to one decimal place.

550. Landscaping Reed wants       551. Accident investigation

      to have a square garden           An accident investigator

      plot in his backyard. He          measured the skid marks

      has enough compost to             of one of the vehicles

      cover an area of 75               involved in an accident.

      square feet. Use the              The length of the skid

      formula           to find         marks was 175 feet. Use

      the length of each side of        the formula             to

      his garden. Round your            find the speed of the

      answer to the nearest             vehicle before the brakes

      tenth of a foot.                  were applied. Round your

                                        answer to the nearest

                                        tenth.

Use Radicals in Functions
Evaluate a Radical Function
In the following exercises, evaluate each function.

552.                    find      553.               find           554.                   find

                                                                          
                                                                          

555. For the function

                        find

      
      

Find the Domain of a Radical Function

In the following exercises, find the domain of the function and write the domain in interval notation.

556.                              557.                              558.

559.

Graph Radical Functions

In the following exercises,  find the domain of the function  graph the function  use the graph to determine the
range.

560.                              561.                              562.

563.

Use the Complex Number System
Evaluate the Square Root of a Negative Number
In the following exercises, write each expression in terms of i and simplify if possible.
564.

    
    
    
832 8 · Exercises

Add or Subtract Complex Numbers
In the following exercises, add or subtract.

565.                                   566.                               567.

568.

Multiply Complex Numbers
In the following exercises, multiply.

569.                                   570.                               571.

572.

In the following exercises, multiply using the Product of Binomial Squares Pattern.
573.

In the following exercises, multiply using the Product of Complex Conjugates Pattern.
574.

Divide Complex Numbers

In the following exercises, divide.

575.                                   576.

Simplify Powers of i

In the following exercises, simplify.

577.                                   578.

Practice Test

In the following exercises, simplify using absolute values as necessary.

579.                                   580.                               581.

582.

In the following exercises, simplify. Assume all variables are positive.

583.                                   584.                               585.

       

586.                                   587.                               588.

589.                                   590.                               591.

592.                                   593.                               594.

595.                                   596.                               597.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                8 · Exercises 833

598.                                599.

In the following exercises, solve.

600.                                601.  602.

In the following exercise,  find the domain of the function  graph the function  use the graph to determine the range.
603.
834 8 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     9 · Introduction 835

9  QUADRATIC EQUATIONS AND
   FUNCTIONS

Figure 9.1 Several companies have patented contact lenses equipped with cameras, suggesting that they may be the
future of wearable camera technology. (credit: "intographics"/Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  9.1 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property
  9.2 Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square
  9.3 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula
  9.4 Solve Equations in Quadratic Form
  9.5 Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations
  9.6 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties
  9.7 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations
  9.8 Solve Quadratic Inequalities

      Introduction

Blink your eyes. You've taken a photo. That's what will happen if you are wearing a contact lens with a built-in camera.
Some of the same technology used to help doctors see inside the eye may someday be used to make cameras and other
devices. These technologies are being developed by biomedical engineers using many mathematical principles,
including an understanding of quadratic equations and functions. In this chapter, you will explore these kinds of
equations and learn to solve them in different ways. Then you will solve applications modeled by quadratics, graph them,
and extend your understanding to quadratic inequalities.

9.1 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

   Solve quadratic equations of the form             using the Square Root Property

   Solve quadratic equations of the form             using the Square Root Property

   BE PREPARED 9.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

   Simplify:
   If you missed this problem, review Example 8.13.

   BE PREPARED 9.2 Simplify:                      .
836 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 8.50.

BE PREPARED 9.3                  Factor:               .

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.23.

A quadratic equation is an equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0, where  . Quadratic equations differ from linear

equations by including a quadratic term with the variable raised to the second power of the form ax2. We use different

methods to solve quadratic equations than linear equations, because just adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing

terms will not isolate the variable.

We have seen that some quadratic equations can be solved by factoring. In this chapter, we will learn three other
methods to use in case a quadratic equation cannot be factored.

Solve Quadratic Equations of the form                       using the Square Root Property

We have already solved some quadratic equations by factoring. Let's review how we used factoring to solve the quadratic
equation x2 = 9.

Put the equation in standard form.
Factor the difference of squares.
Use the Zero Product Property.
Solve each equation.

We can easily use factoring to find the solutions of similar equations, like x2 = 16 and x2 = 25, because 16 and 25 are

perfect squares. In each case, we would get two solutions,               and

But what happens when we have an equation like x2 = 7? Since 7 is not a perfect square, we cannot solve the equation by
factoring.

Previously we learned that since 169 is the square of 13, we can also say that 13 is a square root of 169. Also, (-13)2 =
169, so -13 is also a square root of 169. Therefore, both 13 and -13 are square roots of 169. So, every positive number
has two square roots--one positive and one negative. We earlier defined the square root of a number in this way:

Since these equations are all of the form x2 = k, the square root definition tells us the solutions are the two square roots
of k. This leads to the Square Root Property.

  Square Root Property

  If x2 = k, then

Notice that the Square Root Property gives two solutions to an equation of the form x2 = k, the principal square root of

and its opposite. We could also write the solution as       We read this as x equals positive or negative the square

root of k.

Now we will solve the equation x2 = 9 again, this time using the Square Root Property.

Access for free at openstax.org
                               9.1 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 837

Use the Square Root Property.

What happens when the constant is not a perfect square? Let's use the Square Root Property to solve the equation x2 =
7.

  Use the Square Root Property.

We cannot simplify , so we leave the answer as a radical.
  EXAMPLE 9.1

How to solve a Quadratic Equation of the form ax2 = k Using the Square Root Property
Solve:

     Solution

       TRY IT 9.1 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.2 Solve:
The steps to take to use the Square Root Property to solve a quadratic equation are listed here.
838 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

        ...

             HOW TO

Solve a quadratic equation using the square root property.

Step 1.  Isolate the quadratic term and make its coefficient one.
Step 2.  Use Square Root Property.
Step 3.  Simplify the radical.
Step 4.  Check the solutions.

In order to use the Square Root Property, the coefficient of the variable term must equal one. In the next example, we
must divide both sides of the equation by the coefficient 3 before using the Square Root Property.

  EXAMPLE 9.2

Solve:
     Solution

The quadratic term is isolated.
Divide by 3 to make its coefficient 1.
Simplify.
Use the Square Root Property.
Simplify the radical.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check the solutions:

TRY IT 9.3 Solve:

TRY IT 9.4 Solve:

The Square Root Property states `If        ,' What will happen if  This will be the case in the next example.

EXAMPLE 9.3

Solve:       .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 9.1 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 839

  Solution

Isolate the quadratic term.
Use the Square Root Property.
Simplify using complex numbers.
Simplify the radical.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check the solutions:

       TRY IT 9.5 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.6 Solve:
Our method also works when fractions occur in the equation; we solve as any equation with fractions. In the next
example, we first isolate the quadratic term, and then make the coefficient equal to one.
  EXAMPLE 9.4
Solve:
     Solution

  Isolate the quadratic term.
  Multiply by to make the coefficient 1.
  Simplify.
  Use the Square Root Property.
  Simplify the radical.
840 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

          Simplify.
          Rewrite to show two solutions.
          Check:

              TRY IT 9.7 Solve:
              TRY IT 9.8 Solve:
       The solutions to some equations may have fractions inside the radicals. When this happens, we must rationalize the
       denominator.
         EXAMPLE 9.5
       Solve:
            Solution
          Isolate the quadratic term.
          Divide by to make the coefficient 1.
          Simplify.
          Use the Square Root Property.
          Rewrite the radical as a fraction of square roots.
          Rationalize the denominator.
          Simplify.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   9.1 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 841

  Rewrite to show two solutions.
  Check:
  We leave the check for you.

       TRY IT 9.9 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.10 Solve:

Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form a(x - h)2 = k Using the Square Root
Property

We can use the Square Root Property to solve an equation of the form a(x - h)2 = k as well. Notice that the quadratic
term, x, in the original form ax2 = k is replaced with (x - h).
The first step, like before, is to isolate the term that has the variable squared. In this case, a binomial is being squared.
Once the binomial is isolated, by dividing each side by the coefficient of a, then the Square Root Property can be used on
(x - h)2.

  EXAMPLE 9.6
Solve:

     Solution

  Divide both sides by the coefficient 4.
  Use the Square Root Property on the binomial
  Simplify the radical.
  Solve for
  Rewrite to show two solutions.
  Check:

       TRY IT 9.11 Solve:
842 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

              TRY IT 9.12 Solve:
       Remember when we take the square root of a fraction, we can take the square root of the numerator and denominator
       separately.

         EXAMPLE 9.7
       Solve:

            Solution

         Use the Square Root Property.
         Rewrite the radical as a fraction of square roots.
         Simplify the radical.
         Solve for .
         Rewrite to show two solutions.
         Check:
         We leave the check for you.

              TRY IT 9.13 Solve:
              TRY IT 9.14 Solve:
       We will start the solution to the next example by isolating the binomial term.
         EXAMPLE 9.8
       Solve:
            Solution

         Subtract 3 from both sides to isolate the binomial term.
         Divide both sides by 2.
         Use the Square Root Property.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   9.1 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 843

  Simplify the radical.
  Solve for .
  Rewrite to show two solutions.
  Check:
  We leave the check for you.

       TRY IT 9.15 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.16 Solve:
Sometimes the solutions are complex numbers.
  EXAMPLE 9.9
Solve:
     Solution

  Use the Square Root Property.
  Simplify the radical.
  Add 3 to both sides.
  Divide both sides by 2.
  Rewrite in standard form.
  Simplify.
  Rewrite to show two solutions.
  Check:
  We leave the check for you.

       TRY IT 9.17 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.18 Solve:
The left sides of the equations in the next two examples do not seem to be of the form a(x - h)2. But they are perfect
square trinomials, so we will factor to put them in the form we need.
844 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         EXAMPLE 9.10
       Solve:

            Solution
       We notice the left side of the equation is a perfect square trinomial. We will factor it first.

Factor the perfect square trinomial.       ,
Use the Square Root Property.         ,
Simplify the radical.
Solve for .

Divide each side by 2.

Rewrite to show two solutions.
Simplify each equation.
Check:

       TRY IT 9.19 Solve:
       TRY IT 9.20 Solve:
       MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with using the Square Root Property to solve
      quadratic equations.
      Solving Quadratic Equations: The Square Root Property (https://openstax.org/l/37SqRtProp1)
      Using the Square Root Property to Solve Quadratic Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37SqRtProp2)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   9.1 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property 845

        SECTION 9.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form ax2 = k Using the Square Root Property

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

1.              2.                                                 3.

4.              5.                                                 6.

7.              8.                                                 9.

10.             11.                                                12.

13.             14.                                                15.

16.             17.                                                18.

19.             20.                                                21.

22.

Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form a(x - h)2 = k Using the Square Root Property

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

23.             24.                                                25.

26.             27.                                                28.

29.             30.                                                31.

32.             33.                                                34.

35.             36.                                                37.

38.             39.                                                40.

41.             42.                                                43.

44.             45.                                                46.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, solve using the Square Root Property.

47.             48.                                                49.

50.             51.                                                52.

53.             54.                                                55.

56.             57.                                                58.

59.             60.                                                61.

62.             63.                                                64.

65.             66.                                                67.

68.
846 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Writing Exercises

69. In your own words, explain the Square Root           70. In your own words, explain how to use the Square
      Property.                                                Root Property to solve the quadratic equation
                                                                                   .

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Choose how would you respond to the statement "I can solve quadratic equations of the form a times the square of x
minus h equals k using the Square Root Property." "Confidently," "with some help," or "No, I don't get it."

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

9.2 Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Complete the square of a binomial expression

Solve quadratic equations of the form                    by completing the square

Solve quadratic equations of the form                    by completing the square

BE PREPARED 9.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Expand:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

BE PREPARED 9.5                  Factor
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.9.

BE PREPARED 9.6                  Factor
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.14.

So far we have solved quadratic equations by factoring and using the Square Root Property. In this section, we will solve
quadratic equations by a process called completing the square, which is important for our work on conics later.

Complete the Square of a Binomial Expression

In the last section, we were able to use the Square Root Property to solve the equation (y - 7)2 = 12 because the left side
was a perfect square.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 847

We also solved an equation in which the left side was a perfect square trinomial, but we had to rewrite it the form
            in order to use the Square Root Property.

What happens if the variable is not part of a perfect square? Can we use algebra to make a perfect square?
Let's look at two examples to help us recognize the patterns.

We restate the patterns here for reference.
  Binomial Squares Pattern
  If a and b are real numbers,

We can use this pattern to "make" a perfect square.

We will start with the expression x2 + 6x. Since there is a plus sign between the two terms, we will use the (a + b)2
pattern, a2 + 2ab + b2 = (a + b)2.

We ultimately need to find the last term of this trinomial that will make it a perfect square trinomial. To do that we will
need to find b. But first we start with determining a. Notice that the first term of x2 + 6x is a square, x2. This tells us that a

= x.

What number, b, when multiplied with 2x gives 6x? It would have to be 3, which is  So b = 3.

Now to complete the perfect square trinomial, we will find the last term by squaring b, which is 32 = 9.
We can now factor.
So we found that adding 9 to x2 + 6x `completes the square', and we write it as (x + 3)2.
848 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

  ...

       HOW TO

Complete a square of

Step 1.  Identify b, the coefficient of x.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Find         the number to complete the square.
Step 4.
         Add the      to x2 + bx.

         Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as a binomial squared.

EXAMPLE 9.11

Complete the square to make a perfect square trinomial. Then write the result as a binomial squared.

                                 

  Solution



The coefficient of is -26.

  Add 169 to the binomial to complete the square.
  Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
  a binomial squared.



  The coefficient of is .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 849

  Add to the binomial to complete the square.
  Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
  a binomial squared.



  The coefficient of is

Add to the binomial to complete the square.
Rewrite as a binomial square.

TRY IT 9.21  Complete the square to make a perfect square trinomial. Then write the result as a binomial
TRY IT 9.22  squared.

                                                      

             Complete the square to make a perfect square trinomial. Then write the result as a binomial
             squared.

                                                      
850 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

    Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form x2 + bx + c = 0 by Completing the Square

       In solving equations, we must always do the same thing to both sides of the equation. This is true, of course, when we
       solve a quadratic equation by completing the square too. When we add a term to one side of the equation to make a
       perfect square trinomial, we must also add the same term to the other side of the equation.
       For example, if we start with the equation x2 + 6x = 40, and we want to complete the square on the left, we will add 9 to
       both sides of the equation.

Add 9 to both sides to complete the square.

Now the equation is in the form to solve using the Square Root Property! Completing the square is a way to transform an
equation into the form we need to be able to use the Square Root Property.

EXAMPLE 9.12

How to Solve a Quadratic Equation of the Form  by Completing the Square
Solve by completing the square:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 851

TRY IT 9.23 Solve by completing the square:

TRY IT 9.24 Solve by completing the square:

The steps to solve a quadratic equation by completing the square are listed here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a quadratic equation of the form       by completing the square.

Step 1.  Isolate the variable terms on one side and the constant terms on the other.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Find  the number needed to complete the square. Add it to both sides of the equation.

Step 4.  Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as a binomial squared on the left and simplify by adding the
Step 5.  terms on the right
Step 6.  Use the Square Root Property.
         Simplify the radical and then solve the two resulting equations.
         Check the solutions.

When we solve an equation by completing the square, the answers will not always be integers.
  EXAMPLE 9.13

Solve by completing the square:
     Solution

The variable terms are on the left side.
Take half of 4 and square it.

Add 4 to both sides.

Factor the perfect square trinomial,
writing it as a binomial squared.
852 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Use the Square Root Property.
         Simplify using complex numbers.
         Subtract 2 from each side.
         Rewrite to show two solutions.
         We leave the check to you.

              TRY IT 9.25 Solve by completing the square:
              TRY IT 9.26 Solve by completing the square:
       In the previous example, our solutions were complex numbers. In the next example, the solutions will be irrational
       numbers.
         EXAMPLE 9.14
       Solve by completing the square:
            Solution

         The variable terms are on the left side.
         Take half of and square it.

         Add 81 to both sides.
         Factor the perfect square trinomial,
         writing it as a binomial squared.
         Use the Square Root Property.
         Simplify the radical.
         Solve for .
         Check.

        Access for free at openstax.org
Another way to check this would be to use a calculator. Evaluate  9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 853

                                                                  for both of the solutions. The answer should be

       TRY IT 9.27 Solve by completing the square:

       TRY IT 9.28 Solve by completing the square:
We will start the next example by isolating the variable terms on the left side of the equation.

  EXAMPLE 9.15
Solve by completing the square:

     Solution

  Isolate the variable terms on the left side.
  Subtract 4 to get the constant terms on the right side.
  Take half of 10 and square it.

Add 25 to both sides.
Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
a binomial squared.
Use the Square Root Property.
Simplify the radical.
Solve for x.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Solve the equations.
Check:

TRY IT 9.29 Solve by completing the square:
TRY IT 9.30 Solve by completing the square:
854 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

       To solve the next equation, we must first collect all the variable terms on the left side of the equation. Then we proceed
       as we did in the previous examples.

         EXAMPLE 9.16
       Solve by completing the square:

            Solution

         Subtract to get the variable terms on the left side.
         Take half of and square it.

Add to both sides.
Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
a binomial squared.
Add the fractions on the right side.

Use the Square Root Property.

Simplify the radical.

Solve for n.

Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!

TRY IT 9.31 Solve by completing the square:

TRY IT 9.32 Solve by completing the square:

Notice that the left side of the next equation is in factored form. But the right side is not zero. So, we cannot use the Zero

Product Property since it says "If  then a = 0 or b = 0." Instead, we multiply the factors and then put the

equation into standard form to solve by completing the square.

EXAMPLE 9.17

Solve by completing the square:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 855

  Solution

We multiply the binomials on the left.
Add 15 to isolate the constant terms on the right.
Take half of 2 and square it.

Add 1 to both sides.
Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
a binomial squared.

Use the Square Root Property.

Solve for x.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Simplify.
Check:
We leave the check for you!

TRY IT 9.33 Solve by completing the square:

TRY IT 9.34 Solve by completing the square:

Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form ax2 + bx + c = 0 by Completing the Square

The process of completing the square works best when the coefficient of x2 is 1, so the left side of the equation is of the
form x2 + bx + c. If the x2 term has a coefficient other than 1, we take some preliminary steps to make the coefficient
equal to 1.

Sometimes the coefficient can be factored from all three terms of the trinomial. This will be our strategy in the next
example.

EXAMPLE 9.18

Solve by completing the square:                                                                    as a common

     Solution
To complete the square, we need the coefficient of to be one. If we factor out the coefficient of
factor, we can continue with solving the equation by completing the square.
856 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Factor out the greatest common factor.
         Divide both sides by 3 to isolate the trinomial
         with coefficient 1.
         Simplify.
         Add 5 to get the constant terms on the right side.
         Take half of 4 and square it.

         Add 4 to both sides.
         Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it
         as a binomial squared.
         Use the Square Root Property.
         Solve for x.
         Rewrite to show two solutions.
         Simplify.
         Check:

              TRY IT 9.35 Solve by completing the square:
              TRY IT 9.36 Solve by completing the square:
       To complete the square, the coefficient of the x2 must be 1. When the leading coefficient is not a factor of all the terms,
       we will divide both sides of the equation by the leading coefficient! This will give us a fraction for the second coefficient.
       We have already seen how to complete the square with fractions in this section.
         EXAMPLE 9.19
       Solve by completing the square:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                           9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 857

     Solution
To complete the square we need the coefficient of to be one. We will divide both sides of the equation by the
coefficient of x2. Then we can continue with solving the equation by completing the square.

  Divide both sides by 2 to get the
  coefficient of to be 1.
  Simplify.
  Take half of and square it.

  Add to both sides.
  Factor the perfect square trinomial,
  writing it as a binomial squared.
  Add the fractions on the right side.
  Use the Square Root Property.
  Simplify the radical.
  Solve for x.
  Rewrite to show two solutions.
  Simplify.
  Check:
  We leave the check for you!

       TRY IT 9.37 Solve by completing the square:
       TRY IT 9.38 Solve by completing the square:
Now that we have seen that the coefficient of x2 must be 1 for us to complete the square, we update our procedure for
solving a quadratic equation by completing the square to include equations of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0.
858 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

...

     HOW TO

Solve a quadratic equation of the form              by completing the square.

Step 1.  Divide by to make the coefficient of x2 term 1.
Step 2.  Isolate the variable terms on one side and the constant terms on the other.
Step 3.
Step 4.  Find  the number needed to complete the square. Add it to both sides of the equation.

Step 5.  Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as a binomial squared on the left and simplify by adding the
Step 6.  terms on the right
Step 7.  Use the Square Root Property.
         Simplify the radical and then solve the two resulting equations.
         Check the solutions.

  EXAMPLE 9.20

Solve by completing the square:

     Solution
Again, our first step will be to make the coefficient of x2 one. By dividing both sides of the equation by the coefficient of
x2, we can then continue with solving the equation by completing the square.

Divide both sides by 3 to make the
coefficient of equal 1.

Simplify.

Take half of and square it.

Add to both sides.
Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as
a binomial squared.
Use the Square Root Property.

Simplify the radical.

Solve for x .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.2 · Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square 859

Rewrite to show two solutions.

Check:
We leave the check for you!

     TRY IT 9.39 Solve by completing the square:

     TRY IT 9.40 Solve by completing the square:

     MEDIA
     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with completing the square.
     Completing Perfect Square Trinomials (https://openstax.org/l/37CompTheSq1)
     Completing the Square 1 (https://openstax.org/l/37CompTheSq2)
     Completing the Square to Solve Quadratic Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37CompTheSq3)
     Completing the Square to Solve Quadratic Equations: More Examples (https://openstax.org/l/37CompTheSq4)
     Completing the Square 4 (https://openstax.org/l/37CompTheSq5)

        SECTION 9.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Complete the Square of a Binomial Expression

In the following exercises, complete the square to make a perfect square trinomial. Then write the result as a binomial
squared.

71.                             72.                          73.                
74.                                                               

       

Solve Quadratic Equations of the form x2 + bx + c = 0 by Completing the Square

In the following exercises, solve by completing the square.

75.                             76.                          77.

78.                             79.                          80.

81.                             82.                          83.

84.                             85.                          86.

87.                             88.                          89.

90.                             91.                          92.

93.                             94.                          95.

96.                             97.                          98.
860 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Solve Quadratic Equations of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 by Completing the Square

In the following exercises, solve by completing the square.

99.                                        100.                   101.

102.                                       103.                   104.

105.                                       106.                   107.

108.                                       109.                   110.

Writing Exercises

111. Solve the equation                                      112. Solve the equation  by completing

     by using the Square Root Property                       the square and explain all your steps.
     by Completing the Square
     Which method do you prefer? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

9.3 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve quadratic equations using the Quadratic Formula
           Use the discriminant to predict the number and type of solutions of a quadratic equation
           Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve a quadratic equation

      BE PREPARED 9.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Evaluate        when        and

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

      BE PREPARED 9.8            Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 8.13.

      BE PREPARED 9.9            Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 8.76.

Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

When we solved quadratic equations in the last section by completing the square, we took the same steps every time. By
the end of the exercise set, you may have been wondering `isn't there an easier way to do this?' The answer is `yes'.
Mathematicians look for patterns when they do things over and over in order to make their work easier. In this section
we will derive and use a formula to find the solution of a quadratic equation.

We have already seen how to solve a formula for a specific variable `in general', so that we would do the algebraic steps
only once, and then use the new formula to find the value of the specific variable. Now we will go through the steps of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 861

completing the square using the general form of a quadratic equation to solve a quadratic equation for x.
We start with the standard form of a quadratic equation and solve it for x by completing the square.

Isolate the variable terms on one side.

Make the coefficient of   equal to 1, by
dividing by a.

Simplify.

To complete the square, find             and add it to both sides of the
equation.

The left side is a perfect square, factor it.

Find the common denominator of the right
side and write equivalent fractions with
the common denominator.

Simplify.

Combine to one fraction.

Use the square root property.

Simplify the radical.

Add        to both sides of the equation.

Combine the terms on the right side.

                                                                           This equation is the Quadratic
                                                                           Formula.

Quadratic Formula                                                          are given by the formula:
The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0, where

To use the Quadratic Formula, we substitute the values of a, b, and c from the standard form into the expression on the
862 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

       right side of the formula. Then we simplify the expression. The result is the pair of solutions to the quadratic equation.
       Notice the formula is an equation. Make sure you use both sides of the equation.

         EXAMPLE 9.21
       How to Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
       Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 863

TRY IT 9.41 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:        .

TRY IT 9.42 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:        .

...

     HOW TO

Solve a quadratic equation using the quadratic formula.

Step 1.  Write the quadratic equation in standard form, ax2 + bx + c = 0. Identify the values of a, b, and c.
Step 2.  Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
Step 3.  Simplify.
Step 4.  Check the solutions.

If you say the formula as you write it in each problem, you'll have it memorized in no time! And remember, the Quadratic
Formula is an EQUATION. Be sure you start with "x =".

  EXAMPLE 9.22

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution

Write the equation in standard form by adding
5 to each side.
This equation is now in standard form.

Identify the values of    

Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of    

Simplify.

Rewrite to show two solutions.
Simplify.
864 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Check:

TRY IT 9.43 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:  .

TRY IT 9.44 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:     .

When we solved quadratic equations by using the Square Root Property, we sometimes got answers that had radicals.
That can happen, too, when using the Quadratic Formula. If we get a radical as a solution, the final answer must have
the radical in its simplified form.

  EXAMPLE 9.23

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution

This equation is in standard form.
Identify the values of a, b, and c.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor out the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 865

Rewrite to show two solutions.

Check:
We leave the check for you!

TRY IT 9.45 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:     .

TRY IT 9.46 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:  .

When we substitute a, b, and c into the Quadratic Formula and the radicand is negative, the quadratic equation will have
imaginary or complex solutions. We will see this in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 9.24

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution

This equation is in standard form
Identify the values of
Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of   .

Simplify.

Simplify the radical using complex numbers.
Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
866 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Rewrite in standard              form.

Write as two solutions.

TRY IT 9.47 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:  .

TRY IT 9.48 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:  .

Remember, to use the Quadratic Formula, the equation must be written in standard form, ax2 + bx + c = 0. Sometimes,
we will need to do some algebra to get the equation into standard form before we can use the Quadratic Formula.

  EXAMPLE 9.25

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution

Our first step is to get the equation in standard form.

Distribute to get the equation in standard form.
This equation is now in standard form
Identify the values of
Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of           .

Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 867

  Write as two solutions.
  Check:
  We leave the check for you!

       TRY IT 9.49 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
       TRY IT 9.50 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
When we solved linear equations, if an equation had too many fractions we cleared the fractions by multiplying both
sides of the equation by the LCD. This gave us an equivalent equation--without fractions-- to solve. We can use the
same strategy with quadratic equations.
  EXAMPLE 9.26
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution
Our first step is to clear the fractions.

  Multiply both sides by the LCD, 6, to clear the fractions.
  Multiply.
  Subtract 2 to get the equation in standard form.
  Identify the values of a, b, and c.
  Write the Quadratic Formula.
  Then substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
  Simplify.

  Simplify the radical.
  Factor the common factor in the numerator.
868 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Remove the common factors.

Rewrite to show two solutions.

Check:
We leave the check for you!

TRY IT 9.51 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:  .

TRY IT 9.52 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:     .

Think about the equation (x - 3)2 = 0. We know from the Zero Product Property that this equation has only one solution,
x = 3.
We will see in the next example how using the Quadratic Formula to solve an equation whose standard form is a perfect
square trinomial equal to 0 gives just one solution. Notice that once the radicand is simplified it becomes 0 , which leads
to only one solution.

  EXAMPLE 9.27

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:
     Solution

Add 25 to get the equation in standard form.
Identify the values of a, b, and c.
Write the quadratic formula.
Then substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.

Simplify the fraction.

Check:
We leave the check for you!

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 869

Did you recognize that 4x2 - 20x + 25 is a perfect square trinomial. It is equivalent to (2x - 5)2? If you solve
4x2 - 20x + 25 = 0 by factoring and then using the Square Root Property, do you get the same result?

       TRY IT 9.53 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:

       TRY IT 9.54 Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:

Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic
Equation

When we solved the quadratic equations in the previous examples, sometimes we got two real solutions, one real
solution, and sometimes two complex solutions. Is there a way to predict the number and type of solutions to a
quadratic equation without actually solving the equation?
Yes, the expression under the radical of the Quadratic Formula makes it easy for us to determine the number and type of
solutions. This expression is called the discriminant.

  Discriminant

Let's look at the discriminant of the equations in some of the examples and the number and type of solutions to those
quadratic equations.

Quadratic Equation  Discriminant  Value of the Discriminant Number and Type of solutions
(in standard form)

                                  +  2 real

                                  0  1 real

                                  -  2 complex

Using the Discriminant, b2 - 4ac, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation

For a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0,
  · If b2 - 4ac > 0, the equation has 2 real solutions.
870 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

  · if b2 - 4ac = 0, the equation has 1 real solution.
  · if b2 - 4ac < 0, the equation has 2 complex solutions.

EXAMPLE 9.28

Determine the number of solutions to each quadratic equation.

                                           

  Solution

To determine the number of solutions of each quadratic equation, we will look at its discriminant.



The equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
Simplify.

Since the discriminant is positive, there are 2 real solutions to the equation.



  The equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c.
  Write the discriminant.
  Substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
  Simplify.

Since the discriminant is negative, there are 2 complex solutions to the equation.



  The equation is in standard form, identify a, b, and c.
  Write the discriminant.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 871

Substitute in the values of a, b, and c.
Simplify.

Since the discriminant is 0, there is 1 real solution to the equation.

  TRY IT 9.55  Determine the numberand type of solutions to each quadratic equation.

                                                                        

  TRY IT 9.56  Determine the number and type of solutions to each quadratic equation.

                                                                        

Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Use to Solve a Quadratic Equation

We summarize the four methods that we have used to solve quadratic equations below.

Methods for Solving Quadratic Equations

1. Factoring
2. Square Root Property
3. Completing the Square
4. Quadratic Formula

Given that we have four methods to use to solve a quadratic equation, how do you decide which one to use? Factoring is

often the quickest method and so we try it first. If the equation is       or              we use the Square Root

Property. For any other equation, it is probably best to use the Quadratic Formula. Remember, you can solve any

quadratic equation by using the Quadratic Formula, but that is not always the easiest method.

What about the method of Completing the Square? Most people find that method cumbersome and prefer not to use it.
We needed to include it in the list of methods because we completed the square in general to derive the Quadratic
Formula. You will also use the process of Completing the Square in other areas of algebra.

  ...

       HOW TO

Identify the most appropriate method to solve a quadratic equation.

Step 1.  Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this method is very quick.
Step 2.
         Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form      or              it can easily be
Step 3.
         solved by using the Square Root Property.

         Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using the Quadratic Formula.

The next example uses this strategy to decide how to solve each quadratic equation.

EXAMPLE 9.29

Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each quadratic equation.

                          
872 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

            Solution

    

Since the equation is in the               the most appropriate method is to use the Square Root Property.



We recognize that the left side of the equation is a perfect square trinomial, and so factoring will be the most
appropriate method.



  Put the equation in standard form.

While our first thought may be to try factoring, thinking about all the possibilities for trial and error method leads us to
choose the Quadratic Formula as the most appropriate method.

      TRY IT 9.57  Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each quadratic equation.

                                                                   

      TRY IT 9.58  Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each quadratic equation.

                                                                     

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with using the Quadratic Formula.

      Using the Quadratic Formula (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm1)
      Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula with Complex Solutions (https://openstax.org/l/
      37QuadForm2)
      Discriminant in Quadratic Formula (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm3)

        SECTION 9.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

In the following exercises, solve by using the Quadratic Formula.

113.                                       114.                      115.

116.                                       117.                      118.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       9.3 · Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula 873

119.               120.                121.

122.               123.                124.

125.               126.                127.

128.               129.                130.

131.               132.                133.

134.               135.                136.

137.               138.                139.

140.               141.                142.

143.               144.

Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number of Real Solutions of a Quadratic Equation

In the following exercises, determine the number of real solutions for each quadratic equation.

145.                     146.          147.                                                         
                                                                                                 
                              

148.               
    

Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Use to Solve a Quadratic Equation

In the following exercises, identify the most appropriate method (Factoring, Square Root, or Quadratic Formula) to use to
solve each quadratic equation. Do not solve.

149.               150.                151.

                                           
                                           
                                           

152.

    
    
    

Writing Exercises

153. Solve the equation                154. Solve the equation

     by completing the square               by completing the square
     using the Quadratic Formula            using the Quadratic Formula
     Which method do you prefer? Why?       Which method do you prefer? Why?
874 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

9.4 Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve equations in quadratic form

       BE PREPARED 9.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Factor by substitution:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 6.21.

     BE PREPARED 9.11            Factor by substitution:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.22.

     BE PREPARED 9.12            Simplify:     

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 8.33.

Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

Sometimes when we factored trinomials, the trinomial did not appear to be in the ax2 + bx + c form. So we factored by
substitution allowing us to make it fit the ax2 + bx + c form. We used the standard for the substitution.

To factor the expression x4 - 4x2 - 5, we noticed the variable part of the middle term is x2 and its square, x4, is the

variable part of the first term. (We know    ) So we let u = x2 and factored.

Let  and substitute.

Factor the trinomial.

Replace u with .

Similarly, sometimes an equation is not in the ax2 + bx + c = 0 form but looks much like a quadratic equation. Then, we
can often make a thoughtful substitution that will allow us to make it fit the ax2 + bx + c = 0 form. If we can make it fit the
form, we can then use all of our methods to solve quadratic equations.

Notice that in the quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, the middle term has a variable, x, and its square, x2, is the variable
part of the first term. Look for this relationship as you try to find a substitution.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                     9.4 · Solve Equations in Quadratic Form 875

Again, we will use the standard u to make a substitution that will put the equation in quadratic form. If the substitution
gives us an equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0, we say the original equation was of quadratic form.
The next example shows the steps for solving an equation in quadratic form.

  EXAMPLE 9.30
How to Solve Equations in Quadratic Form
Solve:

     Solution
876 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

     TRY IT 9.59 Solve:                    .

     TRY IT 9.60 Solve:                       .

We summarize the steps to solve an equation in quadratic form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve equations in quadratic form.

Step 1.  Identify a substitution that will put the equation in quadratic form.
Step 2.  Rewrite the equation with the substitution to put it in quadratic form.
Step 3.  Solve the quadratic equation for u.
Step 4.  Substitute the original variable back into the results, using the substitution.
Step 5.  Solve for the original variable.
Step 6.  Check the solutions.

In the next example, the binomial in the middle term, (x - 2) is squared in the first term. If we let u = x - 2 and substitute,
our trinomial will be in ax2 + bx + c form.

  EXAMPLE 9.31

Solve:
     Solution

Prepare for the substitution.

Let      and substitute.

Solve by factoring.

Replace with
Solve for
Check:

       TRY IT 9.61 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.4 · Solve Equations in Quadratic Form 877

     TRY IT 9.62 Solve:

In the next example, we notice that   Also, remember that when we square both sides of an equation, we

may introduce extraneous roots. Be sure to check your answers!

EXAMPLE 9.32

Solve:                                                          If we let  and substitute, our trinomial will be

     Solution
The in the middle term, is squared in the first term
in ax2 + bx + c = 0 form.

Rewrite the trinomial to prepare for the substitution.

Let  and substitute.

Solve by factoring.

Replace u with
Solve for x, by squaring both sides.
Check:

     TRY IT 9.63 Solve:

     TRY IT 9.64 Solve:

Substitutions for rational exponents can also help us solve an equation in quadratic form. Think of the properties of
exponents as you begin the next example.

  EXAMPLE 9.33

Solve:                                                          If we let  and substitute, our trinomial will
     Solution

The in the middle term is squared in the first term
be in ax2 + bx + c = 0 form.
878 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Rewrite the trinomial to prepare for the substitution.

Let  and substitute.

Solve by factoring.

Replace u with
Solve for by cubing both sides.
Check:

     TRY IT 9.65 Solve:

     TRY IT 9.66 Solve:

In the next example, we need to keep in mind the definition of a negative exponent as well as the properties of
exponents.

EXAMPLE 9.34

Solve:                                                  If we let  and substitute, our trinomial will

     Solution
The in the middle term is squared in the first term
be in ax2 + bx + c = 0 form.

Rewrite the trinomial to prepare for the substitution.

Let  and substitute.

Solve by factoring.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                9.4 · Solve Equations in Quadratic Form 879

Replace u with
Solve for by taking the reciprocal since
Check:

      TRY IT 9.67 Solve:

      TRY IT 9.68 Solve:

      MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with solving quadratic equations.
      Solving Equations in Quadratic Form (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm4)

        SECTION 9.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

In the following exercises, solve.

155.                                156.        157.
                                                160.
158.                                159.        163.

161.                                162.               166.

164.                                165.                           171.
                                                174.
167.                                      168.  177.

169.                                      170.

172.                                173.

175.                                176.
880 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

178.                                       179.  180.

181.                                       182.  183.

184.                                       185.  186.

187.                                       188.  189.

190.                                       191.  192.

Writing Exercises                                194. Explain the procedure for solving an equation in
                                                         quadratic form.
193. Explain how to recognize an equation in
        quadratic form.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

9.5 Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve applications modeled by quadratic equations

       BE PREPARED 9.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             The sum of two consecutive odd numbers is -100. Find the numbers.
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.18.

      BE PREPARED 9.14           Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 7.35.

      BE PREPARED 9.15           Find the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs 5 inches and 12 inches.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.34.

Solve Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations

We solved some applications that are modeled by quadratic equations earlier, when the only method we had to solve
them was factoring. Now that we have more methods to solve quadratic equations, we will take another look at
applications.
Let's first summarize the methods we now have to solve quadratic equations.

  Methods to Solve Quadratic Equations

   1. Factoring
   2. Square Root Property
   3. Completing the Square
   4. Quadratic Formula

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                       9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 881

As you solve each equation, choose the method that is most convenient for you to work the problem. As a reminder, we
will copy our usual Problem-Solving Strategy here so we can follow the steps.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a Problem-Solving Strategy.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
Step 2.  Identify what we are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
         information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebraic equation.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence

We have solved number applications that involved consecutive even and odd integers, by modeling the situation with
linear equations. Remember, we noticed each even integer is 2 more than the number preceding it. If we call the first
one n, then the next one is n + 2. The next one would be n + 2 + 2 or n + 4. This is also true when we use odd integers.
One set of even integers and one set of odd integers are shown below.

Some applications of odd or even consecutive integers are modeled by quadratic equations. The notation above will be
helpful as you name the variables.

  EXAMPLE 9.35

The product of two consecutive odd integers is 195. Find the integers.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.              We are looking for two consecutive odd integers.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                  Let the first odd integer.

                                                       the next odd integer

Step 4. Translate into an equation. State the problem  "The product of two consecutive odd integers is 195."
in one sentence.

                                                       The product of the first odd integer and the second odd
                                                       integer is 195.

Translate into an equation.
882 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Step 5. Solve the equation. Distribute.
         Write the equation in standard form.
         Factor.

         Use the Zero Product Property.
         Solve each equation.

         There are two values of n that are solutions. This will give us two pairs of consecutive odd integers for our solution.

Step 6. Check the answer.
Do these pairs work?
Are they consecutive odd integers?

Is their product 195?

Step 7. Answer the question.        Two consecutive odd integers whose product is 195 are
                                    13, 15 and -13, -15.

       TRY IT 9.69 The product of two consecutive odd integers is 99. Find the integers.
       TRY IT 9.70 The product of two consecutive even integers is 168. Find the integers.
We will use the formula for the area of a triangle to solve the next example.
  Area of a Triangle
  For a triangle with base, b, and height, h, the area, A, is given by the formula

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 883

Recall that when we solve geometric applications, it is helpful to draw the figure.
  EXAMPLE 9.36

An architect is designing the entryway of a restaurant. She wants to put a triangular window above the doorway. Due to
energy restrictions, the window can only have an area of 120 square feet and the architect wants the base to be 4 feet
more than twice the height. Find the base and height of the window.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  Draw a picture.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.             We are looking for the base and height.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                 Let h = the height of the triangle.
                                                      2h + 4 = the base of the triangle

Step 4. Translate into an equation.
We know the area. Write the
formula for the area of a triangle.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Substitute in the values.

Distribute.

This is a quadratic equation, rewrite it in standard
form.

Factor.

Use the Zero Product Property.

Simplify.

             Since h is the height of a window, a value of h = -12 does not make sense.

                                           The height of the triangle

                                           The base of the triangle

Step 6. Check the answer.                             The height of the triangular window is 10 feet and the
Does a triangle with height 10 and base 24 have       base is 24 feet.
area 120? Yes.

Step 7. Answer the question.
884 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

TRY IT 9.71   Find the base and height of a triangle whose base is four inches more than six times its height
              and has an area of 456 square inches.

TRY IT 9.72   If a triangle that has an area of 110 square feet has a base that is two feet less than twice the
              height, what is the length of its base and height?

In the two preceding examples, the number in the radical in the Quadratic Formula was a perfect square and so the
solutions were rational numbers. If we get an irrational number as a solution to an application problem, we will use a
calculator to get an approximate value.
We will use the formula for the area of a rectangle to solve the next example.

  Area of a Rectangle

  For a rectangle with length, L, and width, W, the area, A, is given by the formula A = LW.

  EXAMPLE 9.37

Mike wants to put 150 square feet of artificial turf in his front yard. This is the maximum area of artificial turf allowed by
his homeowners association. He wants to have a rectangular area of turf with length one foot less than 3 times the
width. Find the length and width. Round to the nearest tenth of a foot.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  Draw a picture.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.                         We are looking for the length and width.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                             Let  the width of the rectangle.

                                                                       the length of the rectangle

Step 4. Translate into an equation.
We know the area. Write the formula for the area of a rectangle.

Step 5. Solve the equation. Substitute in the values.

Distribute.

This is a quadratic equation; rewrite it in standard form.
Solve the equation using the Quadratic Formula.

Identify the  values.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 885

Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of  .

Simplify.
Rewrite to show two solutions.

Approximate the answers using a calculator.        The width of the rectangle is
We eliminate the negative solution for the width.  approximately 7.2 feet and the
                                                   length is approximately 20.6 feet.
Step 6. Check the answer.
Make sure that the answers make sense. Since the
answers are approximate, the area will not come
out exactly to 150.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.73  The length of a 200 square foot rectangular vegetable garden is four feet less than twice the
             width. Find the length and width of the garden, to the nearest tenth of a foot.

TRY IT 9.74  A rectangular tablecloth has an area of 80 square feet. The width is 5 feet shorter than the
             length.What are the length and width of the tablecloth to the nearest tenth of a foot.?

The Pythagorean Theorem gives the relation between the legs and hypotenuse of a right triangle. We will use the
Pythagorean Theorem to solve the next example.

  Pythagorean Theorem

  In any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs, and c is the length of the hypotenuse, a2 + b2 = c2.
886 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         EXAMPLE 9.38
       Rene is setting up a holiday light display. He wants to make a `tree' in the shape of two right triangles, as shown below,
       and has two 10-foot strings of lights to use for the sides. He will attach the lights to the top of a pole and to two stakes
       on the ground. He wants the height of the pole to be the same as the distance from the base of the pole to each stake.
       How tall should the pole be?

            Solution

         Step 1. Read the problem. Draw a
         picture.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for. We are looking for the height of the pole.

                                           The distance from the base of the pole to either stake is the same as the
                                           height of the pole.

                                           Let the height of the pole.
                                                      the distance from pole to stake

                                           Each side is a right triangle. We draw a picture of one of them.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.

  Step 4. Translate into an equation.
  We can use the Pythagorean Theorem to
  solve for x.
  Write the Pythagorean Theorem.
  Step 5. Solve the equation. Substitute.
  Simplify.
  Divide by 2 to isolate the variable.
  Simplify.
  Use the Square Root Property.
  Simplify the radical.
  Rewrite to show two solutions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 887

Step 6. Check the answer.                             If we approximate this number to the
Check on your own in the Pythagorean                  nearest tenth with a calculator, we find
Theorem.
                                                                                      .
Step 7. Answer the question.
                                                      The pole should be about 7.1 feet tall.

TRY IT 9.75        The sun casts a shadow from a flag pole. The height of the flag pole is three times the length of
                   its shadow. The distance between the end of the shadow and the top of the flag pole is 20 feet.
                   Find the length of the shadow and the length of the flag pole. Round to the nearest tenth.

TRY IT 9.76        The distance between opposite corners of a rectangular field is four more than the width of the
                   field. The length of the field is twice its width. Find the distance between the opposite corners.
                   Round to the nearest tenth.

The height of a projectile shot upward from the ground is modeled by a quadratic equation. The initial velocity, v0,
propels the object up until gravity causes the object to fall back down.

Projectile motion

The height in feet, h , of an object shot upwards into the air with initial velocity,  , after seconds is given by the
formula

We can use this formula to find how many seconds it will take for a firework to reach a specific height.

  EXAMPLE 9.39

A firework is shot upwards with initial velocity 130 feet per second. How many seconds will it take to reach a height of
260 feet? Round to the nearest tenth of a second.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.             We are looking for the number of
                                                      seconds, which is time.

Step 3. Name what we are looking for.                 Let the number of seconds.

Step 4. Translate into an equation. Use the formula.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
We know the velocity is 130 feet per second.
The height is 260 feet. Substitute the values.
888 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

This is a quadratic equation, rewrite it in standard form.
Solve the equation using the Quadratic Formula.
Identify the values of

Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of           .

Simplify.

Rewrite to show two solutions.                              The firework will go up and then fall back
Approximate the answer with a calculator.                   down. As the firework goes up, it will
Step 6. Check the answer.                                   reach 260 feet after approximately 3.6
The check is left to you.                                   seconds. It will also pass that height on
                                                            the way down at 4.6 seconds.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.77  An arrow is shot from the ground into the air at an initial speed of 108 ft/s. Use the formula h =
TRY IT 9.78  -16t2 + v0t to determine when the arrow will be 180 feet from the ground. Round the nearest
             tenth.

             A man throws a ball into the air with a velocity of 96 ft/s. Use the formula h = -16t2 + v0t to
             determine when the height of the ball will be 48 feet. Round to the nearest tenth.

We have solved uniform motion problems using the formula D = rt in previous chapters. We used a table like the one
below to organize the information and lead us to the equation.

The formula D = rt assumes we know r and t and use them to find D. If we know D and r and need to find t, we would
solve the equation for t and get the formula

Some uniform motion problems are also modeled by quadratic equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                           9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 889

  EXAMPLE 9.40
Professor Smith just returned from a conference that was 2,000 miles east of his home. His total time in the airplane for
the round trip was 9 hours. If the plane was flying at a rate of 450 miles per hour, what was the speed of the jet stream?

     Solution
This is a uniform motion situation. A diagram will help us visualize the situation.

We fill in the chart to organize the information.

We are looking for the speed of the jet stream.    Let the speed of the jet stream.

When the plane flies with the wind, the wind increases its speed and so the rate is 450 + r.

When the plane flies against the wind, the wind decreases its speed and the rate is 450 - r.

Write in the rates.

Write in the distances.

Since         , we solve for

and get       .

We divide the distance by

the rate in each row, and

place the expression in the

time column.

We know the times add to 9
and so we write our equation.

We multiply both sides by the LCD.                 
                                                      
Simplify.                                            
                                                     
Factor the 2,000.                                    

Solve.

Divide by 9.
890 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

                                                                                                

Simplify.

Check:
Is 50 mph a reasonable speed for the
jet stream? Yes.
If the plane is traveling 450 mph and
the wind is 50 mph,
Tailwind

Headwind

The times add to 9 hours, so it checks.

                                           The speed of the jet stream was 50 mph.

TRY IT 9.79  MaryAnne just returned from a visit with her grandchildren back east . The trip was 2400 miles
             from her home and her total time in the airplane for the round trip was 10 hours. If the plane
             was flying at a rate of 500 miles per hour, what was the speed of the jet stream?

TRY IT 9.80  Gerry just returned from a cross country trip. The trip was 3000 miles from his home and his
             total time in the airplane for the round trip was 11 hours. If the plane was flying at a rate of 550
             miles per hour, what was the speed of the jet stream?

Work applications can also be modeled by quadratic equations. We will set them up using the same methods we used
when we solved them with rational equations.We'll use a similar scenario now.

  EXAMPLE 9.41

The weekly gossip magazine has a big story about the presidential election and the editor wants the magazine to be
printed as soon as possible. She has asked the printer to run an extra printing press to get the printing done more
quickly. Press #1 takes 12 hours more than Press #2 to do the job and when both presses are running they can print the
job in 8 hours. How long does it take for each press to print the job alone?

     Solution
This is a work problem. A chart will help us organize the information.

We are looking for how many hours it would take each press separately to complete the job.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 891

Let the number of hours for Press #2
to complete the job.
Enter the hours per job for Press #1,
Press #2, and when they work together.

The part completed by Press #1 plus the part
completed by Press #2 equals the
amount completed together.
Translate to an equation.

Solve.

Multiply by the LCD,           .

Simplify.

Solve.

Since the idea of negative hours does not make

sense, we use the value     .

Write our sentence answer.                      Press #1 would take 24 hours and
                                                Press #2 would take 12 hours to do the job alone.

TRY IT 9.81           The weekly news magazine has a big story naming the Person of the Year and the editor wants
                      the magazine to be printed as soon as possible. She has asked the printer to run an extra
                      printing press to get the printing done more quickly. Press #1 takes 6 hours more than Press #2
                      to do the job and when both presses are running they can print the job in 4 hours. How long
                      does it take for each press to print the job alone?

TRY IT 9.82           Erlinda is having a party and wants to fill her hot tub. If she only uses the red hose it takes 3
                      hours more than if she only uses the green hose. If she uses both hoses together, the hot tub
                      fills in 2 hours. How long does it take for each hose to fill the hot tub?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving applications modeled by quadratic
equations.

Word Problems Involving Quadratic Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm5)
Quadratic Equation Word Problems (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm6)
Applying the Quadratic Formula (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadForm7)
892 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

        SECTION 9.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Pefect

Solve Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations           196. The product of two consecutive even numbers is
                                                                    360. Find the numbers.
In the following exercises, solve using any method.
                                                            198. The product of two consecutive odd numbers is
195. The product of two consecutive odd numbers is                  1,023. Find the numbers.
        255. Find the numbers.
                                                            200. The product of two consecutive even numbers is
197. The product of two consecutive even numbers is                 528. Find the numbers.
        624. Find the numbers.

199. The product of two consecutive odd numbers is
        483. Find the numbers.

In the following exercises, solve using any method. Round your answers to the nearest tenth, if needed.

201. A triangle with area 45 square inches has a            202. The base of a triangle is six more than twice the
        height that is two less than four times the base            height. The area of the triangle is 88 square
        Find the base and height of the triangle.                   yards. Find the base and height of the triangle.

203. The area of a triangular flower bed in the park        204. A triangular banner for the basketball
        has an area of 120 square feet. The base is 4 feet          championship hangs in the gym. It has an area
        longer that twice the height. What are the base             of 75 square feet. What is the length of the base
        and height of the triangle?                                 and height , if the base is two-thirds of the
                                                                    height?

205. The length of a rectangular driveway is five feet      206. A rectangular lawn has area 140 square yards. Its
        more than three times the width. The area is 50             width that is six less than twice the length. What
        square feet. Find the length and width of the               are the length and width of the lawn?
        driveway.

207. A rectangular table for the dining room has a          208. The new computer has a surface area of 168
        surface area of 24 square feet. The length is two           square inches. If the the width is 5.5 inches less
        more feet than twice the width of the table. Find           that the length, what are the dimensions of the
        the length and width of the table.                          computer?

209. The hypotenuse of a right triangle is twice the        210. The hypotenuse of a right triangle is 10 cm long.
        length of one of its legs. The length of the other          One of the triangle's legs is three times the
        leg is three feet. Find the lengths of the three            length of the other leg. Find the lengths of the
        sides of the triangle.                                      two legs of the triangle. Round to the nearest
                                                                    tenth.

211. A rectangular garden will be divided into two          212. Nautical flags are used to represent letters of the
        plots by fencing it on the diagonal. The diagonal           alphabet. The flag for the letter, O consists of a
        distance from one corner of the garden to the               yellow right triangle and a red right triangle
        opposite corner is five yards longer than the               which are sewn together along their hypotenuse
        width of the garden. The length of the garden is            to form a square. The hypotenuse of the two
        three times the width. Find the length of the               triangles is three inches longer than a side of the
        diagonal of the garden.                                     flag. Find the length of the side of the flag.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.5 · Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations 893

213. Gerry plans to place a 25-foot ladder against the       214. John has a 10-foot piece of rope that he wants to
        side of his house to clean his gutters. The                  use to support his 8-foot tree. How far from the
        bottom of the ladder will be 5 feet from the                 base of the tree should he secure the rope?
        house.How far up the side of the house will the
        ladder reach?                                        216. An arrow is shot vertically upward at a rate of
                                                                     220 feet per second. Use the projectile formula h
215. A firework rocket is shot upward at a rate of 640               = -16t2 + v0t, to determine when height of the
        ft/sec. Use the projectile formula h = -16t2 + v0t           arrow will be 400 feet.
        to determine when the height of the firework
        rocket will be 1200 feet.                            218. A stone is dropped from a 196-foot platform. Use
                                                                     the formula h = -16t2 + v0t + 196 to determine
217. A bullet is fired straight up from a BB gun with                how many seconds it will take for the stone to hit
        initial velocity 1120 feet per second at an initial          the ground. (Since the stone is dropped, v0= 0.)
        height of 8 feet. Use the formula h = -16t2 + v0t +
        8 to determine how many seconds it will take for     220. The couple took a small airplane for a quick flight
        the bullet to hit the ground. (That is, when will h          up to the wine country for a romantic dinner and
        = 0?)                                                        then returned home. The plane flew a total of 5
                                                                     hours and each way the trip was 300 miles. If the
219. The businessman took a small airplane for a                     plane was flying at 125 mph, what was the speed
        quick flight up the coast for a lunch meeting and            of the wind that affected the plane?
        then returned home. The plane flew a total of 4
        hours and each way the trip was 200 miles. What      222. Rick paddled up the river, spent the night
        was the speed of the wind that affected the                  camping, and then paddled back. He spent 10
        plane which was flying at a speed of 120 mph?                hours paddling and the campground was 24
                                                                     miles away. If Rick kayaked at a speed of 5 mph,
221. Roy kayaked up the river and then back in a total               what was the speed of the current?
        time of 6 hours. The trip was 4 miles each way
        and the current was difficult. If Roy kayaked at a   224. Two gardeners can do the weekly yard
        speed of 5 mph, what was the speed of the                    maintenance in 8 minutes if they work together.
        current?                                                     The older gardener takes 12 minutes more than
                                                                     the younger gardener to finish the job by
223. Two painters can paint a room in 2 hours if they                himself. How long does it take for each gardener
        work together. The less experienced painter                  to do the weekly yard maintainence individually?
        takes 3 hours more than the more experienced
        painter to finish the job. How long does it take     226. Sully is having a party and wants to fill his
        for each painter to paint the room individually?             swimming pool. If he only uses his hose it takes
                                                                     2 hours more than if he only uses his neighbor's
225. It takes two hours for two machines to                          hose. If he uses both hoses together, the pool
        manufacture 10,000 parts. If Machine #1 can do               fills in 4 hours. How long does it take for each
        the job alone in one hour less than Machine #2               hose to fill the pool?
        can do the job, how long does it take for each
        machine to manufacture 10,000 parts alone?

Writing Exercises

227. Make up a problem involving the product of two          228. Make up a problem involving the product of two
        consecutive odd integers.                                    consecutive even integers.

     Start by choosing two consecutive odd                        Start by choosing two consecutive even

        integers. What are your integers?                            integers. What are your integers?

     What is the product of your integers?                        What is the product of your integers?
     Solve the equation n(n + 2) = p, where p is                  Solve the equation n(n + 2) = p, where p is

        the product you found in part (b).                           the product you found in part (b).

     Did you get the numbers you started with?                    Did you get the numbers you started with?
894 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

9.6 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Recognize the graph of a quadratic function
           Find the axis of symmetry and vertex of a parabola
           Find the intercepts of a parabola
           Graph quadratic functions using properties
           Solve maximum and minimum applications

BE PREPARED 9.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    Graph the function             by plotting points.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 3.54.

BE PREPARED 9.17    Solve:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 6.45.

BE PREPARED 9.18    Evaluate            when a = 3 and b = -6.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

Recognize the Graph of a Quadratic Function

Previously we very briefly looked at the function  , which we called the square function. It was one of the first

non-linear functions we looked at. Now we will graph functions of the form                  if             We call this

kind of function a quadratic function.

Quadratic Function

A quadratic function, where a, b, and c are real numbers and    is a function of the form

We graphed the quadratic function       by plotting points.

Every quadratic function has a graph that looks like this. We call this figure a parabola.
Let's practice graphing a parabola by plotting a few points.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 895

  EXAMPLE 9.42

Graph
     Solution

We will graph the function by plotting points.

Choose integer values for x,

substitute them into the equation

and simplify to find     .

Record the values of the ordered pairs in the chart.

Plot the points, and then connect

them with a smooth curve. The

result will be the graph of the

function              .

TRY IT 9.83 Graph                  .

       TRY IT 9.84 Graph

All graphs of quadratic functions of the form f (x) = ax2 + bx + c are parabolas that open upward or downward. See Figure
9.2.
896 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

                                                                              Figure 9.2
Notice that the only difference in the two functions is the negative sign before the quadratic term (x2 in the equation of
the graph in Figure 9.2). When the quadratic term, is positive, the parabola opens upward, and when the quadratic term
is negative, the parabola opens downward.

  Parabola Orientation

  For the graph of the quadratic function f (x) = ax2 + bx + c, if

EXAMPLE 9.43

Determine whether each parabola opens upward or downward:

                                 

  Solution



Find the value of "a".

                                   Since the "a" is negative, the parabola will open downward.



Access for free at openstax.org
                 9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 897

Find the value of "a".
                                 Since the "a" is positive, the parabola will open upward.

TRY IT 9.85  Determine whether the graph of each function is a parabola that opens upward or downward:

               

TRY IT 9.86  Determine whether the graph of each function is a parabola that opens upward or downward:

               

Find the Axis of Symmetry and Vertex of a Parabola

Look again at Figure 9.2. Do you see that we could fold each parabola in half and then one side would lie on top of the
other? The `fold line' is a line of symmetry. We call it the axis of symmetry of the parabola.

We show the same two graphs again with the axis of symmetry. See Figure 9.3.

                                                                              Figure 9.3
The equation of the axis of symmetry can be derived by using the Quadratic Formula. We will omit the derivation here
and proceed directly to using the result. The equation of the axis of symmetry of the graph of f (x) = ax2 + bx + c is

So to find the equation of symmetry of each of the parabolas we graphed above, we will substitute into the formula
898 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Notice that these are the equations of the dashed blue lines on the graphs.

The point on the parabola that is the lowest (parabola opens up), or the highest (parabola opens down), lies on the axis
of symmetry. This point is called the vertex of the parabola.

We can easily find the coordinates of the vertex, because we know it is on the axis of symmetry. This means its

x-coordinate is   To find the y-coordinate of the vertex we substitute the value of the x-coordinate into the quadratic

function.

Axis of Symmetry and Vertex of a Parabola

The graph of the function f (x) = ax2 + bx + c is a parabola where:

· the axis of symmetry is the vertical line

· the vertex is a point on the axis of symmetry, so its x-coordinate is

· the y-coordinate of the vertex is found by substituting            into the quadratic equation.

EXAMPLE 9.44

For the graph of                           find:

 the axis of symmetry            the vertex.

     Solution



The axis of symmetry is the vertical line
            .

Substitute the values of         into the
equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 899

  Simplify.                            The axis of symmetry is the line  .



The vertex is a point on the line of

symmetry, so its x-coordinate will be

      .

Find         .

Simplify.

The result is the y-coordinate.

                                       The vertex is  .

TRY IT 9.87     For the graph of                         find:

                 the axis of symmetry  the vertex.

TRY IT 9.88     For the graph of                         find:

                 the axis of symmetry  the vertex.

Find the Intercepts of a Parabola

When we graphed linear equations, we often used the x- and y-intercepts to help us graph the lines. Finding the
coordinates of the intercepts will help us to graph parabolas, too.

Remember, at the y-intercept the value of x is zero. So to find the y-intercept, we substitute x = 0 into the function.

Let's find the y-intercepts of the two parabolas shown in Figure 9.4.
900 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

                                                                              Figure 9.4

An x-intercept results when the value of f (x) is zero. To find an x-intercept, we let f (x) = 0. In other words, we will need to
solve the equation 0 = ax2 + bx + c for x.

Solving quadratic equations like this is exactly what we have done earlier in this chapter!

We can now find the x-intercepts of the two parabolas we looked at. First we will find the x-intercepts of the parabola
whose function is f (x) = x2 + 4x + 3.

Let      .

Factor.

Use the Zero Product Property.

Solve.

                                           The x-intercepts are  and  .

Now we will find the x-intercepts of the parabola whose function is f (x) = -x2 + 4x + 3.

Let      .

This quadratic does not factor, so
we use the Quadratic Formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 901

Simplify.

           The x-intercepts are                                                         and

           .

We will use the decimal approximations of the x-intercepts, so that we can locate these points on the graph,

Do these results agree with our graphs? See Figure 9.5.

                                                                            Figure 9.5
Find the Intercepts of a Parabola
To find the intercepts of a parabola whose function is
902 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

EXAMPLE 9.45

Find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is

Solution

To find the y-intercept, let               and

solve for  .

                                                When     , then               .

                                                The y-intercept is the point     .

To find the x-intercept, let               and
solve for .

Solve by factoring.

                                                When     , then                     .

                                                The x-intercepts are the points     and

                                                      .

       TRY IT 9.89 Find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is

       TRY IT 9.90 Find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is

In this chapter, we have been solving quadratic equations of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0. We solved for x and the results
were the solutions to the equation.
We are now looking at quadratic functions of the form f (x) = ax2 + bx + c. The graphs of these functions are parabolas.
The x-intercepts of the parabolas occur where f (x) = 0.
For example:

The solutions of the quadratic function are the x values of the x-intercepts.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 903

Earlier, we saw that quadratic equations have 2, 1, or 0 solutions. The graphs below show examples of parabolas for
these three cases. Since the solutions of the functions give the x-intercepts of the graphs, the number of x-intercepts is
the same as the number of solutions.
Previously, we used the discriminant to determine the number of solutions of a quadratic function of the form

                         Now we can use the discriminant to tell us how many x-intercepts there are on the graph.

Before you to find the values of the x-intercepts, you may want to evaluate the discriminant so you know how many
solutions to expect.

  EXAMPLE 9.46

Find the intercepts of the parabola for the function
     Solution

To find the y-intercept, let  and

solve for  .

                                          When  , then                  .

                                          The y-intercept is the point     .

To find the x-intercept, let  and
solve for .

Find the value of the discriminant to
predict the number of solutions which is
also the number of x-intercepts.
904 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

                                                                        Since the value of the discriminant is
                                                                        negative, there is no real solution to the
                                                                        equation.
                                                                      There are no x-intercepts.
              TRY IT 9.91 Find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is
              TRY IT 9.92 Find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is

     Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

       Now we have all the pieces we need in order to graph a quadratic function. We just need to put them together. In the
       next example we will see how to do this.

         EXAMPLE 9.47
       How to Graph a Quadratic Function Using Properties
       Graph f (x) = x2 -6x + 8 by using its properties.

            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 905

TRY IT 9.93  Graph f (x) = x2 + 2x - 8 by using its properties.
TRY IT 9.94  Graph f (x) = x2 - 8x + 12 by using its properties.

We list the steps to take in order to graph a quadratic function here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

To graph a quadratic function using properties.

Step 1.  Determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward.
Step 2.  Find the equation of the axis of symmetry.
Step 3.  Find the vertex.
Step 4.  Find the y-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.
Step 5.  Find the x-intercepts. Find additional points if needed.
906 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Step 6. Graph the parabola.
       We were able to find the x-intercepts in the last example by factoring. We find the x-intercepts in the next example by
       factoring, too.

         EXAMPLE 9.48
       Graph f (x) = -x2 + 6x - 9 by using its properties.

            Solution

         Since a is , the parabola opens downward.

          To find the equation of the axis of symmetry, use
                      .

                                 The axis of symmetry is    .

                                 The vertex is on the line  .

  Find .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 907

                                       The vertex is

The y-intercept occurs when  . Find .

Substitute  .

Simplify.

                                       The y-intercept is
908 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

The point        is three units to the left of the line of

symmetry. The point three units to the right of the line

of symmetry is         .

                                                            Point symmetric to the y-intercept is

The x-intercept occurs when                .

Find          .

Factor the GCF.

Factor the trinomial.

Solve for x.

Connect the points to graph the parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 909

       TRY IT 9.95 Graph f (x) = -3x2 + 12x - 12 by using its properties.
       TRY IT 9.96 Graph f (x) = 4x2 + 24x + 36 by using its properties.
For the graph of f (x) = -x2 + 6x - 9, the vertex and the x-intercept were the same point. Remember how the discriminant
determines the number of solutions of a quadratic equation? The discriminant of the equation 0 = -x2 + 6x - 9 is 0, so
there is only one solution. That means there is only one x-intercept, and it is the vertex of the parabola.
How many x-intercepts would you expect to see on the graph of f (x) = x2 + 4x + 5?
  EXAMPLE 9.49
Graph f (x) = x2 + 4x + 5 by using its properties.
     Solution

  Since a is 1, the parabola opens upward.

To find the axis of symmetry, find  .

                                       The equation of the axis of symmetry is  .

The vertex is on the line
910 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Find       when

                                              The vertex is       .

The y-intercept occurs when                .

Find

Simplify.

                                              The y-intercept is     .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 911

The point       is two units to the left of the line of

symmetry.

The point two units to the right of the line of

symmetry is     .

                                                         Point symmetric to the y-intercept is  .

The x-intercept occurs when  .

Find         .

Test the discriminant.
912 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Since the value of the discriminant is negative, there is
         no real solution and so no x-intercept.

         Connect the points to graph the parabola. You may
         want to choose two more points for greater accuracy.

TRY IT 9.97  Graph f (x) = x2 - 2x + 3 by using its properties.
TRY IT 9.98  Graph f (x) = -3x2 - 6x - 4 by using its properties.

Finding the y-intercept by finding f (0) is easy, isn't it? Sometimes we need to use the Quadratic Formula to find the
x-intercepts.

  EXAMPLE 9.50
Graph f (x) = 2x2 - 4x - 3 by using its properties.

     Solution

Since a is 2, the parabola opens upward.

To find the equation of the axis of symmetry, use
            .

                                                                    The equation of the axis of
                                                                    symmetry is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 913

The vertex is on the line     .

Find       .

                                                         The vertex is

The y-intercept occurs when      .

Find .

Simplify.

                                                         The y-intercept is

The point        is one unit to the left of the line of  Point symmetric to the
symmetry.                                                y-intercept is

The point one unit to the right of the line of

symmetry is      .

The x-intercept occurs when      .

Find          .

Use the Quadratic Formula.

Substitute in the values of and

Simplify.

Simplify inside the radical.

Simplify the radical.

Factor the GCF.

Remove common factors.

Write as two equations.
914 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Approximate the values.

                                            The approximate values of the

                                            x-intercepts are  and

Graph the parabola using the points found.

       TRY IT 9.99 Graph f (x) = 5x2 + 10x + 3 by using its properties.
       TRY IT 9.100 Graph f (x) = -3x2 - 6x + 5 by using its properties.

Solve Maximum and Minimum Applications

Knowing that the vertex of a parabola is the lowest or highest point of the parabola gives us an easy way to determine
the minimum or maximum value of a quadratic function. The y-coordinate of the vertex is the minimum value of a
parabola that opens upward. It is the maximum value of a parabola that opens downward. See Figure 9.6.

                                                                              Figure 9.6
  Minimum or Maximum Values of a Quadratic Function
  The y-coordinate of the vertex of the graph of a quadratic function is the

    · minimum value of the quadratic equation if the parabola opens upward.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 915

    · maximum value of the quadratic equation if the parabola opens downward.

  EXAMPLE 9.51
Find the minimum or maximum value of the quadratic function

     Solution

  Since a is positive, the parabola opens upward.
  The quadratic equation has a minimum.
  Find the equation of the axis of symmetry.

                                                       The equation of the axis of

                                                       symmetry is    .

The vertex is on the line  .

Find       .

                                                       The vertex is     .

Since the parabola has a minimum, the y-coordinate of

the vertex is the minimum y-value of the quadratic

equation.

The minimum value of the quadratic is and it

occurs when   .
916 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

         Show the graph to verify the result.
              TRY IT 9.101 Find the maximum or minimum value of the quadratic function
              TRY IT 9.102 Find the maximum or minimum value of the quadratic function

       We have used the formula
      to calculate the height in feet, h , of an object shot upwards into the air with initial velocity, v0, after t seconds .
      This formula is a quadratic function, so its graph is a parabola. By solving for the coordinates of the vertex (t, h), we can
       find how long it will take the object to reach its maximum height. Then we can calculate the maximum height.

         EXAMPLE 9.52
      The quadratic equation h(t) = -16t2 + 176t + 4 models the height of a volleyball hit straight upwards with velocity 176 feet
       per second from a height of 4 feet.

     How many seconds will it take the volleyball to reach its maximum height?  Find the maximum height of the

       volleyball.
            Solution

         Since a is negative, the parabola opens downward.
         The quadratic function has a maximum.

    

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 917

Find the equation of the axis of symmetry.

                                            The equation of the axis of symmetry is

  The vertex is on the line                 The maximum occurs when  seconds.



  Find

  Use a calculator to simplify.
                                              The vertex is

Since the parabola has a maximum, the h-coordinate of the vertex is the maximum value of the quadratic function.
The maximum value of the quadratic is 488 feet and it occurs when t = 5.5 seconds.
After 5.5 seconds, the volleyball will reach its maximum height of 488 feet.

TRY IT 9.103  Solve, rounding answers to the nearest tenth.

              The quadratic function h(t) = -16t2 + 128t + 32 is used to find the height of a stone thrown
              upward from a height of 32 feet at a rate of 128 ft/sec. How long will it take for the stone to
              reach its maximum height? What is the maximum height?

TRY IT 9.104                 A path of a toy rocket thrown upward from the ground at a rate of 208 ft/sec is modeled by the
                             quadratic function of h(t) = -16t2 + 208t. When will the rocket reach its maximum height? What

                             will be the maximum height?

MEDIA

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphing quadratic functions using
properties.

Quadratic Functions: Axis of Symmetry and Vertex (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFunct1)
Finding x- and y-intercepts of a Quadratic Function (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFunct2)
Graphing Quadratic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFunct3)
Solve Maxiumum or Minimum Applications (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFunct4)
Quadratic Applications: Minimum and Maximum (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFunct5)
918 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

        SECTION 9.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Recognize the Graph of a Quadratic Function

In the following exercises, graph the functions by plotting points.

229.                                       230.                          231.

232.

For each of the following exercises, determine if the parabola opens up or down.

233.                                       234.                          235. 
                                                                             
    
236. 

    

Find the Axis of Symmetry and Vertex of a Parabola

In the following functions, find  the equation of the axis of symmetry and  the vertex of its graph.

237.                                       238.                          239.

240.

Find the Intercepts of a Parabola

In the following exercises, find the intercepts of the parabola whose function is given.

241.                                       242.                          243.

244.                                       245.                          246.

247.                                       248.                          249.

250.                                       251.                          252.

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

In the following exercises, graph the function by using its properties.

253.                                       254.                          255.

256.                                       257.                          258.

259.                                       260.                          261.

262.                                       263.                          264.

265.                                       266.                          267.

268.                                       269.                          270.

Solve Maximum and Minimum Applications

In the following exercises, find the maximum or minimum value of each function.

271.                                       272.                          273.

274.                                       275.                          276.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.6 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties 919

In the following exercises, solve. Round answers to the nearest tenth.

277. An arrow is shot vertically upward from a                278. A stone is thrown vertically upward from a
        platform 45 feet high at a rate of 168 ft/sec. Use            platform that is 20 feet height at a rate of 160 ft/
        the quadratic function h(t) = -16t2 + 168t + 45               sec. Use the quadratic function h(t) = -16t2 +
        find how long it will take the arrow to reach its             160t + 20 to find how long it will take the stone
        maximum height, and then find the maximum                     to reach its maximum height, and then find the
        height.                                                       maximum height.

279. A ball is thrown vertically upward from the              280. A ball is thrown vertically upward from the
        ground with an initial velocity of 109 ft/sec. Use            ground with an initial velocity of 122 ft/sec. Use
        the quadratic function h(t) = -16t2 + 109t + 0 to             the quadratic function h(t) = -16t2 + 122t + 0 to
        find how long it will take for the ball to reach its          find how long it will take for the ball to reach its
        maximum height, and then find the maximum                     maximum height, and then find the maximum
        height.                                                       height.

281. A computer store owner estimates that by                 282. A retailer who sells backpacks estimates that by
        charging x dollars each for a certain computer,               selling them for x dollars each, he will be able to
        he can sell 40 - x computers each week. The                   sell 100 - x backpacks a month. The quadratic
        quadratic function R(x) = -x2 +40x is used to find            function R(x) = -x2 +100x is used to find the R,
        the revenue, R, received when the selling price of            received when the selling price of a backpack is
        a computer is x, Find the selling price that will             x. Find the selling price that will give him the
        give him the maximum revenue, and then find                   maximum revenue, and then find the amount of
        the amount of the maximum revenue.                            the maximum revenue.

283. A retailer who sells fashion boots estimates that        284. A cell phone company estimates that by charging
        by selling them for x dollars each, he will be able           x dollars each for a certain cell phone, they can
        to sell 70 - x boots a week. Use the quadratic                sell 8 - x cell phones per day. Use the quadratic
        function R(x) = -x2 +70x to find the revenue                  function R(x) = -x2 +8x to find the revenue
        received when the average selling price of a pair             received per day when the selling price of a cell
        of fashion boots is x. Find the selling price that            phone is x. Find the selling price that will give
        will give him the maximum revenue, and then                   them the maximum revenue per day, and then
        find the amount of the maximum revenue per                    find the amount of the maximum revenue.
        day.

285. A rancher is going to fence three sides of a corral      286. A veterinarian is enclosing a rectangular outdoor
                                                                      running area against his building for the dogs he
next to a river. He needs to maximize the corral                      cares for. He needs to maximize the area using
                                                                      100 feet of fencing. The quadratic function
area using 240 feet of fencing. The quadratic                                                    gives the area, A, of the dog

equation  gives the area of                                           run for the length, x, of the building that will
                                                                      border the dog run. Find the length of the
the corral, A, for the length, x, of the corral along                 building that should border the dog run to give
the river. Find the length of the corral along the                    the maximum area, and then find the maximum
river that will give the maximum area, and then                       area of the dog run.
find the maximum area of the corral.

287. A land owner is planning to build a fenced in            288. A family of three young children just moved into
        rectangular patio behind his garage, using his                a house with a yard that is not fenced in. The
        garage as one of the "walls." He wants to                     previous owner gave them 300 feet of fencing to
        maximize the area using 80 feet of fencing. The               use to enclose part of their backyard. Use the
        quadratic function A(x) = x(80 - 2x) gives the area           quadratic function
        of the patio, where x is the width of one side.
        Find the maximum area of the patio.                           determine the maximum area of the fenced in
                                                                      yard.
920 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Writing Exercise

289. How do the graphs of the functions                     290. Explain the process of finding the vertex of a
                                                                    parabola.
and                      differ? We graphed them at
                                                            292. How can you use the discriminant when you are
the start of this section. What is the difference                   graphing a quadratic function?

between their graphs? How are their graphs the

same?

291. Explain how to find the intercepts of a parabola.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

9.7 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph quadratic equations of the form
           Graph quadratic functions of the form
           Graph quadratic functions of the form
           Graph quadratic functions using transformations
           Find a quadratic function from its graph

BE PREPARED 9.19 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Graph the function         by plotting points.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.54.

BE PREPARED 9.20                 Factor completely:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.24.

BE PREPARED 9.21                 Factor completely:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.26.

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the last section, we learned how to graph quadratic functions using their properties. Another method involves starting

with the basic graph of                    and `moving' it according to information given in the function equation. We call this

graphing quadratic functions using transformations.

In the first example, we will graph the quadratic function  by plotting points. Then we will see what effect

adding a constant, k, to the equation will have on the graph of the new function

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 921

EXAMPLE 9.53

Graph         and                         on the same rectangular coordinate system. Describe what effect

adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.

     Solution                                                                 graph. We fill in the chart for all three
Plotting points will help us see the effect of the constants on the basic
functions.

The g(x) values are two more than the f(x) values. Also, the h(x) values are two less than the f(x) values. Now we will
graph all three functions on the same rectangular coordinate system.

The graph of  is the same as the graph of                     but shifted up 2 units.
The graph of  is the same as the graph of                     but shifted down 2 units.

TRY IT 9.105   Graph                                          and             on the same rectangular coordinate

              system.

               Describe what effect adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.

TRY IT 9.106   Graph                                          and             on the same rectangular coordinate

              system.

               Describe what effect adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.

The last example shows us that to graph a quadratic function of the form      we take the basic parabola

graph of      and vertically shift it up  or shift it down                 .
922 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

This transformation is called a vertical shift.

Graph a Quadratic Function of the form                Using a Vertical Shift

The graph of                     shifts the graph of   vertically k units.

· If k > 0, shift the parabola vertically up k units.
· If k < 0, shift the parabola vertically down units.

Now that we have seen the effect of the constant, k, it is easy to graph functions of the form  We just start

with the basic parabola of                 and then shift it up or down.

It may be helpful to practice sketching               quickly. We know the values and can sketch the graph from there.

Once we know this parabola, it will be easy to apply the transformations. The next example will require a vertical shift.

EXAMPLE 9.54

Graph         using a vertical shift.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 923

Solution

We first draw the graph of           on

the grid.

Determine .

Shift the graph             down 3.

TRY IT 9.107 Graph                        using a vertical shift.

TRY IT 9.108 Graph                        using a vertical shift.

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the first example, we graphed the quadratic function              by plotting points and then saw the effect of adding a

constant k to the function had on the resulting graph of the new function

We will now explore the effect of subtracting a constant, h, from x has on the resulting graph of the new function

EXAMPLE 9.55

Graph                                and                 on the same rectangular coordinate system. Describe what

effect adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.
924 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions                                         graph. We fill in the chart for all three

            Solution
       Plotting points will help us see the effect of the constants on the basic
       functions.

The g(x) values and the h(x) values share the common numbers 0, 1, 4, 9, and 16, but are shifted.

TRY IT 9.109   Graph                                            and               on the same rectangular

              coordinate system.

               Describe what effect adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.

TRY IT 9.110   Graph                                            and               on the same rectangular coordinate

              system.

               Describe what effect adding a constant to the function has on the basic parabola.

The last example shows us that to graph a quadratic function of the form          we take the basic parabola

graph of  and shift it left (h > 0) or shift it right (h < 0).

This transformation is called a horizontal shift.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 925

Graph a Quadratic Function of the form                      Using a Horizontal Shift

The graph of                      shifts the graph of       horizontally units.

· If h > 0, shift the parabola horizontally right h units.
· If h < 0, shift the parabola horizontally left units.

Now that we have seen the effect of the constant, h, it is easy to graph functions of the form  We just

start with the basic parabola of        and then shift it left or right.

The next example will require a horizontal shift.

EXAMPLE 9.56

Graph          using a horizontal shift.
     Solution

We first draw the graph of        on

the grid.

Determine h.
926 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Shift the graph                  to the right 6 units.

TRY IT 9.111 Graph                                      using a horizontal shift.

TRY IT 9.112 Graph                                      using a horizontal shift.

Now that we know the effect of the constants h and k, we will graph a quadratic function of the form
by first drawing the basic parabola and then making a horizontal shift followed by a vertical shift. We could do the
vertical shift followed by the horizontal shift, but most students prefer the horizontal shift followed by the vertical.

EXAMPLE 9.57

Graph                            using transformations.

     Solution
This function will involve two transformations and we need a plan.

Let's first identify the constants h, k.

The h constant gives us a horizontal shift and the k gives us a vertical shift.

We first draw the graph of                 on the grid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 927

TRY IT 9.113 Graph                        using transformations.

TRY IT 9.114 Graph                        using transformations.

Graph Quadratic Functions of the Form

So far we graphed the quadratic function  and then saw the effect of including a constant h or k in the

equation had on the resulting graph of the new function. We will now explore the effect of the coefficient a on the

resulting graph of the new function

If we graph these functions, we can see the effect of the constant a, assuming a > 0.

To graph a function with constant a it is easiest to choose a few points on            and multiply the y-values by a.
928 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Graph of a Quadratic Function of the form

The coefficient a in the function               affects the graph of      by stretching or compressing it.

· If                   the graph of              will be "wider" than the graph of
· If            , the graph of             will be "skinnier" than the graph of

EXAMPLE 9.58

Graph

Solution

We will graph the functions                and         on the same grid. We will choose a few points on                  and

then multiply the y-values by 3 to get the points for

TRY IT 9.115 Graph

TRY IT 9.116 Graph

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

We have learned how the constants a, h, and k in the functions,                     and                     affect

their graphs. We can now put this together and graph quadratic functions            by first putting them

into the form                              by completing the square. This form is sometimes known as the vertex form or

standard form.

We must be careful to both add and subtract the number to the SAME side of the function to complete the square. We
cannot add the number to both sides as we did when we completed the square with quadratic equations.

When we complete the square in a function with a coefficient of x2 that is not one, we have to factor that coefficient from
just the x-terms. We do not factor it from the constant term. It is often helpful to move the constant term a bit to the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 929

right to make it easier to focus only on the x-terms.

Once we get the constant we want to complete the square, we must remember to multiply it by that coefficient before
we then subtract it.

EXAMPLE 9.59

Rewrite                          in the             form by completing the square.
     Solution

Separate the x terms from the constant.

Factor the coefficient of , .

Prepare to complete the square.

Take half of 2 and then square it to complete the
square.

The constant 1 completes the square in the
parentheses, but the parentheses is multiplied by

    . So we are really adding We must then
add 3 to not change the value of the function.

Rewrite the trinomial as a square and subtract the
constants.

The function is now in the
form.

TRY IT 9.117 Rewrite                                in the   form by completing the square.

TRY IT 9.118 Rewrite                                in the   form by completing the square.

Once we put the function into the                   form, we can then use the transformations as we did in the last

few problems. The next example will show us how to do this.

EXAMPLE 9.60

Graph          by using transformations.

     Solution                                       vertex form by completing the square.
Step 1. Rewrite the function in

Separate the x terms from the constant.
930 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Take half of 6 and then square it to complete the square.

We both add 9 and subtract 9 to not change the value of the function.
Rewrite the trinomial as a square and subtract the constants.

The function is now in the                 form.

Step 2: Graph the function using transformations.                      and shift it to the left 3 units and down 4

Looking at the h, k values, we see the graph will take the graph of
units.

We first draw the graph of                 on the grid.

TRY IT 9.119 Graph                                       by using transformations.

TRY IT 9.120 Graph                                       by using transformations.

We list the steps to take to graph a quadratic function using transformations here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph a quadratic function using transformations.        form by completing the square.

Step 1. Rewrite the function in
Step 2. Graph the function using transformations.

  EXAMPLE 9.61                   by using transformations.
Graph

Access for free at openstax.org
     Solution                                                                         9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 931
Step 1. Rewrite the function in
                                                   vertex form by completing the square.

Separate the x terms from the constant.

We need the coefficient of to be one.
We factor from the x-terms.

Take half of 2 and then square it to complete the square.

We add 1 to complete the square in the parentheses, but the parentheses is multiplied
by . Se we are really adding . To not change the value of the function we add 2.

Rewrite the trinomial as a square and subtract the constants.

The function is now in the                         form.

Step 2. Graph the function using transformations.

We first draw the graph of       on the grid.

TRY IT 9.121 Graph                                        by using transformations.

TRY IT 9.122 Graph                                        by using transformations.

Now that we have completed the square to put a quadratic function into                 form, we can also use this
technique to graph the function using its properties as in the previous section.

If we look back at the last few examples, we see that the vertex is related to the constants h and k.
932 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

In each case, the vertex is (h, k). Also the axis of symmetry is the line x = h.

We rewrite our steps for graphing a quadratic function using properties for when the function is in
form.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph a quadratic function in the form                using properties.

Step 1.  Rewrite the function in               form.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Determine whether the parabola opens upward, a > 0, or downward, a < 0.
Step 4.
Step 5.  Find the axis of symmetry, x = h.
Step 6.
Step 7.  Find the vertex, (h, k).

         Find the y-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.

         Find the x-intercepts.

         Graph the parabola.

EXAMPLE 9.62

 Rewrite                                   in  form and  graph the function using properties.

Solution

Rewrite the function in
form by completing the square.

Identify the constants

Since     , the parabola opens upward.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 933

The axis of symmetry is      .              The axis of symmetry is  .

The vertex is  .                            The vertex is  .

Find the y-intercept by finding  .

Find the point symmetric to                          y-intercept
axis of symmetry.                across the

Find the x-intercepts.                               The discriminant negative, so there are
                                                     no x-intercepts. Graph the parabola.

TRY IT 9.123  Rewrite                       in                          form and  graph the function

                         using properties.

TRY IT 9.124  Rewrite                       in                          form and  graph the function

                         using properties.

Find a Quadratic Function from its Graph

So far we have started with a function and then found its graph.
Now we are going to reverse the process. Starting with the graph, we will find the function.

  EXAMPLE 9.63
Determine the quadratic function whose graph is shown.
934 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

  Solution
Since it is quadratic, we start with the

The vertex,     is   so                          and

To find , we use the -intercept,           .

So           .

Solve for .

Write the function.  and                      .
Substitute in

    TRY IT 9.125 Write the quadratic function in      form whose graph is shown.

       TRY IT 9.126 Determine the quadratic function whose graph is shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 935

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphing quadratic functions using
      transformations.

      Function Shift Rules Applied to Quadratic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFuncTran1)
      Changing a Quadratic from Standard Form to Vertex Form (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFuncTran2)
      Using Transformations to Graph Quadratic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFuncTran3)
      Finding Quadratic Equation in Vertex Form from Graph (https://openstax.org/l/37QuadFuncTran4)

        SECTION 9.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the following exercises,  graph the quadratic functions on the same rectangular coordinate system and  describe
what effect adding a constant, k, to the function has on the basic parabola.

293.         294.
        and          and

In the following exercises, graph each function using a vertical shift.

295.         296.                                                          297.

298.         299.                                                          300.

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the following exercises,  graph the quadratic functions on the same rectangular coordinate system and  describe
what effect adding a constant, , inside the parentheses has

301.         302.
        and          and

In the following exercises, graph each function using a horizontal shift.

303.         304.                                                          305.

306.         307.                                                          308.

In the following exercises, graph each function using transformations.

309.         310.                                                          311.

312.         313.                                                          314.

315.         316.
936 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the following exercises, graph each function.

317.                                       318.                 319.

320.                                       321.                 322.

323.                                       324.

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

In the following exercises, rewrite each function in the               form by completing the square.
                                                                327.
325.                                       326.

328.

In the following exercises,  rewrite each function in                form and  graph it by using transformations.
                                                                331.
329.                                       330.                 334.
                                                                337.
332.                                       333.                 340.
                                                                343.
335.                                       336.

338.                                       339.

341.                                       342.

344.

In the following exercises,  rewrite each function in                form and  graph it using properties.
                                                                347.
345.                                       346.

348.

Matching

In the following exercises, match the graphs to one of the following functions:                            

                                                                                      

349.                                                      350.

Access for free at openstax.org
            9.7 · Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations 937

351.  352.
353.
355.  354.
      356.
938 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

Find a Quadratic Function from its Graph

In the following exercises, write the quadratic function in               form whose graph is shown.

357.                                                                358.

359.                                                                360.

Writing Exercise

361. Graph the quadratic function                                   362. Graph the quadratic function
                                     first using the properties as                                         first using the properties

        we did in the last section and then graph it using                  as we did in the last section and then graph it
        transformations. Which method do you prefer?                        using transformations. Which method do you
        Why?                                                                prefer? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    9.8 · Solve Quadratic Inequalities 939

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

9.8 Solve Quadratic Inequalities

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve quadratic inequalities graphically
           Solve quadratic inequalities algebraically

       BE PREPARED 9.22 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

BE PREPARED 9.23  Solve:  .

                  If you missed this problem, review Example 6.45.

BE PREPARED 9.24  Solve
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 7.56.

We have learned how to solve linear inequalities and rational inequalities previously. Some of the techniques we used to
solve them were the same and some were different.
We will now learn to solve inequalities that have a quadratic expression. We will use some of the techniques from solving
linear and rational inequalities as well as quadratic equations.
We will solve quadratic inequalities two ways--both graphically and algebraically.

Solve Quadratic Inequalities Graphically

A quadratic equation is in standard form when written as ax2 + bx + c = 0. If we replace the equal sign with an inequality
sign, we have a quadratic inequality in standard form.

  Quadratic Inequality

  A quadratic inequality is an inequality that contains a quadratic expression.
  The standard form of a quadratic inequality is written:

The graph of a quadratic function f(x) = ax2 + bx + c = 0 is a parabola. When we ask when is ax2 + bx + c < 0, we are asking
when is f(x) < 0. We want to know when the parabola is below the x-axis.

When we ask when is ax2 + bx + c > 0, we are asking when is f(x) > 0. We want to know when the parabola is above the
x-axis.
940 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

EXAMPLE 9.64

How to Solve a Quadratic Inequality Graphically

Solve         graphically. Write the solution in interval notation.

Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
9.8 · Solve Quadratic Inequalities 941
942 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

TRY IT 9.127  Solve                         graphically and  write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 9.128  Solve                         graphically and  write the solution in interval notation.

We list the steps to take to solve a quadratic inequality graphically.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a quadratic inequality graphically.

Step 1. Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.
Step 2. Graph the function
Step 3. Determine the solution from the graph.

In the last example, the parabola opened upward and in the next example, it opens downward. In both cases, we are
looking for the part of the parabola that is below the x-axis but note how the position of the parabola affects the
solution.

EXAMPLE 9.65

Solve               graphically. Write the solution in interval notation.
     Solution

The quadratic inequality in standard form.

Graph the function                                      The parabola opens downward.
                                            .

Find the line of symmetry.

Find the vertex.

                                            Vertex

Access for free at openstax.org
Find the x-intercepts. Let      .                                                                   9.8 · Solve Quadratic Inequalities 943

Factor.                                            x-intercepts
Use the Zero Product Property.

Graph the parabola.

Determine the solution from the graph.                                        
We include the x-intercepts as the inequality
is "less than or equal to."

TRY IT 9.129  Solve                                graphically and  write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 9.130  Solve                                graphically and  write the solution in interval notation.

Solve Quadratic Inequalities Algebraically

The algebraic method we will use is very similar to the method we used to solve rational inequalities. We will find the
critical points for the inequality, which will be the solutions to the related quadratic equation. Remember a polynomial
expression can change signs only where the expression is zero.

We will use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals and then determine whether the quadratic
expression willl be postive or negative in the interval. We then determine the solution for the inequality.

EXAMPLE 9.66

How To Solve Quadratic Inequalities Algebraically

Solve                algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.

Solution
944 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

TRY IT 9.131 Solve                           algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 9.132 Solve                           algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.

In this example, since the expression        factors nicely, we can also find the sign in each interval much like we

did when we solved rational inequalities. We find the sign of each of the factors, and then the sign of the product. Our

number line would like this:

The result is the same as we found using the other method.

We summarize the steps here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a quadratic inequality algebraically.

Step 1.  Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.
Step 2.  Determine the critical points--the solutions to the related quadratic equation.
Step 3.  Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.
Step 4.  Above the number line show the sign of each quadratic expression using test points from each interval
         substituted into the original inequality.
Step 5.  Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. Write the solution in interval notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                9.8 · Solve Quadratic Inequalities 945

EXAMPLE 9.67

Solve                  algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.
     Solution

Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.

Multiply both sides of the inequality by .
Remember to reverse the inequality sign.

Determine the critical points by solving
the related quadratic equation.

Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of       .

Simplify.
Simplify the radical.

Remove the common factor, 2.

Use the critical points to divide the
number line into intervals.
Test numbers from each interval
in the original inequality.

Determine the intervals where the                 in the middle interval
inequality is correct. Write the solution
in interval notation.

TRY IT 9.133 Solve                                algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.

TRY IT 9.134 Solve                                algebraically. Write the solution in interval notation.

The solutions of the quadratic inequalities in each of the previous examples, were either an interval or the union of two

intervals. This resulted from the fact that, in each case we found two solutions to the corresponding quadratic equation
ax2 + bx + c = 0. These two solutions then gave us either the two x-intercepts for the graph or the two critical points to

divide the number line into intervals.
946 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

       This correlates to our previous discussion of the number and type of solutions to a quadratic equation using the
       discriminant.
       For a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0,

The last row of the table shows us when the parabolas never intersect the x-axis. Using the Quadratic Formula to solve
the quadratic equation, the radicand is a negative. We get two complex solutions.

In the next example, the quadratic inequality solutions will result from the solution of the quadratic equation being
complex.

EXAMPLE 9.68

Solve, writing any solution in interval notation:

              

  Solution



Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.

Determine the critical points by solving
the related quadratic equation.

Write the Quadratic Formula.

Then substitute in the values of  .

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              9.8 · Solve Quadratic Inequalities 947

Simplify the radicand.                                             Complex solutions

The complex solutions tell us the
parabola does not intercept the x-axis.
Also, the parabola opens upward. This
tells us that the parabola is completely above the x-axis.

We are to find the solution to            Since for all values of  the graph is above the x-axis, all values of x make

the inequality true. In interval notation we write  



  Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.

Determine the critical points by solving the related quadratic equation

Since the corresponding quadratic equation is the same as in part (a), the parabola will be the same. The parabola opens
upward and is completely above the x-axis--no part of it is below the x-axis.

We are to find the solution to            Since for all values of x the graph is never below the x-axis, no values of x

make the inequality true. There is no solution to the inequality.

      TRY IT 9.135  Solve and write any solution in interval notation:
      TRY IT 9.136
                                          

                    Solve and write any solution in interval notation:

                                          

        SECTION 9.8 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Quadratic Inequalities Graphically

In the following exercises,  solve graphically and  write the solution in interval notation.

363.                            364.                               365.

366.                            367.                               368.

369.                            370.

In the following exercises, solve each inequality algebraically and write any solution in interval notation.

371.                            372.                               373.

374.                            375.                               376.

377.                            378.                               379.
948 9 · Quadratic Equations and Functions

380.                                       381.                    382.

383.                                       384.                    385.

386.                                       387.                    388.

389.                                       390.

Writing Exercises

391. Explain critical points and how they are used to  392. Solve        both graphically and
        solve quadratic inequalities algebraically.
                                                       algebraically. Which method do you prefer, and
393. Describe the steps needed to solve a quadratic
        inequality graphically.                        why?

                                                       394. Describe the steps needed to solve a quadratic
                                                               inequality algebraically.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    9 · Chapter Review 949

Chapter Review

Key Terms

discriminant In the Quadratic Formula,              the quantity b2 - 4ac is called the discriminant.

quadratic function A quadratic function, where a, b, and c are real numbers and      is a function of the form

quadratic inequality A quadratic inequality is an inequality that contains a quadratic expression.

Key Concepts

9.1 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property

  · Square Root Property

 If      , then                            or

      How to solve a quadratic equation using the square root property.
      Step 1. Isolate the quadratic term and make its coefficient one.
      Step 2. Use Square Root Property.
      Step 3. Simplify the radical.
      Step 4. Check the solutions.

9.2 Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square

  · Binomial Squares Pattern
      If a and b are real numbers,

· How to Complete a Square

Step 1. Identify b, the coefficient of x.

Step 2. Find         the number to complete the square.

Step 3. Add the      to x2 + bx

Step 4. Rewrite the trinomial as a binomial square

· How to solve a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 by completing the square.
   Step 1. Divide by a to make the coefficient of x2 term 1.

Step 2. Isolate the variable terms on one side and the constant terms on the other.

Step 3. Find         the number needed to complete the square. Add it to both sides of the equation.

Step 4.  Factor the perfect square trinomial, writing it as a binomial squared on the left and simplify by adding the
         terms on the right.
Step 5.  Use the Square Root Property.
Step 6.  Simplify the radical and then solve the two resulting equations.
Step 7.  Check the solutions.

9.3 Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

· Quadratic Formula

 The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0,  are given by the formula:

· How to solve a quadratic equation using the Quadratic Formula.
   Step 1. Write the quadratic equation in standard form, ax2 + bx + c = 0. Identify the values of a, b, c.
   Step 2. Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the values of a, b, c.
    Step 3. Simplify.

    Step 4. Check the solutions.
950 9 · Chapter Review

  · Using the Discriminant, b2 - 4ac, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
       For a quadratic equation of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0,
      If b2 - 4ac > 0, the equation has 2 real solutions.
      if b2 - 4ac = 0, the equation has 1 real solution.
      if b2 - 4ac < 0, the equation has 2 complex solutions.

  · Methods to Solve Quadratic Equations:
       Factoring
       Square Root Property
       Completing the Square
       Quadratic Formula

  · How to identify the most appropriate method to solve a quadratic equation.
      Step 1. Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this method is very quick.
      Step 2. Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form ax2 = k or a(x - h)2 = k, it can easily be
                  solved by using the Square Root Property.
      Step 3. Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using the Quadratic Formula.

9.4 Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

  · How to solve equations in quadratic form.
      Step 1. Identify a substitution that will put the equation in quadratic form.
      Step 2. Rewrite the equation with the substitution to put it in quadratic form.
      Step 3. Solve the quadratic equation for u.
      Step 4. Substitute the original variable back into the results, using the substitution.
      Step 5. Solve for the original variable.
      Step 6. Check the solutions.

9.5 Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations

  · Methods to Solve Quadratic Equations
       Factoring
       Square Root Property
       Completing the Square
       Quadratic Formula

  · How to use a Problem-Solving Strategy.
      Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
      Step 2. Identify what we are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
                  information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  · Area of a Triangle
       For a triangle with base, b, and height, h, the area, A, is given by the formula

  · Area of a Rectangle
       For a rectangle with length, L, and width, W, the area, A, is given by the formula A = LW.

  · Pythagorean Theorem

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   9 · Chapter Review 951

 In any right triangle, where a and b are the lengths of the legs, and c is the length of the hypotenuse, a2 + b2 =
    c2.

· Projectile motion
    The height in feet, h, of an object shot upwards into the air with initial velocity, v0, after t seconds is given by the
        formula h = -16t2 + v0t.

9.6 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

· Parabola Orientation

 For the graph of the quadratic function                    if

 a > 0, the parabola opens upward.

 a < 0, the parabola opens downward.

· Axis of Symmetry and Vertex of a Parabola The graph of the function                     is a parabola where:
    the axis of symmetry is the vertical line

 the vertex is a point on the axis of symmetry, so its x-coordinate is

 the y-coordinate of the vertex is found by substituting           into the quadratic equation.

· Find the Intercepts of a Parabola
    To find the intercepts of a parabola whose function is

· How to graph a quadratic function using properties.
    Step 1. Determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward.
    Step 2. Find the equation of the axis of symmetry.
    Step 3. Find the vertex.
   Step 4. Find the y-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.
   Step 5. Find the x-intercepts. Find additional points if needed.
    Step 6. Graph the parabola.

· Minimum or Maximum Values of a Quadratic Equation
    The y-coordinate of the vertex of the graph of a quadratic equation is the
    minimum value of the quadratic equation if the parabola opens upward.
    maximum value of the quadratic equation if the parabola opens downward.

9.7 Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

· Graph a Quadratic Function of the form                  Using a Vertical Shift

 The graph of                    shifts the graph of        vertically k units.

 If k > 0, shift the parabola vertically up k units.

 If k < 0, shift the parabola vertically down units.

· Graph a Quadratic Function of the form                    Using a Horizontal Shift

 The graph of                    shifts the graph of        horizontally h units.

 If h > 0, shift the parabola horizontally left h units.

 If h < 0, shift the parabola horizontally right units.

· Graph of a Quadratic Function of the form  affects the graph of                  by stretching or compressing it.
    The coefficient a in the function

If             then the graph of             will be "wider" than the graph of

If  then the graph of                        will be "skinnier" than the graph of

· How to graph a quadratic function using transformations

Step 1. Rewrite the function in                           form by completing the square.

Step 2. Graph the function using transformations.
952 9 · Exercises

· Graph a quadratic function in the vertex form                     using properties

      Step 1. Rewrite the function in                        form.

      Step 2. Determine whether the parabola opens upward, a > 0, or downward, a < 0.

      Step 3. Find the axis of symmetry, x = h.

      Step 4. Find the vertex, (h, k).

      Step 5. Find they-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.

      Step 6. Find the x-intercepts, if possible.

      Step 7. Graph the parabola.

9.8 Solve Quadratic Inequalities

  · Solve a Quadratic Inequality Graphically

      Step 1. Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.

      Step 2. Graph the function                      using properties or transformations.

      Step 3. Determine the solution from the graph.

  · How to Solve a Quadratic Inequality Algebraically
      Step 1. Write the quadratic inequality in standard form.
      Step 2. Determine the critical points -- the solutions to the related quadratic equation.
      Step 3. Use the critical points to divide the number line into intervals.
      Step 4. Above the number line show the sign of each quadratic expression using test points from each interval
                  substituted into the original inequality.
      Step 5. Determine the intervals where the inequality is correct. Write the solution in interval notation.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Square Root Property

Solve Quadratic Equations of the form ax2 = k Using the Square Root Property

In the following exercises, solve using the Square Root Property.

395.                                    396.                        397.

398.                                    399.                        400.

401.                                    402. 11.

Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form                 Using the Square Root Property

In the following exercises, solve using the Square Root Property.

403.                                    404.                        405.

406.                                    407.                        408.

409.                                    410.

Solve Quadratic Equations by Completing the Square

Solve Quadratic Equations Using Completing the Square

In the following exercises, complete the square to make a perfect square trinomial. Then write the result as a binomial
squared.

411.                                    412.                        413.

414.

In the following exercises, solve by completing the square.

415.                                    416.                        417.

418.                                    419.                        420.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            9 · Exercises 953

421.                                422.                           423.

424.                                425.                           426.

Solve Quadratic Equations of the form ax2 + bx + c = 0 by Completing the Square

In the following exercises, solve by completing the square.

427.                                428.                           429.

430.                                431.                           432.

433.                                434.

Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

In the following exercises, solve by using the Quadratic Formula.

435.                                436.                           437.

438.                                439.                           440.

441.                                442.                           443.

444.                                445.                           446.

447.                                448.                           449.

450.

Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation

In the following exercises, determine the number of solutions for each quadratic equation.

451.                                452.

                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        

Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Use to Solve a Quadratic Equation

In the following exercises, identify the most appropriate method (Factoring, Square Root, or Quadratic Formula) to use to
solve each quadratic equation. Do not solve.

453.                                454.

                                        
                                        
                                        

Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

Solve Equations in Quadratic Form

In the following exercises, solve.

455.                                456.                           457.

458.                                      459.                           460.

461.                                462.                           463.
954 9 · Exercises

Solve Applications of Quadratic Equations

Solve Applications Modeled by Quadratic Equations

In the following exercises, solve by using the method of factoring, the square root principle, or the Quadratic Formula.
Round your answers to the nearest tenth, if needed.

464. Find two consecutive odd         465. Find two consecutive even       466. A triangular banner has
        numbers whose product                 numbers whose product                an area of 351 square
        is 323.                               is 624.                              centimeters. The length
                                                                                   of the base is two
                                                                                   centimeters longer than
                                                                                   four times the height.
                                                                                   Find the height and
                                                                                   length of the base.

467. Julius built a triangular        468. A tile mosaic in the shape      469. A rectangular piece of
        display case for his coin             of a right triangle is used          plywood has a diagonal
        collection. The height of             as the corner of a                   which measures two feet
        the display case is six               rectangular pathway. The             more than the width. The
        inches less than twice the            hypotenuse of the mosaic             length of the plywood is
        width of the base. The                is 5 feet. One side of the           twice the width. What is
        area of the of the back of            mosaic is twice as long as           the length of the
        the case is 70 square                 the other side. What are             plywood's diagonal?
        inches. Find the height               the lengths of the sides?            Round to the nearest
        and width of the case.                Round to the nearest                 tenth.
                                              tenth.

470. The front walk from the          471. For Sophia's graduation         472. A ball is thrown vertically
        street to Pam's house has             party, several tables of             in the air with a velocity of
        an area of 250 square                 the same width will be               160 ft/sec. Use the
        feet. Its length is two less          arranged end to end to               formula h = -16t2 + v0t to
        than four times its width.            give serving table with a            determine when the ball
        Find the length and width             total area of 75 square              will be 384 feet from the
        of the sidewalk. Round to             feet. The total length of            ground. Round to the
        the nearest tenth.                    the tables will be two               nearest tenth.
                                              more than three times the
473. The couple took a small                  width. Find the length and   475. Two handymen can do a
        airplane for a quick flight           width of the serving table           home repair in 2 hours if
        up to the wine country for            so Sophia can purchase               they work together. One
        a romantic dinner and                 the correct size tablecloth          of the men takes 3 hours
        then returned home. The               . Round answer to the                more than the other man
        plane flew a total of 5               nearest tenth.                       to finish the job by
        hours and each way the                                                     himself. How long does it
        trip was 360 miles. If the    474. Ezra kayaked up the river               take for each handyman
        plane was flying at 150               and then back in a total             to do the home repair
        mph, what was the speed               time of 6 hours. The trip            individually?
        of the wind that affected             was 4 miles each way and
        the plane?                            the current was difficult.
                                              If Roy kayaked at a speed
                                              of 5 mph, what was the
                                              speed of the current?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         9 · Exercises 955

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

Recognize the Graph of a Quadratic Function

In the following exercises, graph by plotting point.

476. Graph                         477. Graph

In the following exercises, determine if the following parabolas open up or down.

478.                               479.

                                       
                                       

Find the Axis of Symmetry and Vertex of a Parabola

In the following exercises, find  the equation of the axis of symmetry and  the vertex.

480.                               481.

Find the Intercepts of a Parabola

In the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts.

482.                               483.                         484.

485.                               486.                         487.

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Properties

In the following exercises, graph by using its properties.

488.                               489.                         490.

491.                               492.                         493.

Solve Maximum and Minimum Applications

In the following exercises, find the minimum or maximum value.

494.                               495.
956 9 · Exercises

In the following exercises, solve. Rounding answers to the nearest tenth.

496. A ball is thrown upward         497. A daycare facility is
        from the ground with an              enclosing a rectangular area
        initial velocity of 112 ft/          along the side of their
        sec. Use the quadratic               building for the children to
        equation h = -16t2 + 112t            play outdoors. They need to
        to find how long it will             maximize the area using
        take the ball to reach               180 feet of fencing on three
        maximum height, and                  sides of the yard. The
        then find the maximum                quadratic equation
        height.                                                         gives the

                                             area, A, of the yard for the
                                             length, x, of the building
                                             that will border the yard.
                                             Find the length of the
                                             building that should border
                                             the yard to maximize the
                                             area, and then find the
                                             maximum area.

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the following exercises, graph each function using a vertical shift.

498.                                 499.

In the following exercises, graph each function using a horizontal shift.

500.                                 501.

In the following exercises, graph each function using transformations.

502.                                 503.                                          504.

505.

Graph Quadratic Functions of the form

In the following exercises, graph each function.

506.                                 507.                                          508.

Graph Quadratic Functions Using Transformations

In the following exercises, rewrite each function in the                                  form by completing the square.

509.                                 510.                                               form and  graph it by using transformations.
                                                                                   513.
In the following exercises,  rewrite each function in

511.                                 512.

514.

Access for free at openstax.org
In the following exercises,  rewrite each function in                                                           9 · Exercises 957

515.                           516.                          form and  graph it using properties.

Find a Quadratic Function from its Graph                           form.

In the following exercises, write the quadratic function in

517.                           518.

Solve Quadratic Inequalities

Solve Quadratic Inequalities Graphically

In the following exercises, solve graphically and write the solution in interval notation.

519.                           520.                          521.

522.

In the following exercises, solve each inequality algebraically and write any solution in interval notation.

523.                           524.                          525.

526.                           527.                          528.

Practice Test                  530. Use Completing the       531. Use the Quadratic
                                       Square to solve the           Formula to solve the
529. Use the Square Root               quadratic equation            quadratic equation
        Property to solve the
        quadratic equation

Solve the following quadratic equations. Use any method.

532.                           533.

Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions of each quadratic equation.

534.                           535.

Solve each equation.

536.                           537.

For each parabola, find  which direction it opens,  the equation of the axis of symmetry,  the vertex,  the x- and
y-intercepts, and e) the maximum or minimum value.

538.                           539.

Graph each quadratic function using intercepts, the vertex, and the equation of the axis of symmetry.

540.                           541.
958 9 · Exercises

In the following exercises, graph each function using transformations.

542.                             543.

In the following exercises, solve each inequality algebraically and write any solution in interval notation.

544.                             545.

Model the situation with a quadratic equation and solve by any method.

546. Find two consecutive even   547. The length of a diagonal          548. A water balloon is
        numbers whose product            of a rectangle is three                launched upward at the
        is 360.                          more than the width. The               rate of 86 ft/sec. Using
                                         length of the rectangle is             the formula h = -16t2 +
                                         three times the width.                 86t find how long it will
                                         Find the length of the                 take the balloon to reach
                                         diagonal. (Round to the                the maximum height, and
                                         nearest tenth.)                        then find the maximum
                                                                                height. Round to the
                                                                                nearest tenth.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    10 · Introduction 959

10  EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC
    FUNCTIONS

Figure 10.1 Hydroponic systems allow botanists to grow crops without land. (credit: "Izhamwong"/Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  10.1 Finding Composite and Inverse Functions
  10.2 Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions
  10.3 Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions
  10.4 Use the Properties of Logarithms
  10.5 Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

      Introduction

As the world population continues to grow, food supplies are becoming less able to meet the increasing demand. At the
same time, available resources of fertile soil for growing plants is dwindling. One possible solution--grow plants without
soil. Botanists around the world are expanding the potential of hydroponics, which is the process of growing plants
without soil. To provide the plants with the nutrients they need, the botanists keep careful growth records. Some growth
is described by the types of functions you will explore in this chapter--exponential and logarithmic. You will evaluate and
graph these functions, and solve equations using them.

10.1 Finding Composite and Inverse Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find and evaluate composite functions
           Determine whether a function is one-to-one
           Find the inverse of a function

BE PREPARED 10.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                  If        and  find

                  If you missed this problem, review Example 3.48.

BE PREPARED 10.2  Solve for
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.31.

BE PREPARED 10.3 Simplify:
960 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 1.25.

In this chapter, we will introduce two new types of functions, exponential functions and logarithmic functions. These
functions are used extensively in business and the sciences as we will see.

Find and Evaluate Composite Functions

Before we introduce the functions, we need to look at another operation on functions called composition. In

composition, the output of one function is the input of a second function. For functions and the composition is

written        and is defined by

We read        as of of

To do a composition, the output of the first function,   becomes the input of the second function, f, and so we must
be sure that it is part of the domain of f.

Composition of Functions

The composition of functions f and g is written         and is defined by

We read        as of of x.

We have actually used composition without using the notation many times before. When we graphed quadratic

functions using translations, we were composing functions. For example, if we first graphed  as a parabola and

then shifted it down vertically four units, we were using the composition defined by         where

The next example will demonstrate that                   and               usually result in different outputs.

EXAMPLE 10.1

For functions                    and             find:                                and 

     Solution



Use the definition of

  Distribute.
  Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 961



  Use the definition of

Distribute.
Simplify.

Notice the difference in the result in part  and part  .

 Notice that             is different than  In part       we did the composition of the functions. Now in part

 we are not composing them, we are multiplying them.

  TRY IT 10.1            For functions      and                           find         
                                      .      and                          find           and 

  TRY IT 10.2 For functions                                                      and 

In the next example we will evaluate a composition for a specific value.

EXAMPLE 10.2

For functions            and                find:                         

     Solution



Use the definition of

Simplify.

Simplify.


962 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

         Use the definition of
         Simplify.
         Simplify.



  Use the definition of

Simplify.

Simplify.

TRY IT 10.3 For functions                       and  find     and

                         

TRY IT 10.4 For functions                       and  find     and 

Determine Whether a Function is One-to-One

When we first introduced functions, we said a function is a relation that assigns to each element in its domain exactly
one element in the range. For each ordered pair in the relation, each x-value is matched with only one y-value.

We used the birthday example to help us understand the definition. Every person has a birthday, but no one has two
birthdays and it is okay for two people to share a birthday. Since each person has exactly one birthday, that relation is a
function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 963

A function is one-to-one if each value in the range has exactly one element in the domain. For each ordered pair in the
function, each y-value is matched with only one x-value.
Our example of the birthday relation is not a one-to-one function. Two people can share the same birthday. The range
value August 2 is the birthday of Liz and June, and so one range value has two domain values. Therefore, the function is
not one-to-one.

  One-to-One Function

  A function is one-to-one if each value in the range corresponds to one element in the domain. For each ordered pair
  in the function, each y-value is matched with only one x-value. There are no repeated y-values.

EXAMPLE 10.3

For each set of ordered pairs, determine if it represents a function and, if so, if the function is one-to-one.

                                                       and 

     Solution



Each x-value is matched with only one y-value. So this relation is a function.

But each y-value is not paired with only one x-value,  and   for example. So this function is not one-to-one.



Each x-value is matched with only one y-value. So this relation is a function.
Since each y-value is paired with only one x-value, this function is one-to-one.

  TRY IT 10.5  For each set of ordered pairs, determine if it represents a function and if so, is the function one-
               to-one.

                                                                                    

  TRY IT 10.6  For each set of ordered pairs, determine if it represents a function and if so, is the function one-
               to-one.

                                                                                  
964 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

       To help us determine whether a relation is a function, we use the vertical line test. A set of points in a rectangular
       coordinate system is the graph of a function if every vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point. Also, if any
       vertical line intersects the graph in more than one point, the graph does not represent a function.
       The vertical line is representing an x-value and we check that it intersects the graph in only one y-value. Then it is a
       function.
       To check if a function is one-to-one, we use a similar process. We use a horizontal line and check that each horizontal line
       intersects the graph in only one point. The horizontal line is representing a y-value and we check that it intersects the
       graph in only one x-value. If every horizontal line intersects the graph of a function in at most one point, it is a one-to-
       one function. This is the horizontal line test.

         Horizontal Line Test
         If every horizontal line intersects the graph of a function in at most one point, it is a one-to-one function.
       We can test whether a graph of a relation is a function by using the vertical line test. We can then tell if the function is
       one-to-one by applying the horizontal line test.
         EXAMPLE 10.4

    Determine  whether each graph is the graph of a function and, if so,  whether it is one-to-one.

            Solution

    

       Since any vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point, the graph is the graph of a function. Since any horizontal
       line intersects the graph in at most one point, the graph is the graph of a one-to-one function.

    

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 965

Since any vertical line intersects the graph in at most one point, the graph is the graph of a function. The horizontal line
shown on the graph intersects it in two points. This graph does not represent a one-to-one function.

       TRY IT 10.7 Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function and, if so, whether it is one-to-one.

       TRY IT 10.8 Determine whether each graph is the graph of a function and, if so, whether it is one-to-one.
966 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Find the Inverse of a Function

Let's look at a one-to one function, , represented by the ordered pairs                                       For each -value,
adds 5 to get the -value. To `undo' the addition of 5, we subtract 5 from each  -value and get back to the original

 -value. We can call this "taking the inverse of " and name the function

Notice that that the ordered pairs of and       have their -values and -values reversed. The domain of     is the range
of and the domain of is the range of

Inverse of a Function Defined by Ordered Pairs

If  is a one-to-one function whose ordered pairs are of the form                then its inverse function  is the set

of ordered pairs

In the next example we will find the inverse of a function defined by ordered pairs.

EXAMPLE 10.5

Find the inverse of the function                Determine the domain and range of the inverse function.

     Solution
This function is one-to-one since every -value is paired with exactly one -value.

To find the inverse we reverse the -values and -values in the ordered pairs of the function.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 967

Function
Inverse Function
Domain of Inverse Function
Range of Inverse Function

TRY IT 10.9            Find the inverse of                 Determine the domain and range of the
                       inverse function.

TRY IT 10.10           Find the inverse of                                Determine the domain and range of the
                       inverse function.

We just noted that if  is a one-to-one function whose ordered pairs are of the form         then its inverse function

is the set of ordered pairs

So if a point  is on the graph of a function  then the ordered pair       is on the graph of  See Figure
10.2.

                                              Figure 10.2

The distance between any two pairs     and    is cut in half by the line  So we say the points are mirror

images of each other through the line

Since every point on the graph of a function  is a mirror image of a point on the graph of    we say the

graphs are mirror images of each other through the line  We will use this concept to graph the inverse of a

function in the next example.

EXAMPLE 10.6

Graph, on the same coordinate system, the inverse of the one-to one function shown.
968 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

     Solution
We can use points on the graph to find points on the inverse graph. Some points on the graph are:

                                                        .

So, the inverse function will contain the points:  .

Notice how the graph of the original function and the graph of the inverse functions are mirror images through the line
       TRY IT 10.11 Graph, on the same coordinate system, the inverse of the one-to one function.

TRY IT 10.12 Graph, on the same coordinate system, the inverse of the one-to one function.

When we began our discussion of an inverse function, we talked about how the inverse function `undoes' what the
original function did to a value in its domain in order to get back to the original x-value.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 969

Inverse Functions

We can use this property to verify that two functions are inverses of each other.

EXAMPLE 10.7

Verify that             and                  are inverse functions.

Solution

The functions are inverses of each other if  and

Substitute         for

Simplify.
Simplify.

Substitute    for

Simplify.
Simplify.

Since both              and                are true, the functions                 and  are inverse functions.

That is, they are inverses of each other.

TRY IT 10.13            Verify that the functions are inverse functions.
                                             and

TRY IT 10.14            Verify that the functions are inverse functions.
                                             and

We have found inverses of function defined by ordered pairs and from a graph. We will now look at how to find an

inverse using an algebraic equation. The method uses the idea that if     is a one-to-one function with ordered pairs
970 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

then its inverse function                       is the set of ordered pairs

If we reverse the x and y in the function and then solve for y, we get our inverse function.

EXAMPLE 10.8

How to Find the inverse of a One-to-One Function
Find the inverse of

     Solution

TRY IT 10.15 Find the inverse of the function

TRY IT 10.16 Find the inverse of the function

We summarize the steps below.

             ...

                 HOW TO

How to Find the inverse of a One-to-One Function

Step 1.  Substitute y for
Step 2.
Step 3.  Interchange the variables x and y.
Step 4.
         Solve for y.

         Substitute              for y.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 971

  Step 5. Verify that the functions are inverses.

  EXAMPLE 10.9
How to Find the Inverse of a One-to-One Function
Find the inverse of

     Solution

Substitute for  .

Interchange the variables and .

            Solve for .

Substitute      for .

Verify that the functions are inverses.

TRY IT 10.17 Find the inverse of the function
TRY IT 10.18 Find the inverse of the function
972 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

        SECTION 10.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find and Evaluate Composite Functions

In the following exercises, find  (f  g)(x),  (g  f)(x), and  (f · g)(x).

1.                 and                                  2.                      and
                                                                                and
3.                 and                                  4.                 and
                                                                                and
5.   and                                                6.

7.                 and                                  8.

In the following exercises, find the values described.

9. For functions                 and                    10. For functions               and

  find                                                     find                            
                                                                           find 
11. For functions                and                    12. For functions               and

   find                                                                                      

Determine Whether a Function is One-to-One

In the following exercises, determine if the set of ordered pairs represents a function and if so, is the function one-to-
one.

13.                                   ,                 14.                             ,

15.                              ,                      16.                          ,

Access for free at openstax.org
              10.1 · Finding Composite and Inverse Functions 973

In the following exercises, determine whether each graph is the graph of a function and if so, is it one-to-one.

17.    18. 

            

19.    20. 

            

In the following exercises, find the inverse of each function. Determine the domain and range of the inverse function.

21.    22.

23.    24.
974 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

25.                                             26.

In the following exercises, graph, on the same coordinate system, the inverse of the one-to-one function shown.

27.                                             28.

29.                                             30.

In the following exercises, determine whether or not the given functions are inverses.

31.  and                                        32.             and

33.  and                                        34.             and

35.       and                                   36.             and

37.       and                                   38.                  and

In the following exercises, find the inverse of each function.

39.                                             40.

41.                                             42.

43.                                             44.

45.                                             46.

47.                                             48.

49.                                             50.

51.                                             52.

53.                                             54.

55.                                             56.

57.                                             58.

59.                                             60.

61.                                             62.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 975

Writing Exercises

63. Explain how the graph of the inverse of a function  64. Explain how to find the inverse of a function from
      is related to the graph of the function.                its equation. Use an example to demonstrate the
                                                              steps.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

10.2 Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph exponential functions
           Solve Exponential equations
           Use exponential models in applications

       BE PREPARED 10.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:

                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 5.13.

BE PREPARED 10.5   Evaluate:  

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.14.

BE PREPARED 10.6   Evaluate:                       

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.15.

Graph Exponential Functions

The functions we have studied so far do not give us a model for many naturally occurring phenomena. From the growth
of populations and the spread of viruses to radioactive decay and compounding interest, the models are very different
from what we have studied so far. These models involve exponential functions.

An exponential function is a function of the form       where  and
976 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Exponential Function

An exponential function, where                  and   is a function of the form

Notice that in this function, the variable is the exponent. In our functions so far, the variables were the base.

Our definition says              If we let      then       becomes               Since    for all real numbers,

          This is the constant function.

Our definition also says         If we let a base be negative, say then                 is not a real number when

In fact,             would not be a real number any time is a fraction with an even denominator. So our definition
requires

By graphing a few exponential functions, we will be able to see their unique properties.

EXAMPLE 10.10

On the same coordinate system graph                   and

     Solution
We will use point plotting to graph the functions.

TRY IT 10.19 Graph:

TRY IT 10.20 Graph:

If we look at the graphs from the previous Example and Try Its, we can identify some of the properties of exponential
functions.

The graphs of             and                   as well as the graphs of         and      all have the same basic

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 977

shape. This is the shape we expect from an exponential function where

We notice, that for each function, the graph contains the point  This make sense because              for any a.

The graph of each function,    also contains the point           The graph of  contained              and the
                             This makes sense as
graph of         contained

Notice too, the graph of each function         also contains the point         The graph of           contained
                                                         This makes sense as
          and the graph of   contained

What is the domain for each function? From the graphs we can see that the domain is the set of all real numbers. There

is no restriction on the domain. We write the domain in interval notation as  

Look at each graph. What is the range of the function? The graph never hits the -axis. The range is all positive numbers.

We write the range in interval notation as 

Whenever a graph of a function approaches a line but never touches it, we call that line an asymptote. For the

exponential functions we are looking at, the graph approaches the -axis very closely but will never cross it, we call the

line      the x-axis, a horizontal asymptote.

Properties of the Graph of              when

                                           Domain        
                                           Range         

                                           x-intercept None
                                           y-intercept
                                           Contains
                                           Asymptote -axis, the line

Our definition of an exponential function          says          but the examples and discussion so far has been about

functions where  What happens when                 ? The next example will explore this possibility.

EXAMPLE 10.11

On the same coordinate system, graph               and
978 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

            Solution
       We will use point plotting to graph the functions.

TRY IT 10.21 Graph:

TRY IT 10.22 Graph:

Now let's look at the graphs from the previous Example and Try Its so we can now identify some of the properties of
exponential functions where

The graphs of                    and           as well as the graphs of                      and               all have the same
                                                                                                  the graphs go down from
basic shape. While this is the shape we expect from an exponential function where

left to right while the previous graphs, when              went from up from left to right.

We notice that for each function, the graph still contains the point (0, 1). This make sense because       for any a.

As before, the graph of each function,                     also contains the point  The graph of           contained

and the graph of                        contained          This makes sense as

Notice too that the graph of each function,                also contains the point           The graph of

contained      and the graph of                            contained  This makes sense as

What is the domain and range for each function? From the graphs we can see that the domain is the set of all real

numbers and we write the domain in interval notation as   Again, the graph never hits the -axis. The range is

all positive numbers. We write the range in interval notation as 

We will summarize these properties in the chart below. Which also include when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 979

Properties of the Graph of

                            when                                   when

               Domain                                    Domain          

               Range                                     Range           

               -intercept none                           -intercept none

               -intercept                                -intercept

               Contains                                  Contains

               Asymptote             -axis, the line     Asymptote       -axis, the line

               Basic shape increasing                    Basic shape decreasing

It is important for us to notice that both of these graphs are one-to-one, as they both pass the horizontal line test. This
means the exponential function will have an inverse. We will look at this later.

When we graphed quadratic functions, we were able to graph using translation rather than just plotting points. Will that
work in graphing exponential functions?

EXAMPLE 10.12

On the same coordinate system graph                 and

     Solution
We will use point plotting to graph the functions.
980 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

TRY IT 10.23 On the same coordinate system, graph:       and

TRY IT 10.24 On the same coordinate system, graph:       and

Looking at the graphs of the functions              and  in the last example, we see that adding one in the

exponent caused a horizontal shift of one unit to the left. Recognizing this pattern allows us to graph other functions

with the same pattern by translation.

Let's now consider another situation that might be graphed more easily by translation, once we recognize the pattern.

EXAMPLE 10.13

On the same coordinate system graph                 and

     Solution
We will use point plotting to graph the functions.

TRY IT 10.25 On the same coordinate system, graph:       and

TRY IT 10.26 On the same coordinate system, graph:       and

Looking at the graphs of the functions              and  in the last example, we see that subtracting 2

caused a vertical shift of down two units. Notice that the horizontal asymptote also shifted down 2 units. Recognizing

this pattern allows us to graph other functions with the same pattern by translation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 981

All of our exponential functions have had either an integer or a rational number as the base. We will now look at an
exponential function with an irrational number as the base.

Before we can look at this exponential function, we need to define the irrational number, e. This number is used as a
base in many applications in the sciences and business that are modeled by exponential functions. The number is

defined as the value of       as n gets larger and larger. We say, as n approaches infinity, or increases without

bound. The table shows the value of         for several values of

                                         1           2

                                         2           2.25

                                         5           2.48832

                                         10          2.59374246

                                         100         2.704813829...

                                         1,000       2.716923932...

                                         10,000      2.718145927...

                                         100,000     2.718268237...

                                         1,000,000   2.718280469...

                                         1,000,000,000 2.718281827...

                                         Table 10.1

The number e is like the number in that we use a symbol to represent it because its decimal representation never
stops or repeats. The irrational number e is called the natural base.

  Natural Base

The number e is defined as the value of          as n increases without bound. We say, as n approaches infinity,

The exponential function whose base is            is called the natural exponential function.

Natural Exponential Function

The natural exponential function is an exponential function whose base is

The domain is   and the range is 

Let's graph the function      on the same coordinate system as             and
982 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Notice that the graph of              is "between" the graphs of          and  Does this make sense as

     ?

Solve Exponential Equations

Equations that include an exponential expression are called exponential equations. To solve them we use a property

that says as long as             and            if  then it is true that  In other words, in an exponential equation, if

the bases are equal then the exponents are equal.

One-to-One Property of Exponential Equations

For     and

To use this property, we must be certain that both sides of the equation are written with the same base.

  EXAMPLE 10.14

How to Solve an Exponential Equation
Solve:

     Solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 983

TRY IT 10.27 Solve:

TRY IT 10.28 Solve:

The steps are summarized below.

             ...

                 HOW TO

How to Solve an Exponential Equation

Step 1.  Write both sides of the equation with the same base, if possible.
Step 2.  Write a new equation by setting the exponents equal.
Step 3.  Solve the equation.
Step 4.  Check the solution.

In the next example, we will use our properties on exponents.
  EXAMPLE 10.15

Solve     .

Solution

Use the Property of Exponents:

Write a new equation by setting the exponents
equal.

Solve the equation.
984 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

         Check the solutions.

TRY IT 10.29 Solve:

TRY IT 10.30 Solve:

Use Exponential Models in Applications

Exponential functions model many situations. If you own a bank account, you have experienced the use of an

exponential function. There are two formulas that are used to determine the balance in the account when interest is

earned. If a principal, P, is invested at an interest rate, r, for t years, the new balance, A, will depend on how often the

interest is compounded. If the interest is compounded n times a year we use the formula      If the interest

is compounded continuously, we use the formula      These are the formulas for compound interest.

Compound Interest

For a principal, P, invested at an interest rate, r, for t years, the new balance, A, is:

As you work with the Interest formulas, it is often helpful to identify the values of the variables first and then substitute
them into the formula.

EXAMPLE 10.16

A total of     was invested in a college fund for a new grandchild. If the interest rate is  how much will be in the

account in 18 years by each method of compounding?

 compound quarterly
 compound monthly
 compound continuously

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 985

  Solution

Identify the values of each variable in the formulas.
Remember to express the percent as a decimal.

                              . There are 4 quarters in a year.

  For quarterly compounding,

Substitute the values in the formula.

Compute the amount. Be careful to consider the order of operations as you
enter the expression into your calculator.

                              . There are 12 months in a year.

  For monthly compounding,

Substitute the values in the formula.

Compute the amount.



  For compounding continuously,
  Substitute the values in the formula.
  Compute the amount.

TRY IT 10.31         Angela invested     in a savings account. If the interest rate is  how much will be in the
TRY IT 10.32
                     account in 10 years by each method of compounding?

                      compound quarterly
                      compound monthly
                      compound continuously

                     Allan invested $10,000 in a mutual fund. If the interest rate is  how much will be in the
                     account in 15 years by each method of compounding?

                      compound quarterly
                      compound monthly
986 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                          compound continuously

       Other topics that are modeled by exponential functions involve growth and decay. Both also use the formula
       we used for the growth of money. For growth and decay, generally we use as the original amount instead of calling it

           the principal. We see that exponential growth has a positive rate of growth and exponential decay has a negative
       rate of growth.

         Exponential Growth and Decay

         For an original amount, that grows or decays at a rate, r, for a certain time, t, the final amount, A, is:

       Exponential growth is typically seen in the growth of populations of humans or animals or bacteria. Our next example
       looks at the growth of a virus.

         EXAMPLE 10.17
       Chris is a researcher at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention and he is trying to understand the behavior of a
       new and dangerous virus. He starts his experiment with 100 of the virus that grows continously at a rate of 25% per hour.
       He will check on the virus in 24 hours. How many viruses will he find?

            Solution
         Identify the values of each variable in the formulas.

         Be sure to put the percent in decimal form.

         Be sure the units match--the rate is per hour and the time is in hours.

Substitute the values in the formula:         .

Compute the amount.

Round to the nearest whole virus.

                                                 The researcher will find 40,343 viruses.

TRY IT 10.33         Another researcher at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Lisa, is studying the
                     growth of a bacteria. She starts her experiment with 50 of the bacteria that grows at a rate of

                           per hour. She will check on the bacteria every 8 hours. How many bacteria will she find in 8
                     hours?

TRY IT 10.34         Milan, a biologist is observing the growth pattern of a virus. They start with 100 of the virus

                     that grows at a rate of     per hour. They will check on the virus in 24 hours. How many

                     viruses will they find?

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with evaluating and graphing exponential functions.
  · Graphing Exponential Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37Graphexponent)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                10.2 · Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions 987

· Solving Exponential Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37Solvelikebase)
· Applications of Exponential Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37Exponentapp)
· Continuously Compound Interest (https://openstax.org/l/37Compoundint)
· Radioactive Decay and Exponential Growth (https://openstax.org/l/37Exponentdecay)

        SECTION 10.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph Exponential Functions

In the following exercises, graph each exponential function.

65.                                               66.

67.                                               68.

69.                                               70.

71.                                               72.

73.                                               74.

75.                                               76.

In the following exercises, graph each function in the same coordinate system.

77.                                               78.

79.                                               80.

81.                                               82.

83.                                               84.

In the following exercises, graph each exponential function.

85.                                               86.

87.                                               88.

89.                                               90.

91.                                               92.

93.                                               94.

Solve Exponential Equations

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

95.                                               96.

97.                                               98.

99.                                               100.

101.                                              102.

103.                                              104.

105.                                              106.

107.                                              108.
988 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, match the graphs to one of the following functions:                                      

109.                                                        110.

111.                                                        112.

113.                                                        114.

Use exponential models in applications

In the following exercises, use an exponential model to solve.

115. Edgar accumulated           in credit card debt. If    116. Cynthia invested  in a savings account. If

      the interest rate is       per year, and he does not        the interest rate is how much will be in the

      make any payments for 2 years, how much will                account in 10 years by each method of

      he owe on this debt in 2 years by each method of            compounding?  compound quarterly
                                                                   compound monthly  compound
      compounding?  compound quarterly 
      compound monthly  compound continuously                     continuously

117. Rochelle deposits           in an IRA. What will be    118. Nazerhy deposits  in a certificate of

      the value of her investment in 25 years if the              deposit. The annual interest rate is and the

      investment is earning per year and is                       interest will be compounded quarterly. How

      compounded continuously?                                    much will the certificate be worth in 10 years?

119. A researcher at the Center for Disease Control         120. A biologist is observing the growth pattern of a
        and Prevention is studying the growth of a
        bacteria. He starts his experiment with 100 of the        virus. She starts with 50 of the virus that grows
        bacteria that grows at a rate of per hour. He
        will check on the bacteria every 8 hours. How             at a rate of  per hour. She will check on the
        many bacteria will he find in 8 hours?
                                                                  virus in 24 hours. How many viruses will she

                                                                  find?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 989

121. In the last ten years the population of Indonesia  122. In the last ten years the population of Brazil has

has grown at a rate of  per year to                     grown at a rate of                     per year to 205,823,665.

258,316,051. If this rate continues, what will be       If this rate continues, what will be the population

the population in 10 more years?                        in 10 more years?

Writing Exercises

123. Explain how you can distinguish between            124. Compare and contrast the graphs of                  and

exponential functions and polynomial functions.         .

125. What happens to an exponential function as the
        values of decreases? Will the graph ever cross
        the
          -axis? Explain.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

10.3 Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Convert between exponential and logarithmic form
           Evaluate logarithmic functions
           Graph Logarithmic functions
           Solve logarithmic equations
           Use logarithmic models in applications

       BE PREPARED 10.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Solve:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 6.46.

BE PREPARED 10.8        Evaluate:
                        If you missed this problem, review Example 5.15.

BE PREPARED 10.9        Solve:
                        If you missed this problem, review Example 2.2.

We have spent some time finding the inverse of many functions. It works well to `undo' an operation with another
operation. Subtracting `undoes' addition, multiplication `undoes' division, taking the square root `undoes' squaring.

As we studied the exponential function, we saw that it is one-to-one as its graphs pass the horizontal line test. This
means an exponential function does have an inverse. If we try our algebraic method for finding an inverse, we run into a
problem.
990 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

To deal with this we define the logarithm function with base a to be the inverse of the exponential function

We use the notation                             and say the inverse function of the exponential function is the logarithmic function.

Logarithmic Function

The function                     is the logarithmic function with base , where          and

Convert Between Exponential and Logarithmic Form

Since the equations              and            are equivalent, we can go back and forth between them. This will often be the

method to solve some exponential and logarithmic equations. To help with converting back and forth let's take a close

look at the equations. See Figure 10.3. Notice the positions of the exponent and base.

                                                                             Figure 10.3
If we realize the logarithm is the exponent it makes the conversion easier. You may want to repeat, "base to the exponent
give us the number."

  EXAMPLE 10.18

Convert to logarithmic form:                      and 

Solution

TRY IT 10.35 Convert to logarithmic form:                                       

TRY IT 10.36 Convert to logarithmic form:                                       

In the next example we do the reverse--convert logarithmic form to exponential form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 991

  EXAMPLE 10.19                                             and 

Convert to exponential form: 

     Solution

  TRY IT 10.37 Convert to exponential form:                         

  TRY IT 10.38 Convert to exponential form:                         

Evaluate Logarithmic Functions

We can solve and evaluate logarithmic equations by using the technique of converting the equation to its equivalent
exponential equation.

EXAMPLE 10.20

Find the value of x:                and 

     Solution



Convert to exponential form.

Solve the quadratic.

The base of a logarithmic function must be positive, so we

eliminate      .



  Convert to exponential form.
  Simplify.


992 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Convert to exponential form.

Rewrite as          .

With the same base, the exponents must be equal.

TRY IT 10.39 Find the value of                                       

TRY IT 10.40 Find the value of                                       

When see an expression such as                  we can find its exact value two ways. By inspection we realize it means to

what power will be     Since                    we know  An alternate way is to set the expression equal to and

then convert it into an exponential equation.

EXAMPLE 10.21

Find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator:     and 

     Solution



  5 to what power will be 25?
  Or
  Set the expression equal to .
  Change to exponential form.
  Rewrite 25 as .
  With the same base the exponents must be equal.



Set the expression equal to .
Change to exponential form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 993

  Rewrite 9 as .
  Simplify the exponents.
  With the same base the exponents must be equal.
  Solve the equation.



  Set the expression equal to .
  Change to exponential form.
  Rewrite 16 as .

With the same base the exponents must be equal.

TRY IT 10.41 Find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator:                                

TRY IT 10.42 Find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator:                                

Graph Logarithmic Functions

To graph a logarithmic function  it is easiest to convert the equation to its exponential form,                Generally,

when we look for ordered pairs for the graph of a function, we usually choose an x-value and then determine its

corresponding y-value. In this case you may find it easier to choose y-values and then determine its corresponding

x-value.

EXAMPLE 10.22

Graph

     Solution                                                           in exponential form,
To graph the function, we will first rewrite the logarithmic equation,

We will use point plotting to graph the function. It will be easier to start with values of y and then get x.
994 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                                                      0
                                                                      1
                                                                      2
                                                                      3

TRY IT 10.43 Graph:

TRY IT 10.44 Graph:

The graphs of                    and                                     are the shape we expect from a logarithmic function where

We notice that for each function the graph contains the point            This make sense because                       means
which is true for any a.

The graph of each function, also contains the point                      This makes sense as      means                which is true for
any a.

Notice too, the graph of each function                                   also contains the point  This makes sense as

means          which is true for any a.

Look at each graph again. Now we will see that many characteristics of the logarithm function are simply 'mirror images'
of the characteristics of the corresponding exponential function.

What is the domain of the function? The graph never hits the y-axis. The domain is all positive numbers. We write the

domain in interval notation as 

What is the range for each function? From the graphs we can see that the range is the set of all real numbers. There is no

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 995

restriction on the range. We write the range in interval notation as  

When the graph approaches the y-axis so very closely but will never cross it, we call the line  the y-axis, a vertical
asymptote.

Properties of the Graph of  when

                                        Domain  
                                        Range   

                                                            None
                                        Contains
                                        Asymptote

Our next example looks at the graph of  when
  EXAMPLE 10.23

Graph

     Solution                                                           in exponential form,
To graph the function, we will first rewrite the logarithmic equation,

We will use point plotting to graph the function. It will be easier to start with values of y and then get x.
996 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                                                     0
                                                                     1
                                                                     2
                                                                     3

TRY IT 10.45 Graph:

TRY IT 10.46 Graph:

Now, let's look at the graphs                                           and  , so we can identify some of the properties of

logarithmic functions where
The graphs of all have the same basic shape. While this is the shape we expect from a logarithmic function where

We notice, that for each function again, the graph contains the points,         This make sense for the
same reasons we argued above.

We notice the domain and range are also the same--the domain is  and the range is   The -axis is

again the vertical asymptote.

We will summarize these properties in the chart below. Which also include when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 997

Properties of the Graph of

                                    when                     when

                            Domain                    Domain       

                            Range                     Range        

                            -intercept                -intercept

                            -intercept none           -intercept None

                            Contains                  Contains

                            Asymptote     -axis       Asymptote    -axis

                            Basic shape increasing    Basic shape Decreasing

We talked earlier about how the logarithmic function          is the inverse of the exponential function

The graphs in Figure 10.4 show both the exponential (blue) and logarithmic (red) functions on the same

graph for both  and
998 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                                                Figure 10.4

Notice how the graphs are reflections of each other through the line       We know this is true of inverse functions.

Keeping a visual in your mind of these graphs will help you remember the domain and range of each function. Notice

the x-axis is the horizontal asymptote for the exponential functions and the y-axis is the vertical asymptote for the

logarithmic functions.

Solve Logarithmic Equations

When we talked about exponential functions, we introduced the number e. Just as e was a base for an exponential

function, it can be used a base for logarithmic functions too. The logarithmic function with base e is called the natural

logarithmic function. The function              is generally written       and we read it as "el en of

Natural Logarithmic Function

The function                     is the natural logarithmic function with base where

When the base of the logarithm function is 10, we call it the common logarithmic function and the base is not shown.
If the base a of a logarithm is not shown, we assume it is 10.

  Common Logarithmic Function

The function                     is the common logarithmic function with base , where

To solve logarithmic equations, one strategy is to change the equation to exponential form and then solve the

exponential equation as we did before. As we solve logarithmic equations,             , we need to remember that for the

base a,        and      Also, the domain is     Just as with radical equations, we must check our solutions to

eliminate any extraneous solutions.

EXAMPLE 10.24

Solve:                  and 

     Solution



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 999

  Rewrite in exponential form.
  Solve the equation using the square root property.
  The base cannot be negative, so we eliminate
  Check.



  Rewrite in exponential form.
  Check.

TRY IT 10.47 Solve:           

TRY IT 10.48 Solve:           

  EXAMPLE 10.25  and 

Solve: 

     Solution



Rewrite in exponential form.
Simplify.
1000 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

           Solve the equation.
           Check.



  Rewrite in exponential form.
  Since the bases are the same the exponents are equal.
  Solve the equation.
  Check.

TRY IT 10.49 Solve:                              

TRY IT 10.50 Solve:                              

Use Logarithmic Models in Applications

There are many applications that are modeled by logarithmic equations. We will first look at the logarithmic equation

that gives the decibel (dB) level of sound. Decibels range from 0, which is barely audible to 160, which can rupture an

eardrum. The  in the formula represents the intensity of sound that is barely audible.

Decibel Level of Sound

The loudness level, D, measured in decibels, of a sound of intensity, I, measured in watts per square inch is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 1001

EXAMPLE 10.26

Extended exposure to noise that measures 85 dB can cause permanent damage to the inner ear which will result in

hearing loss. What is the decibel level of music coming through ear phones with intensity  watts per square inch?

Solution

Substitute in the intensity level, I.

Simplify.
Since
Multiply.

                                       The decibel level of music coming through earphones is 100 dB.

TRY IT 10.51          What is the decibel level of one of the new quiet dishwashers with intensity     watts per
                      square inch?

TRY IT 10.52 What is the decibel level heavy city traffic with intensity  watts per square inch?

The magnitude of an earthquake is measured by a logarithmic scale called the Richter scale. The model is
where is the intensity of the shock wave. This model provides a way to measure earthquake intensity.

Earthquake Intensity

The magnitude R of an earthquake is measured by  where I is the intensity of its shock wave.

  EXAMPLE 10.27

In 1906, San Francisco experienced an intense earthquake with a magnitude of 7.8 on the Richter scale. Over 80% of the
city was destroyed by the resulting fires. In 2014, Los Angeles experienced a moderate earthquake that measured 5.1 on
the Richter scale and caused $108 million dollars of damage. Compare the intensities of the two earthquakes.

     Solution
To compare the intensities, we first need to convert the magnitudes to intensities using the log formula. Then we will set
up a ratio to compare the intensities.

  Convert the magnitudes to
  intensities.
1002 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Form a ratio of the intensities.

Substitute in the values.

Divide by subtracting the
exponents.
Evaluate.

                                                 The intensity of the 1906 earthquake was about 501 times the intensity of the
                                                 2014 earthquake.

      TRY IT 10.53  In 1906, San Francisco experienced an intense earthquake with a magnitude of 7.8 on the
                    Richter scale. In 1989, the Loma Prieta earthquake also affected the San Francisco area, and
                    measured 6.9 on the Richter scale. Compare the intensities of the two earthquakes.

      TRY IT 10.54  In 2014, Chile experienced an intense earthquake with a magnitude of 8.2 on the Richter scale.
                    In 2014, Los Angeles also experienced an earthquake which measured 5.1 on the Richter scale.
                    Compare the intensities of the two earthquakes.

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with evaluating and graphing logarithmic
      functions.

      Re-writing logarithmic equations in exponential form (https://openstax.org/l/37logasexponent)
      Simplifying Logarithmic Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/37Simplifylog)
      Graphing logarithmic functions (https://openstax.org/l/37Graphlog)
      Using logarithms to calculate decibel levels (https://openstax.org/l/37Finddecibel)

        SECTION 10.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Convert Between Exponential and Logarithmic Form

In the following exercises, convert from exponential to logarithmic form.

126.                                              127.

128.                                              129.

130.                                              131.

132.                                              133.

134.                                              135.

136.                                              137.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             10.3 · Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions 1003

138.                            139.

140.                            141.

In the following exercises, convert each logarithmic equation to exponential form.

142.                            143.

144.                            145.

146.                            147.

148.                            149.

150.                            151.

152.                            153.

Evaluate Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, find the value of in each logarithmic equation.

154.                            155.

156.                            157.

158.                            159.

160.                            161.

162.                            163.

164.                            165.

In the following exercises, find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator.

166.                            167.

168.                            169.

170.                            171.

172.                            173.

174.                            175.

176.                            177.

Graph Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, graph each logarithmic function.

178.                            179.

180.                            181.

182.                            183.

184.                            185.

186.                            187.

Solve Logarithmic Equations

In the following exercises, solve each logarithmic equation.

188.                            189.
1004 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

190.                                                               191.

192.                                                               193.

194.                                                               195.

196.                                                               197.

198.                                                               199.

200.                                                               201.

202.                                                               203.

204.                                                               205.

206.                                                               207.

Use Logarithmic Models in Applications

In the following exercises, use a logarithmic model to solve.

208. What is the decibel level of normal conversation              209. What is the decibel level of a whisper with

      with intensity  watts per square inch?                             intensity     watts per square inch?

210. What is the decibel level of the noise from a                 211. What is the decibel level of the sound of a

      motorcycle with intensity                  watts per square        garbage disposal with intensity  watts per

      inch?                                                              square inch?

212. In 2014, Chile experienced an intense                         213. The Los Angeles area experiences many
        earthquake with a magnitude of on the                              earthquakes. In 1994, the Northridge
        Richter scale. In 2010, Haiti also experienced an                  earthquake measured magnitude of on the
        intense earthquake which measured on the                           Richter scale. In 2014, Los Angeles also
        Richter scale. Compare the intensities of the two                  experienced an earthquake which measured
        earthquakes.                                                       on the Richter scale. Compare the intensities of
                                                                           the two earthquakes.

Writing Exercises

214. Explain how to change an equation from                        215. Explain the difference between common
        logarithmic form to exponential form.                              logarithms and natural logarithms.

216. Explain why                                                   217. Explain how to find the  on your calculator.

Self Check


After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.4 · Use the Properties of Logarithms 1005

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

10.4 Use the Properties of Logarithms

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the properties of logarithms
           Use the Change of Base Formula

       BE PREPARED 10.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                          Evaluate:  

                                              If you missed this problem, review Example 5.14.

  BE PREPARED 10.11             Write with a rational exponent:
                                If you missed this problem, review Example 8.27.

  BE PREPARED 10.12             Round to three decimal places: 2.5646415.
                                If you missed this problem, review Example 1.34.

Use the Properties of Logarithms

Now that we have learned about exponential and logarithmic functions, we can introduce some of the properties of
logarithms. These will be very helpful as we continue to solve both exponential and logarithmic equations.

The first two properties derive from the definition of logarithms. Since  we can convert this to logarithmic form

and get            Also, since  we get

Properties of Logarithms

In the next example we could evaluate the logarithm by converting to exponential form, as we have done previously, but
recognizing and then applying the properties saves time.

EXAMPLE 10.28

Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:   and 

     Solution



Use the property,         .



  TRY IT 10.55 Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:                       

  TRY IT 10.56 Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:               
1006 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

The next two properties can also be verified by converting them from exponential form to logarithmic form, or the
reverse.

The exponential equation                         converts to the logarithmic equation    which is a true statement for
positive values for x only.

The logarithmic equation                         converts to the exponential equation    which is also a true statement.

These two properties are called inverse properties because, when we have the same base, raising to a power "undoes"
the log and taking the log "undoes" raising to a power. These two properties show the composition of functions. Both
ended up with the identity function which shows again that the exponential and logarithmic functions are inverse
functions.

Inverse Properties of Logarithms

For            and

In the next example, apply the inverse properties of logarithms.

EXAMPLE 10.29

Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:     and 

     Solution



Use the property,                .



Use the property,                .

     TRY IT 10.57 Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:                         

     TRY IT 10.58 Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:                         

There are three more properties of logarithms that will be useful in our work. We know exponential functions and
logarithmic function are very interrelated. Our definition of logarithm shows us that a logarithm is the exponent of the
equivalent exponential. The properties of exponents have related properties for exponents.

In the Product Property of Exponents,            we see that to multiply the same base, we add the exponents. The
Product Property of Logarithms,                                 tells us to take the log of a product, we add the log of
the factors.

Product Property of Logarithms

If                  and             then,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  10.4 · Use the Properties of Logarithms 1007

  The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.

We use this property to write the log of a product as a sum of the logs of each factor.
  EXAMPLE 10.30

Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify, if possible: 
and 

     Solution



Use the Product Property,                           .



Use the Product Property,                           .

Simplify by evaluating       .

    TRY IT 10.59        Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
    TRY IT 10.60        Simplify, if possible.

                                 

                        Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
                        Simplify, if possible.

                                 

Similarly, in the Quotient Property of Exponents,      we see that to divide the same base, we subtract the
exponents. The Quotient Property of Logarithms,                                 tells us to take the log of a quotient, we
subtract the log of the numerator and denominator.

Quotient Property of Logarithms

If                      and      then,

The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the logarithms.
1008 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Note that
We use this property to write the log of a quotient as a difference of the logs of each factor.

EXAMPLE 10.31

Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a difference of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.

           and 

    Solution



Use the Quotient Property,                       .

Simplify.



Use the Quotient Property,                       .

Simplify.

    TRY IT 10.61  Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a difference of logarithms.
                  Simplify, if possible.

                  

    TRY IT 10.62  Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a difference of logarithms.
                  Simplify, if possible.

                  

The third property of logarithms is related to the Power Property of Exponents,                  we see that to raise a
power to a power, we multiply the exponents. The Power Property of Logarithms,                                 tells us to take
the log of a number raised to a power, we multiply the power times the log of the number.

Power Property of Logarithms

If                and is any real number then,

The log of a number raised to a power is the product of the power times the log of the number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          10.4 · Use the Properties of Logarithms 1009

We use this property to write the log of a number raised to a power as the product of the power times the log of the
number. We essentially take the exponent and throw it in front of the logarithm.

EXAMPLE 10.32

Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.

    and 

    Solution



Use the Power Property,       .



Use the Power Property,       .

    TRY IT 10.63  Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms.
                  Simplify, if possible.

                            

    TRY IT 10.64  Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms.
                  Simplify, if possible.

                            

We summarize the Properties of Logarithms here for easy reference. While the natural logarithms are a special case of
these properties, it is often helpful to also show the natural logarithm version of each property.

Properties of Logarithms

If                          and is any real number then,

                  Property       Base                     Base

    Inverse Properties
1010 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions           Base                                             Base

                                        Property
                      Product Property of Logarithms
                      Quotient Property of Logarithms
                      Power Property of Logarithms

Now that we have the properties we can use them to "expand" a logarithmic expression. This means to write the
logarithm as a sum or difference and without any powers.

We generally apply the Product and Quotient Properties before we apply the Power Property.

EXAMPLE 10.33

Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm                         . Simplify, if possible.
     Solution

Use the Product Property,                                               .
Use the Power Property,                                , on the last two terms.
Simplify.

TRY IT 10.65 Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm                                      . Simplify, if possible.

TRY IT 10.66 Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm                                      . Simplify, if possible.

When we have a radical in the logarithmic expression, it is helpful to first write its radicand as a rational exponent.
  EXAMPLE 10.34

Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm                         . Simplify, if possible.
     Solution

Rewrite the radical with a rational exponent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.4 · Use the Properties of Logarithms 1011

Use the Power Property,     .
                                              .
Use the Quotient Property,                   , in

Use the Product Property,   , inside the
the second term.
Use the Power Property,
parentheses.

Simplify by distributing.

TRY IT 10.67 Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm      . Simplify, if possible.

TRY IT 10.68 Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm      . Simplify, if possible.

The opposite of expanding a logarithm is to condense a sum or difference of logarithms that have the same base into a
single logarithm. We again use the properties of logarithms to help us, but in reverse.

To condense logarithmic expressions with the same base into one logarithm, we start by using the Power Property to get
the coefficients of the log terms to be one and then the Product and Quotient Properties as needed.

EXAMPLE 10.35

Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm      . Simplify, if possible.
     Solution

  The log expressions all have the same base, 4.

The first two terms are added, so we use the Product Property,
                                           .

Since the logs are subtracted, we use the Quotient Property,
                                      .

TRY IT 10.69   Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm                 . Simplify, if
               possible.                                                                  . Simplify, if

TRY IT 10.70 Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm
1012 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

                      possible.

  EXAMPLE 10.36                                             . Simplify, if possible.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm

     Solution
  The log expressions have the same base, 3.

Use the Power Property,                               .

The terms are added, so we use the Product Property,
                                           .

     TRY IT 10.71     Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm       . Simplify, if
                      possible.

     TRY IT 10.72     Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm       . Simplify, if
                      possible.

Use the Change-of-Base Formula

To evaluate a logarithm with any other base, we can use the Change-of-Base Formula. We will show how this is derived.

Suppose we want to evaluate                      .

Let          .

Rewrite the expression in exponential form.

Take the     of each side.

Use the Power Property.

Solve for .

Substitute         .

The Change-of-Base Formula introduces a new base This can be any base b we want where  Because our

calculators have keys for logarithms base 10 and base e, we will rewrite the Change-of-Base Formula with the new base

as 10 or e.

Change-of-Base Formula

For any logarithmic bases and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                10.4 · Use the Properties of Logarithms 1013

When we use a calculator to find the logarithm value, we usually round to three decimal places. This gives us an
approximate value and so we use the approximately equal symbol .

  EXAMPLE 10.37

Rounding to three decimal places, approximate
     Solution

Use the Change-of-Base Formula.

Identify a and M. Choose 10 for b.

Enter the expression  in the calculator

using the log button for base 10. Round to three decimal places.

TRY IT 10.73 Rounding to three decimal places, approximate

TRY IT 10.74 Rounding to three decimal places, approximate

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with using the properties of logarithms.
Using Properties of Logarithms to Expand Logs (https://openstax.org/l/37Logproperties)
Using Properties of Logarithms to Condense Logs (https://openstax.org/l/37Condenselogs)
Change of Base (https://openstax.org/l/37Changeofbase)

        SECTION 10.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Properties of Logarithms

In the following exercises, use the properties of logarithms to evaluate.

218.                                     219.                                
220.                                     221.                                
222.                                     223.                                

224.                                     225.                                 
226.                                     227.                              
1014 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
Simplify if possible.

228.                                             229.

230.                                             231.

232.                                             233.

In the following exercises, use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
Simplify if possible.

234.                                             235.

236.                                             237.

238.                                             239.

240.                                             241.

In the following exercises, use the Power Property of Logarithms to expand each. Simplify if possible.

242.                                             243.

244.                                             245.

246.                                             247.

248.                                             249.

In the following exercises, use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify if possible.

250.                                             251.

252.                                             253.

254.                                             255.

256.                                             257.

258.                                             259.

260.                                             261.

In the following exercises, use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm. Simplify if possible.

262.                                             263.

264.                                             265.

266.                                             267.

268.                                             269.

270.                                             271.

272.                                             273.

274.                                             275.

276.                                             277.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1015

Use the Change-of-Base Formula

In the following exercises, use the Change-of-Base Formula, rounding to three decimal places, to approximate each
logarithm.

278.                                                   279.

280.                                                   281.

282.                                                   283.

Writing Exercises

284. Write the Product Property in your own words.     285. Write the Power Property in your own words.
        Does it apply to each of the following?                Does it apply to each of the following?
                                      Why or why not?                                   Why or why not?

286. Use an example to show that                       287. Explain how to find the value of  using
                                                               your calculator.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of         how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How

can you improve this?

10.5 Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve logarithmic equations using the properties of logarithms
           Solve exponential equations using logarithms
           Use exponential models in applications

      BE PREPARED 10.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                         Solve:
                         If you missed this problem, review Example 6.46.

      BE PREPARED 10.14  Solve:
                         If you missed this problem, review Example 6.45.

      BE PREPARED 10.15  Solve:
                         If you missed this problem, review Example 6.47.

Solve Logarithmic Equations Using the Properties of Logarithms

In the section on logarithmic functions, we solved some equations by rewriting the equation in exponential form. Now
that we have the properties of logarithms, we have additional methods we can use to solve logarithmic equations.

If our equation has two logarithms we can use a property that says that if  then it is true that
This is the One-to-One Property of Logarithmic Equations.
1016 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

One-to-One Property of Logarithmic Equations

For                              and  is any real number:

To use this property, we must be certain that both sides of the equation are written with the same base.
Remember that logarithms are defined only for positive real numbers. Check your results in the original equation. You
may have obtained a result that gives a logarithm of zero or a negative number.

  EXAMPLE 10.38

Solve:
     Solution

Use the Power Property.

Use the One-to-One Property, if                  , then              .

Solve using the Square Root Property.

We eliminate  as we cannot take the logarithm of a negative number.

Check.

       TRY IT 10.75 Solve:

       TRY IT 10.76 Solve:

Another strategy to use to solve logarithmic equations is to condense sums or differences into a single logarithm.
  EXAMPLE 10.39

Solve:
     Solution

Use the Product Property,                                  .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1017

Rewrite in exponential form.
Simplify.
Subtract 9 from each side.
Factor.
Use the Zero-Product Property.
Solve each equation.
Check.

We cannot take the log of a negative number.

       TRY IT 10.77 Solve:

       TRY IT 10.78 Solve:

When there are logarithms on both sides, we condense each side into a single logarithm. Remember to use the Power
Property as needed.

  EXAMPLE 10.40
Solve:

     Solution

Use the Quotient Property on the
left side and the Power Property
on the right.

Rewrite  .

Use the One-to-One Property, if

         , then  .
1018 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Solve the rational equation.
Distribute.
Write in standard form.
Factor.
Use the Zero-Product Property.
Solve each equation.
Check.
We leave the check for you.

TRY IT 10.79 Solve:

TRY IT 10.80 Solve:

Solve Exponential Equations Using Logarithms

In the section on exponential functions, we solved some equations by writing both sides of the equation with the same
base. Next we wrote a new equation by setting the exponents equal.

It is not always possible or convenient to write the expressions with the same base. In that case we often take the
common logarithm or natural logarithm of both sides once the exponential is isolated.

EXAMPLE 10.41

Solve          Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.
     Solution

Since the exponential is isolated, take the logarithm of both sides.
Use the Power Property to get the as a factor, not an exponent.

Solve for Find the exact answer.

Approximate the answer.

Since          and               does it makes sense that

TRY IT 10.81 Solve                               Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.

TRY IT 10.82 Solve                               Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.

When we take the logarithm of both sides we will get the same result whether we use the common or the natural

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1019

logarithm (try using the natural log in the last example. Did you get the same result?) When the exponential has base e,
we use the natural logarithm.

EXAMPLE 10.42

Solve          Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.
     Solution

Isolate the exponential by dividing both sides by 3.

Take the natural logarithm of both sides.

Use the Power Property to get the as a factor, not an exponent.

Use the property         to simplify.

Solve the equation. Find the exact answer.

Approximate the answer.

TRY IT 10.83 Solve                          Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.

TRY IT 10.84 Solve                         Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three decimal places.

Use Exponential Models in Applications

In previous sections we were able to solve some applications that were modeled with exponential equations. Now that
we have so many more options to solve these equations, we are able to solve more applications.
We will again use the Compound Interest Formulas and so we list them here for reference.

  Compound Interest

  For a principal, P, invested at an interest rate, r, for t years, the new balance, A is:

  EXAMPLE 10.43

Jermael's parents put $10,000 in investments for his college expenses on his first birthday. They hope the investments
will be worth $50,000 when he turns 18. If the interest compounds continuously, approximately what rate of growth will
they need to achieve their goal?
1020 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

             Solution

           Identify the variables in the formula

Substitute the values into the formula.

Solve for Divide each side by 10,000.

Take the natural log of each side.

Use the Power Property.

Simplify.

Divide each side by 17.

Approximate the answer.

Convert to a percentage.

                                                  They need the rate of growth to be approximately  .

TRY IT 10.85             Hector invests           at age 21. He hopes the investments will be worth    when he

                         turns 50. If the interest compounds continuously, approximately what rate of growth will he

                         need to achieve his goal?

TRY IT 10.86             Rachel invests           at age 25. She hopes the investments will be worth   when she

                         turns 40. If the interest compounds continuously, approximately what rate of growth will she

                         need to achieve her goal?

We have seen that growth and decay are modeled by exponential functions. For growth and decay we use the formula
                 Exponential growth has a positive rate of growth or growth constant, , and exponential decay has a

negative rate of growth or decay constant, k.

  Exponential Growth and Decay

  For an original amount, that grows or decays at a rate, k, for a certain time, t, the final amount, A, is:

We can now solve applications that give us enough information to determine the rate of growth. We can then use that
rate of growth to predict other situations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1021

  EXAMPLE 10.44
Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria population grew from 100 to 300 in 3 hours. At this rate of growth, how
many bacteria will there be 24 hours from the start of the experiment?

     Solution
This problem requires two main steps. First we must find the unknown rate, k. Then we use that value of k to help us find
the unknown number of bacteria.

Identify the variables in the formula.

Substitute the values in the formula.
Solve for . Divide each side by 100.
Take the natural log of each side.
Use the Power Property.
Simplify.
Divide each side by 3.
Approximate the answer.

We use this rate of growth to predict the number of bacteria there
will be in 24 hours.

Substitute in the values.
Evaluate.

                                                                    At this rate of growth, they can expect
                                                                    656,100 bacteria.

TRY IT 10.87  Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria population grew from 100 to 500 in 6 hours. At
              this rate of growth, how many bacteria will there be 24 hours from the start of the experiment?

TRY IT 10.88  Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria population declined from 700,000 to 400,000 in 5
              hours after the administration of medication. At this rate of decay, how many bacteria will
              there be 24 hours from the start of the experiment?

Radioactive substances decay or decompose according to the exponential decay formula. The amount of time it takes for
1022 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

        the substance to decay to half of its original amount is called the half-life of the substance.
        Similar to the previous example, we can use the given information to determine the constant of decay, and then use that
        constant to answer other questions.

          EXAMPLE 10.45

        The half-life of radium-226 is 1,590 years. How much of a 100 mg sample will be left in 500 years?
             Solution

        This problem requires two main steps. First we must find the decay constant k. If we start with 100-mg, at the half-life
        there will be 50-mg remaining. We will use this information to find k. Then we use that value of k to help us find the
        amount of sample that will be left in 500 years.

Identify the variables in the formula.

Substitute the values in the formula.
Solve for . Divide each side by 100.
Take the natural log of each side.
Use the Power Property.
Simplify.
Divide each side by 1590.

We use this rate of growth to predict the amount that will be
left in 500 years.

Substitute in the values.
Evaluate.

                                                               In 500 years there would be approximately 80.4
                                                               mg remaining.

TRY IT 10.89  The half-life of magnesium-27 is 9.45 minutes. How much of a 10-mg sample will be left in 6
              minutes?

TRY IT 10.90  The half-life of radioactive iodine is 60 days. How much of a 50-mg sample will be left in 40
              days?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1023

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving exponential and logarithmic
      equations.

      Solving Logarithmic Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37Solvelog)
      Solving Logarithm Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37sSolvelogeqs2)
      Finding the rate or time in a word problem on exponential growth or decay (https://openstax.org/l/37Solveforrate)
      Finding the rate or time in a word problem on exponential growth or decay (https://openstax.org/l/37Solveforrate2)

        SECTION 10.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Logarithmic Equations Using the Properties of Logarithms

In the following exercises, solve for x.

288.                                              289.

290.                                              291.

292.                                              293.

294.                                              295.

296.                                              297.

298.                                              299.

300.                                              301.

302.                                              303.

304.                                              305.

Solve Exponential Equations Using Logarithms

In the following exercises, solve each exponential equation. Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three
decimal places.

306.                                              307.

308.                                              309.

310.                                              311.

312.                                              313.

314.                                              315.

316.                                              317.

318.                                              319.

320.                                              321.

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

322.                                              323.

324.                                              325.

326.                                              327.

328.                                              329.
1024 10 · Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

330.                                                           331.

332.                                                           333.

334.                                                           335.

336.                                                           337.

338.                                                           339.

In the following exercises, solve for x, giving an exact answer as well as an approximation to three decimal places.

340.                                                           341.

342.                                                           343.

Use Exponential Models in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

344. Sung Lee invests            at age 18. He hopes the       345. Alice invests          at age 30 from the signing

      investments will be worth                  when he             bonus of her new job. She hopes the

      turns 25. If the interest compounds continuously,              investments will be worth  when she

      approximately what rate of growth will he need                 turns 40. If the interest compounds continuously,

      to achieve his goal? Is that a reasonable                      approximately what rate of growth will she need

      expectation?                                                   to achieve her goal?

346. Coralee invests             in an account that            347. Simone invests         in an account that

      compounds interest monthly and earns                How        compounds interest quarterly and earns

      long will it take for her money to double?                     How long will it take for his money to double?

348. Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria              349. Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria
        population declined from 100,000 to 100 in 24                  population declined from 800,000 to 500,000 in 6
        hours. At this rate of decay, how many bacteria                hours after the administration of medication. At
        will there be in 16 hours?                                     this rate of decay, how many bacteria will there
                                                                       be in 24 hours?

350. A virus takes 6 days to double its original               351. A bacteria doubles its original population in 24

      population                 How long will it take to            hours          How big will its population be

      triple its population?                                         in 72 hours?

352. Carbon-14 is used for archeological carbon                353. Radioactive technetium-99m is often used in
        dating. Its half-life is 5,730 years. How much of a            diagnostic medicine as it has a relatively short
        100-gram sample of Carbon-14 will be left in                   half-life but lasts long enough to get the needed
        1000 years?                                                    testing done on the patient. If its half-life is 6
                                                                       hours, how much of the radioactive material
                                                                       form a 0.5 ml injection will be in the body in 24
                                                                       hours?

Writing Exercises

354. Explain the method you would use to solve these           355. What is the difference between the equation for
                                                                       exponential growth versus the equation for
      equations:                                 Does your             exponential decay?

      method require logarithms for both equations?

      Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                    10.5 · Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 1025

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?
1026 10 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

asymptote A line which a graph of a function approaches closely but never touches.

common logarithmic function The function              is the common logarithmic function with base         where

exponential function An exponential function, where   and     is a function of the form

logarithmic function The function                 is the logarithmic function with base where              and

natural base The number e is defined as the value of       as n gets larger and larger. We say, as n increases

without bound,

natural exponential function The natural exponential function is an exponential function whose base is e:

   The domain is   and the range is 

natural logarithmic function The function             is the natural logarithmic function with base where

one-to-one function A function is one-to-one if each value in the range has exactly one element in the domain. For
    each ordered pair in the function, each y-value is matched with only one x-value.

Key Concepts

10.1 Finding Composite and Inverse Functions                                        and is defined by

  · Composition of Functions: The composition of functions and is written

We read         as of of

· Horizontal Line Test: If every horizontal line, intersects the graph of a function in at most one point, it is a one-to-

one function.

· Inverse of a Function Defined by Ordered Pairs: If  is a one-to-one function whose ordered pairs are of the

form     then its inverse function                is the set of ordered pairs

· Inverse Functions: For every in the domain of one-to-one function and

· How to Find the Inverse of a One-to-One Function:

Step 1. Substitute y for

Step 2. Interchange the variables x and y.

Step 3. Solve for y.

Step 4. Substitute               for

Step 5. Verify that the functions are inverses.

10.2 Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions

  · Properties of the Graph of

                                      when                    when

                          Domain                      Domain                   

                          Range                       Range                    

                                 -intercept none      -intercept none
                                 -intercept           -intercept

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10 · Chapter Review 1027

                          when                                        when
          Contains                                       Contains

          Asymptote  -axis, the line                     Asymptote          -axis, the line

          Basic shape increasing                         Basic shape decreasing

· One-to-One Property of Exponential Functions:

For  and

· How to Solve an Exponential Equation
    Step 1. Write both sides of the equation with the same base, if possible.
    Step 2. Write a new equation by setting the exponents equal.
    Step 3. Solve the equation.
    Step 4. Check the solution.

· Compound Interest: For a principal, invested at an interest rate, for years, the new balance, is

· Exponential Growth and Decay: For an original amount,  that grows or decays at a rate,     for a certain time
    the final amount, is

10.3 Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions

  · Properties of the Graph of

                     when                                       when

          Domain                                         Domain             

          Range                                          Range              

          x-intercept           none                     x-intercept  none
          y-intercept                                    y-intercept
          Contains                                       Contains
1028 10 · Chapter Review

                                             when                       when
                                 Asymptote y-axis              Asymptote y-axis
                                 Basic shape increasing        Basic shape decreasing

· Decibel Level of Sound: The loudness level,  , measured in decibels, of a sound of intensity, , measured in watts
    per square inch is

· Earthquake Intensity: The magnitude  of an earthquake is measured by                 where is the intensity of its
    shock wave.

10.4 Use the Properties of Logarithms

  · Properties of Logarithms

· Inverse Properties of Logarithms

 For                      and

· Product Property of Logarithms

 If                              and  then,

    The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.

· Quotient Property of Logarithms

 If                              and  then,

    The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the logarithms.

· Power Property of Logarithms

 If                              and is any real number then,

    The log of a number raised to a power is the product of the power times the log of the number.

· Properties of Logarithms Summary

If                               and is any real number then,

Access for free at openstax.org
                         Property                            Base                                                 10 · Exercises 1029

                                                                                                       Base

      Inverse Properties

              Product Property of Logarithms
              Quotient Property of Logarithms
              Power Property of Logarithms

· Change-of-Base Formula
   For any logarithmic bases a and b, and

10.5 Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

· One-to-One Property of Logarithmic Equations: For                     and                   is any real number:

· Compound Interest:
   For a principal, P, invested at an interest rate, r, for t years, the new balance, A, is:

  · Exponential Growth and Decay: For an original amount,    that grows or decays at a rate, r, for a certain time t,
      the final amount, A, is

Exercises

Review Exercises

Finding Composite and Inverse Functions

Find and Evaluate Composite Functions

In the following exercises, for each pair of functions, find  (f  g)(x),  (g  f)(x), and  (f · g)(x).

356.                and                                357.        and

In the following exercises, evaluate the composition.

358. For functions   and                               359. For functions
                    find                                                              and
                                                                                       find
    
                                                           
                                                           
                                                           
1030 10 · Exercises

Determine Whether a Function is One-to-One

In the following exercises, for each set of ordered pairs, determine if it represents a function and if so, is the function
one-to-one.

360.                                        361.

362.

In the following exercises, determine whether each graph is the graph of a function and if so, is it one-to-one.

363.                                        364. 

                                                  

Find the Inverse of a Function
In the following exercise, find the inverse of the function. Determine the domain and range of the inverse function.
365.

In the following exercise, graph the inverse of the one-to-one function shown.
366.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             10 · Exercises 1031

In the following exercises, verify that the functions are inverse functions.

367.                 and                                368.                  and

In the following exercises, find the inverse of each function.

369.                                                    370.

371.                                                    372.

Evaluate and Graph Exponential Functions
Graph Exponential Functions
In the following exercises, graph each of the following functions.

373.                                                    374.

375.                                                    376.

377.                                                    378.

379.

Solve Exponential Equations
In the following exercises, solve each equation.

380.                                                    381.

382.                                                    383.

384.                                                    385.

Use Exponential Models in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

386. Felix invested       in a savings account. If      387. Sayed deposits        in an investment

      the interest rate is how much will be in the                  account. What will be the value of his investment

      account in 12 years by each method of                         in 30 years if the investment is earning per

      compounding?                                                  year and is compounded continuously?

       compound quarterly
       compound monthly
       compound continuously.

388. A researcher at the Center for Disease Control     389. In the last five years the population of the United

      and Prevention is studying the growth of a                    States has grown at a rate of  per year to

      bacteria. She starts her experiment with 150 of               about 318,900,000. If this rate continues, what

      the bacteria that grows at a rate of   per hour.              will be the population in 5 more years?

      She will check on the bacteria every 24 hours.

      How many bacteria will he find in 24 hours?

Evaluate and Graph Logarithmic Functions

Convert Between Exponential and Logarithmic Form

In the following exercises, convert from exponential to logarithmic form.

390.                                                    391.

392.                                                    393.
1032 10 · Exercises

In the following exercises, convert each logarithmic equation to exponential form.

394.                                                    395.

396.

Evaluate Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, solve for x.

397.                                                    398.

399.

In the following exercises, find the exact value of each logarithm without using a calculator.

400.                                                    401.

402.

Graph Logarithmic Functions

In the following exercises, graph each logarithmic function.

403.                                                    404.

405.

Solve Logarithmic Equations

In the following exercises, solve each logarithmic equation.

406.                                                    407.

408.                                                    409.

410.

Use Logarithmic Models in Applications

411. What is the decibel level of a train whistle with

      intensity      watts per square inch?

Use the Properties of Logarithms

Use the Properties of Logarithms

In the following exercises, use the properties of logarithms to evaluate.

412.                                                    413.                 
                                                        415.               
414.                 

In the following exercises, use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
Simplify if possible.

416.                                                    417.

In the following exercises, use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms.
Simplify, if possible.

418.                                                    419.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   10 · Exercises 1033

In the following exercises, use the Power Property of Logarithms to expand each logarithm. Simplify, if possible.

420.                                                       421.

In the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to write each logarithm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify if
possible.

422.                                                       423.

424.                                                       425.

In the following exercises, use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm. Simplify if possible.

426.                                                       427.

428.                                                       429.

Use the Change-of-Base Formula

In the following exercises, rounding to three decimal places, approximate each logarithm.

430.                                                       431.

Solve Exponential and Logarithmic Equations

Solve Logarithmic Equations Using the Properties of Logarithms

In the following exercises, solve for x.

432.                                                       433.

434.                                                       435.

436.

Solve Exponential Equations Using Logarithms

In the following exercises, solve each exponential equation. Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three
decimal places.

437.                                                       438.

439.                                                       440.

441.

Use Exponential Models in Applications

442. Jerome invests  at age 17. He hopes the               443. Elise invests  in an account that

      investments will be worth           when he                compounds interest monthly and earns          How

      turns 26. If the interest compounds continuously,          long will it take for her money to double?

      approximately what rate of growth will he need

      to achieve his goal? Is that a reasonable

      expectation?

444. Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria          445. Mouse populations can double in 8 months
        population grew from 100 to 300 in 8 hours. At                              How long will it take for a mouse
        this rate of growth, how many bacteria will there
        be in 24 hours?                                            population to triple?

446. The half-life of radioactive iodine is 60 days. How
        much of a 50 mg sample will be left in 40 days?
1034 10 · Exercises

Practice Test

447. For the functions,                and                 448. Determine if the following set of ordered pairs
                                                                   represents a function and if so, is the function
                     find                                          one-to-one.
                 and 
                                                           450. Graph, on the same coordinate system, the
449. Determine whether each graph is the graph of a                inverse of the one-to-one function shown.
        function and if so, is it one-to-one.

    

      

451. Find the inverse of the function                      452. Graph the function
                                                           454. Solve the equation
453. Solve the equation                                    456. Convert the equation from exponential to

455. Megan invested              in a savings account. If          logarithmic form:

      the interest rate is how much will be in the         458. Solve for x:
                                                           460. Evaluate
      account in 8 years by each method of                 462. Solve for x:

      compounding?

       compound quarterly
       compound monthly
       compound continuously.

457. Convert the equation from logarithmic equation

      to exponential form:

459. Evaluate

461. Graph the function

463. What is the decibel level of a small fan with         464. Evaluate each. 
                                                               
      intensity      watts per square inch?

In the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to write each expression as a sum of logarithms, simplifying if
possible.

465.                                                       466.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10 · Exercises 1035

467.

In the following exercises, use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarithm, simplifying if possible.

468.                                                    469.

470. Rounding to three decimal places, approximate      471. Solve for x:

In the following exercises, solve each exponential equation. Find the exact answer and then approximate it to three
decimal places.

472.                                                    473.

474. Jacob invests $14,000 in an account that           475. Researchers recorded that a certain bacteria
        compounds interest quarterly and earns                  population grew from 500 to 700 in 5 hours. At
        How long will it take for his money to double?          this rate of growth, how many bacteria will there
                                                                be in 20 hours?

476. A certain beetle population can double in 3

      months  How long will it take for that

      beetle population to triple?
1036 10 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        11 · Introduction 1037

11  CONICS

Figure 11.1 Aerospace engineers use rockets such as this one to launch people and objects into space. (credit:
WikiImages/Pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  11.1 Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles
  11.2 Parabolas
  11.3 Ellipses
  11.4 Hyperbolas
  11.5 Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations

      Introduction

Five, Four. Three. Two. One. Lift off. The rocket launches off the ground headed toward space. Unmanned spaceships,
and spaceships in general, are designed by aerospace engineers. These engineers are investigating reusable rockets
that return safely to Earth to be used again. Someday, rockets may carry passengers to the International Space Station
and beyond. One essential math concept for aerospace engineers is that of conics. In this chapter, you will learn about
conics, including circles, parabolas, ellipses, and hyperbolas. Then you will use what you learn to investigate systems of
nonlinear equations.

11.1 Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the Distance Formula
           Use the Midpoint Formula
           Write the equation of a circle in standard form
           Graph a circle

       BE PREPARED 11.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Find the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose legs are 12 and 16 inches.
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.34.

    BE PREPARED 11.2  Factor:
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 6.24.
1038 11 · Conics

BE PREPARED 11.3                 Solve by completing the square:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 9.22.

In this chapter we will be looking at the conic sections, usually called the conics, and their properties. The conics are
curves that result from a plane intersecting a double cone--two cones placed point-to-point. Each half of a double cone
is called a nappe.

There are four conics--the circle, parabola, ellipse, and hyperbola. The next figure shows how the plane intersecting
the double cone results in each curve.

Each of the curves has many applications that affect your daily life, from your cell phone to acoustics and navigation
systems. In this section we will look at the properties of a circle.

Use the Distance Formula

We have used the Pythagorean Theorem to find the lengths of the sides of a right triangle. Here we will use this theorem
again to find distances on the rectangular coordinate system. By finding distance on the rectangular coordinate system,
we can make a connection between the geometry of a conic and algebra--which opens up a world of opportunities for
application.

Our first step is to develop a formula to find distances between points on the rectangular coordinate system. We will plot
the points and create a right triangle much as we did when we found slope in Graphs and Functions. We then take it one
step further and use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse of the triangle--which is the
distance between the points.

EXAMPLE 11.1

Use the rectangular coordinate system to find the distance between the points      and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1039

  Solution

Plot the two points. Connect the two points
with a line.
Draw a right triangle as if you were going to
find slope.

Find the length of each leg.

Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find d, the
distance between the two points.
Substitute in the values.
Simplify.

Use the Square Root Property.

Since distance, d is positive, we can eliminate The distance between the points  and

                                               is 5.

TRY IT 11.1 Use the rectangular coordinate system to find the distance between the points                   and

TRY IT 11.2 Use the rectangular coordinate system to find the distance between the points                   and

The method we used in the last example leads us to the formula to find the distance between the two points       and

When we found the length of the horizontal leg we subtracted      which is
When we found the length of the vertical leg we subtracted    which is
1040 11 · Conics

If the triangle had been in a different position, we may have subtracted       or  The expressions               and

vary only in the sign of the resulting number. To get the positive value-since distance is positive- we can use

absolute value. So to generalize we will say       and

In the Pythagorean Theorem, we substitute the general expressions         and      rather than the numbers.

Substitute in the values.
Squaring the expressions makes them positive, so we eliminate the
absolute value bars.

Use the Square Root Property.

Distance is positive, so eliminate the negative value.

This is the Distance Formula we use to find the distance d between the two points  and

Distance Formula

The distance d between the two points         and       is

EXAMPLE 11.2

Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points          and

Solution

Write the Distance Formula.

Label the points,                      and substitute.

Simplify.

TRY IT 11.3 Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points            and

TRY IT 11.4 Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points            and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1041

EXAMPLE 11.3

Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points     and            Write the answer in exact form

and then find the decimal approximation, rounded to the nearest tenth if needed.

Solution

Write the Distance Formula.

Label the points,              and substitute.

Simplify.

Since 202 is not a perfect square, we can leave the answer in exact form or find a
decimal approximation.

TRY IT 11.5        Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points         and  Write the

                   answer in exact form and then find the decimal approximation, rounded to the nearest tenth if

                   needed.

TRY IT 11.6        Use the Distance Formula to find the distance between the points         and  Write

                   the answer in exact form and then find the decimal approximation, rounded to the nearest tenth

                   if needed.

Use the Midpoint Formula

It is often useful to be able to find the midpoint of a segment. For example, if you have the endpoints of the diameter of
a circle, you may want to find the center of the circle which is the midpoint of the diameter. To find the midpoint of a line
segment, we find the average of the x-coordinates and the average of the y-coordinates of the endpoints.

Midpoint Formula

The midpoint of the line segment whose endpoints are the two points       and           is

To find the midpoint of a line segment, we find the average of the x-coordinates and the average of the y-coordinates
of the endpoints.

  EXAMPLE 11.4                                                                              and  Plot the

Use the Midpoint Formula to find the midpoint of the line segments whose endpoints are
endpoints and the midpoint on a rectangular coordinate system.
1042 11 · Conics

             Solution
           Write the Midpoint Formula.

           Label the points,
           and substitute.
           Simplify.

                                             The midpoint of the segment is the point

Plot the endpoints and midpoint.

TRY IT 11.7  Use the Midpoint Formula to find the midpoint of the line segments whose endpoints are

                                        and  Plot the endpoints and the midpoint on a rectangular coordinate system.

TRY IT 11.8  Use the Midpoint Formula to find the midpoint of the line segments whose endpoints are

                                        and  Plot the endpoints and the midpoint on a rectangular coordinate system.

Both the Distance Formula and the Midpoint Formula depend on two points,  and          It is easy to confuse

which formula requires addition and which subtraction of the coordinates. If we remember where the formulas come

from, it may be easier to remember the formulas.

Write the Equation of a Circle in Standard Form

As we mentioned, our goal is to connect the geometry of a conic with algebra. By using the coordinate plane, we are able
to do this easily.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1043

We define a circle as all points in a plane that are a fixed distance from a given point in the plane. The given point is

called the center,      and the fixed distance is called the radius, r, of the circle.

Circle

A circle is all points in a plane that are a fixed distance from a given point in the plane. The given point is called the

center,       and the fixed distance is called the radius, r, of the circle.

We look at a circle in the rectangular coordinate system.

The radius is the distance from the center,         to a

point on the circle,

To derive the equation of a circle, we can use the

distance formula with the points             and the

distance, r.

Substitute the values.

Square both sides.

This is the standard form of the equation of a circle with center,  and radius, r.

Standard Form of the Equation a Circle

The standard form of the equation of a circle with center,          and radius, r, is
1044 11 · Conics

  EXAMPLE 11.5
Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with radius 3 and center

     Solution
  Use the standard form of the equation of a circle

Substitute in the values             and

Simplify.

TRY IT 11.9 Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with a radius of 6 and center

TRY IT 11.10 Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with a radius of 8 and center

In the last example, the center was  Notice what happened to the equation. Whenever the center is  the

standard form becomes

EXAMPLE 11.6

Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with radius 2 and center
     Solution

  Use the standard form of the equation of a
  circle.

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

TRY IT 11.11 Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with a radius of 7 and center

TRY IT 11.12 Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with a radius of 9 and center

In the next example, the radius is not given. To calculate the radius, we use the Distance Formula with the two given
points.

EXAMPLE 11.7

Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with center  that also contains the point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1045

Solution

The radius is the distance from the center to any point on the circle so we can use the distance formula to calculate it. We

will use the center     and point

Use the Distance Formula to find the radius.

Substitute the values.

Simplify.

Now that we know the radius,       and the center,  we can use the standard form of the equation of a circle to
find the equation.

Use the standard form of the equation of a circle.

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

TRY IT 11.13            Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with center  that also contains the
                        point

TRY IT 11.14            Write the standard form of the equation of the circle with center  that also contains the
                        point

Graph a Circle                                is the standard form of the equation of a circle with center,  and

Any equation of the form
1046 11 · Conics                                                                                               so we need

        radius, r. We can then graph the circle on a rectangular coordinate system.
        Note that the standard form calls for subtraction from x and y. In the next example, the equation has
        to rewrite the addition as subtraction of a negative.

          EXAMPLE 11.8
        Find the center and radius, then graph the circle:

             Solution

Use the standard form of the equation of a circle.

Identify the center,             and radius, r.

                                                       Center:  radius: 3

Graph the circle.

TRY IT 11.15  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

TRY IT 11.16  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

To find the center and radius, we must write the equation in standard form. In the next example, we must first get the

coefficient of     to be one.

EXAMPLE 11.9

Find the center and radius and then graph the circle,
     Solution

Divide each side by 4.

Use the standard form of the equation of a circle.

Identify the center,             and radius, r.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1047

                                              Center:  radius: 4

Graph the circle.

TRY IT 11.17  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

TRY IT 11.18  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

If we expand the equation from Example 11.8,           the equation of the circle looks very different.

  Square the binomials.
  Arrange the terms in descending degree order, and get zero on the right

This form of the equation is called the general form of the equation of the circle.
  General Form of the Equation of a Circle
  The general form of the equation of a circle is

If we are given an equation in general form, we can change it to standard form by completing the squares in both x and
y. Then we can graph the circle using its center and radius.

  EXAMPLE 11.10

 Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

     Solution
We need to rewrite this general form into standard form in order to find the center and radius.
1048 11 · Conics

Group the x-terms and y-terms.            Center:  radius: 3
Collect the constants on the right side.

Complete the squares.

Rewrite as binomial squares.

Identify the center and radius.

Graph the circle.

    TRY IT 11.19  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:
    TRY IT 11.20  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

In the next example, there is a y-term and a -term. But notice that there is no x-term, only an -term. We have seen
this before and know that it means h is 0. We will need to complete the square for the y terms, but not for the x terms.

  EXAMPLE 11.11

 Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

     Solution
We need to rewrite this general form into standard form in order to find the center and radius.

  Group the x-terms and y-terms.
  There are no constants to collect on the
  right side.
  Complete the square for
  Rewrite as binomial squares.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   11.1 · Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles 1049

    Identify the center and radius.            Center:  radius: 4

    Graph the circle.

     TRY IT 11.21  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

     TRY IT 11.22  Find the center and radius, then  graph the circle:

     MEDIA
     Access these online resources for additional instructions and practice with using the distance and midpoint
     formulas, and graphing circles.
     Distance-Midpoint Formulas and Circles (https://openstax.org/l/37distmidcircle)
     Finding the Distance and Midpoint Between Two Points (https://openstax.org/l/37distmid2pts)
     Completing the Square to Write Equation in Standard Form of a Circle (https://openstax.org/l/37stformcircle)

        SECTION 11.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Distance Formula

In the following exercises, find the distance between the points. Write the answer in exact form and then find the
decimal approximation, rounded to the nearest tenth if needed.

1.   and                             2.   and           3.         and

4.   and                             5.   and           6.         and

7.   and                             8.   and           9.         and

10.       and                        11.  and           12.        and

Use the Midpoint Formula

In the following exercises,  find the midpoint of the line segments whose endpoints are given and  plot the endpoints
and the midpoint on a rectangular coordinate system.

13.  and                                       14.      and

15.  and                                       16.      and
1050 11 · Conics

Write the Equation of a Circle in Standard Form

In the following exercises, write the standard form of the equation of the circle with the given radius and center

17. Radius: 7                                             18. Radius: 9

19. Radius:                                               20. Radius:

In the following exercises, write the standard form of the equation of the circle with the given radius and center

21. Radius: 1, center:                                    22. Radius: 10, center:

23. Radius: center:                                       24. Radius: center:

For the following exercises, write the standard form of the equation of the circle with the given center with point on the
circle.

25. Center        with point                              26. Center             with point

27. Center        with point                              28. Center             with point

Graph a Circle

In the following exercises,  find the center and radius, then  graph each circle.

29.                              30.                                   31.

32.                              33.                                   34.

35.                              36.                                     37.

38.                              39.                                   40.

In the following exercises,  identify the center and radius and  graph.

41.                              42.                                   43.

44.                                   45.                                   46.

47.                              48.

Writing Exercises

49. Explain the relationship between the distance         50. Is a circle a function? Explain why or why not.
      formula and the equation of a circle.
                                                          52. In your own words, explain the steps you would
51. In your own words, state the definition of a circle.        take to change the general form of the equation
                                                                of a circle to the standard form.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    11.2 · Parabolas 1051

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

11.2 Parabolas

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph vertical parabolas
           Graph horizontal parabolas
           Solve applications with parabolas

       BE PREPARED 11.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Graph:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 9.47.

BE PREPARED 11.5  Solve by completing the square:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 9.12.

BE PREPARED 11.6  Write in standard form:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 9.59.

Graph Vertical Parabolas

The next conic section we will look at is a parabola. We define a parabola as all points in a plane that are the same
distance from a fixed point and a fixed line. The fixed point is called the focus, and the fixed line is called the directrix of
the parabola.

Parabola

A parabola is all points in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed point and a fixed line. The fixed point is
called the focus, and the fixed line is called the directrix of the parabola.
1052 11 · Conics

Previously, we learned to graph vertical parabolas from the general form or the standard form using properties. Those
methods will also work here. We will summarize the properties here.

                                    Vertical Parabolas

                                    General form                    Standard form

                  Orientation       up;         down                up;                down
                  Axis of symmetry

                  Vertex            Substitute    and

                  y-intercept       solve for y.
                  x-intercepts
                                    Let                             Let
                                                                    Let
                                    Let

The graphs show what the parabolas look like when they open up or down. Their position in relation to the x- or y-axis is
merely an example.

To graph a parabola from these forms, we used the following steps.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph vertical parabolas                                            using properties.

Step 1.           Determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward.
Step 2.           Find the axis of symmetry.
Step 3.           Find the vertex.
Step 4.           Find the y-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   11.2 · Parabolas 1053

Step 5. Find the x-intercepts.
Step 6. Graph the parabola.

The next example reviews the method of graphing a parabola from the general form of its equation.

EXAMPLE 11.12

Graph          by using properties.
     Solution

Since a is the parabola opens downward.

To find the axis of symmetry, find

                                         The axis of symmetry is

The vertex is on the line
Let

                                         The vertex is
1054 11 · Conics

The y-intercept occurs when

Substitute

Simplify.

                                                     The y-intercept is

The point         is three units to the left of the

line of symmetry. The point three units to the       Point symmetric to the y-intercept is

right of the line of symmetry is

  The x-intercept occurs when
  Let
  Factor the GCF.
  Factor the trinomial.
  Solve for x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       11.2 · Parabolas 1055

                                                 The x-intercepts are

Graph the parabola.

TRY IT 11.23 Graph                               by using properties.

TRY IT 11.24 Graph                               by using properties.

The next example reviews the method of graphing a parabola from the standard form of its equation,

EXAMPLE 11.13

Write                in standard form and then use properties of standard form to graph the equation.
     Solution

Rewrite the function in                    form
by completing the square.

Identify the constants a, h, k.                                        ,  ,

Since          the parabola opens upward.

The axis of symmetry is                          The axis of symmetry is
The vertex is                                    The vertex is
1056 11 · Conics

          Find the y-intercept by substituting

Find the point symmetric to                                                  y-intercept
                                 across the axis of symmetry.

Find the x-intercepts.

                                                The square root of a negative number
                                                tells us the solutions are complex
                                                numbers. So there are no x-intercepts.

Graph the parabola.

TRY IT 11.25             Write                  in standard form and  use properties of standard form to

                        graph the equation.

TRY IT 11.26             Write                  in standard form and  use properties of standard form to

                        graph the equation.

Graph Horizontal Parabolas

Our work so far has only dealt with parabolas that open up or down. We are now going to look at horizontal parabolas.
These parabolas open either to the left or to the right. If we interchange the x and y in our previous equations for
parabolas, we get the equations for the parabolas that open to the left or to the right.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         11.2 · Parabolas 1057

                                 Horizontal Parabolas  Standard form
                                    General form

               Orientation       right;        left    right;             left
               Axis of symmetry

               Vertex            Substitute    and

                                 solve for x.

               y-intercepts      Let                   Let

               x-intercept       Let                   Let

               Table 11.1

The graphs show what the parabolas look like when they to the left or to the right. Their position in relation to the x- or
y-axis is merely an example.

Looking at these parabolas, do their graphs represent a function? Since both graphs would fail the vertical line test, they
do not represent a function.

To graph a parabola that opens to the left or to the right is basically the same as what we did for parabolas that open up
or down, with the reversal of the x and y variables.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph horizontal parabolas                             using properties.

Step 1.  Determine whether the parabola opens to the left or to the right.
Step 2.  Find the axis of symmetry.
Step 3.  Find the vertex.
Step 4.  Find the x-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the x-intercept across the axis of symmetry.
Step 5.  Find the y-intercepts.
Step 6.  Graph the parabola.

EXAMPLE 11.14

Graph    by using properties.
1058 11 · Conics

             Solution

Since                  the parabola opens to the right.

To find the axis of symmetry, find

                                                         The axis of symmetry is

The vertex is on the line
Let

                                                         The vertex is

Since the vertex is    both the x- and y-intercepts are the point                 To graph the parabola we need more points. In

this case it is easiest to choose values of y.

We also plot the points symmetric to            and      across the y-axis, the points

Graph the parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   11.2 · Parabolas 1059

TRY IT 11.27 Graph                  by using properties.

TRY IT 11.28 Graph                  by using properties.

In the next example, the vertex is not the origin.

EXAMPLE 11.15

Graph          by using properties.
     Solution

Since          the parabola opens to the left.

To find the axis of symmetry, find

                                                          The axis of symmetry is

The vertex is on the line
1060 11 · Conics                           The vertex is

           Let

          The x-intercept occurs when

The point   is one unit below the line of  The x-intercept is
                                           Symmetric point is
symmetry. The symmetric point one unit

above the line of symmetry is

The y-intercept occurs when

Substitute

Solve.

                                           The y-intercepts are  and

Connect the points to graph the parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          11.2 · Parabolas 1061

TRY IT 11.29 Graph                               by using properties.

TRY IT 11.30 Graph                               by using properties.

In Table 11.1, we see the relationship between the equation in standard form and the properties of the parabola. The

How To box lists the steps for graphing a parabola in the standard form  We will use this procedure in

the next example.

EXAMPLE 11.16

Graph              using properties.
     Solution

Identify the constants a, h, k.

Since          the parabola opens to the right.

The axis of symmetry is                          The axis of symmetry is
The vertex is                                    The vertex is

Find the x-intercept by substituting             The x-intercept is

Find the point symmetric to      across the
axis of symmetry.

Find the y-intercepts. Let
1062 11 · Conics

                                                    A square cannot be negative, so there is no real
                                                    solution. So there are no y-intercepts.

Graph the parabola.

TRY IT 11.31 Graph                                  using properties.

TRY IT 11.32 Graph                                  using properties.

In the next example, we notice the a is negative and so the parabola opens to the left.

EXAMPLE 11.17

Graph                            using properties.
     Solution

Identify the constants a, h, k.

Since             the parabola opens to the left.

The axis of symmetry is                                                The axis of symmetry is
The vertex is                                                          The vertex is

Access for free at openstax.org
Find the x-intercept by substituting                                                                                         11.2 · Parabolas 1063

                                                            The x-intercept is

Find the point symmetric to  across the
axis of symmetry.

Find the y-intercepts.

Let

                                         The y-intercepts are  and

Graph the parabola.

     TRY IT 11.33 Graph                  using properties.

     TRY IT 11.34 Graph                  using properties.

The next example requires that we first put the equation in standard form and then use the properties.
1064 11 · Conics                 in standard form and then use the properties of the standard form to graph the equation.

          EXAMPLE 11.18
        Write

             Solution

Rewrite the function in
                          form by completing

the square.

Identify the constants a, h, k.

Since       the parabola opens to
the right.

The axis of symmetry is                       The axis of symmetry is
The vertex is                                 The vertex is
Find the x-intercept by substituting
                                              The x-intercept is

Find the point symmetric to
across the axis of symmetry.

Find the y-intercepts.
Let

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               11.2 · Parabolas 1065

                                                         The y-intercepts are
Graph the parabola.

TRY IT 11.35   Write                  in standard form and  use properties of the standard form to

              graph the equation.

TRY IT 11.36   Write                  in standard form and  use properties of the standard form

              to graph the equation.

Solve Applications with Parabolas

Many architectural designs incorporate parabolas. It is not uncommon for bridges to be constructed using parabolas as
we will see in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 11.19

Find the equation of the parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the bridge shown. Write the equation in standard
form.
1066 11 · Conics

     Solution
We will first set up a coordinate system and draw the parabola. The graph will give us the information we need to write
the equation of the graph in the standard form

Let the lower left side of the bridge be the
origin of the coordinate grid at the point

Since the base is 20 feet wide the point

                  represents the lower right side.

The bridge is 10 feet high at the highest

point. The highest point is the vertex of

the parabola so the y-coordinate of the

vertex will be 10.

Since the bridge is symmetric, the vertex

must fall halfway between the left most

point,            and the rightmost point

                  From this we know that the

x-coordinate of the vertex will also be 10.

Identify the vertex,

                                                    

Substitute the values into the standard form.

The value of a is still unknown. To find
the value of a use one of the other points
on the parabola.

Substitute the values of the other point
into the equation.

Solve for a.

Substitute the value for a into the
equation.

TRY IT 11.37          Find the equation of the parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the bridge shown. Write the
                      equation in standard form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           11.2 · Parabolas 1067

     TRY IT 11.38  Find the equation of the parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the bridge shown. Write
                   the equation in standard form.

     MEDIA
     Access these online resources for additional instructions and practice with quadratic functions and parabolas.
     Quadratic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/37quadfunc)
     Introduction to Conics and Graphing Horizontal Parabolas (https://openstax.org/l/37conhorizpbola)

        SECTION 11.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph Vertical Parabolas

In the following exercises, graph each equation by using properties.

53.                         54.                                       55.

56.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  use properties of the standard form to graph the
equation.

57.                         58.                                       59.

60.

Graph Horizontal Parabolas

In the following exercises, graph each equation by using properties.

61.                         62.                                       63.

64.                         65.                                       66.

67.                         68.                                       69.

70.                         71.                                       72.

73.                         74.                                       75.

76.                         77.                                       78.

79.                         80.
1068 11 · Conics

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  use properties of the standard form to graph the
equation.

81.                              82.       83.

84.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, match each graph to one of the following equations:  x2 + y2 = 64  x2 + y2 = 49
 (x + 5)2 + (y + 2)2 = 4  (x - 2)2 + (y - 3)2 = 9  y = -x2 + 8x - 15  y = 6x2 + 2x - 1

85.                                   86.

87.                                   88.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     11.2 · Parabolas 1069

89.                                                        90.

Solve Applications with Parabolas                          92. Write the equation in standard form of the
                                                                 parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the
91. Write the equation in standard form of the                   bridge shown. Write the equation in standard
      parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the             form.
      bridge shown. Write the equation in standard
      form.

93. Write the equation in standard form of the             94. Write the equation in standard form of the
      parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the             parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the
      bridge shown. Write the equation in standard               bridge shown. Write the equation in standard
      form.                                                      form.

Writing Exercises                                          96. Is the parabola  a function? Is the parabola

95. In your own words, define a parabola.                       a function? Explain why or why not.

97. Write the equation of a parabola that opens up or      98. Explain in your own words, how you can tell from
      down in standard form and the equation of a                its equation whether a parabola opens up, down,
      parabola that opens left or right in standard form.        left or right.
      Provide a sketch of the parabola for each one,
      label the vertex and axis of symmetry.
1070 11 · Conics

       Self Check

         After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

11.3 Ellipses

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph an ellipse with center at the origin
           Find the equation of an ellipse with center at the origin
           Graph an ellipse with center not at the origin
           Solve application with ellipses

BE PREPARED 11.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                  Graph  using transformations.

                  If you missed this problem, review Example 9.57.

BE PREPARED 11.8  Complete the square:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 9.12.

BE PREPARED 11.9  Write in standard form.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 9.59.

Graph an Ellipse with Center at the Origin

The next conic section we will look at is an ellipse. We define an ellipse as all points in a plane where the sum of the
distances from two fixed points is constant. Each of the given points is called a focus of the ellipse.

  Ellipse

  An ellipse is all points in a plane where the sum of the distances from two fixed points is constant. Each of the fixed
  points is called a focus of the ellipse.

We can draw an ellipse by taking some fixed length of flexible string and attaching the ends to two thumbtacks. We use a
pen to pull the string taut and rotate it around the two thumbtacks. The figure that results is an ellipse.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                           11.3 · Ellipses 1071

A line drawn through the foci intersect the ellipse in two points. Each point is called a vertex of the ellipse. The segment
connecting the vertices is called the major axis. The midpoint of the segment is called the center of the ellipse. A
segment perpendicular to the major axis that passes through the center and intersects the ellipse in two points is called
the minor axis.

We mentioned earlier that our goal is to connect the geometry of a conic with algebra. Placing the ellipse on a
rectangular coordinate system gives us that opportunity. In the figure, we placed the ellipse so the foci
are on the x-axis and the center is the origin.

The definition states the sum of the distance from the foci to a point  is constant. So  is a constant that we

will call so,  We will use the distance formula to lead us to an algebraic formula for an ellipse.

To graph the ellipse, it will be helpful to know the intercepts. We will find the x-intercepts and y-intercepts using the
formula.
1072 11 · Conics

Standard Form of the Equation an Ellipse with Center  

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center    is

The x-intercepts are  and

The y-intercepts are  and

Notice that when the major axis is horizontal, the value of a will be greater than the value of b and when the major axis
is vertical, the value of b will be greater than the value of a. We will use this information to graph an ellipse that is
centered at the origin.

                                                                   Ellipse with Center

                                                     Major axis on the x- axis. on the y-axis.
                                                   x-intercepts
                                                   y-intercepts
                                                  Table 11.2
  EXAMPLE 11.20
How to Graph an Ellipse with Center (0, 0)
Graph:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11.3 · Ellipses 1073

Solution

TRY IT 11.39 Graph:

TRY IT 11.40 Graph:

We summarize the steps for reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

How to Graph an Ellipse with Center

Step 1.  Write the equation in standard form.
Step 2.  Determine whether the major axis is horizontal or vertical.
Step 3.  Find the endpoints of the major axis.
Step 4.  Find the endpoints of the minor axis
Step 5.  Sketch the ellipse.

Sometimes our equation will first need to be put in standard form.
1074 11 · Conics

  EXAMPLE 11.21

Graph
     Solution

  We recognize this as the equation of an
  ellipse since both the x and y terms are
  squared and have different coefficients.

  To get the equation in standard form, divide
  both sides by 16 so that the equation is equal
  to 1.

Simplify.

The equation is in standard form.                            The center is
The ellipse is centered at the origin.
                                                  The vertices are
Since             and 16 is in the  term,         The endpoints of the minor axis are

the major axis is horizontal.

Sketch the ellipse.

       TRY IT 11.41 Graph
       TRY IT 11.42 Graph

Find the Equation of an Ellipse with Center at the Origin

If we are given the graph of an ellipse, we can find the equation of the ellipse.
  EXAMPLE 11.22

Find the equation of the ellipse shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  11.3 · Ellipses 1075

  Solution
We recognize this as an ellipse that is centered at the origin.

Since the major axis is horizontal and the distance from the center to the vertex is 4, we know

and so  .

The minor axis is vertical and the distance from the center to the ellipse is 3, we know  and so
         .

TRY IT 11.43 Find the equation of the ellipse shown.

TRY IT 11.44 Find the equation of the ellipse shown.
1076 11 · Conics

Graph an Ellipse with Center Not at the Origin

The ellipses we have looked at so far have all been centered at the origin. We will now look at ellipses whose center is

The equation is                          and when  the major axis is horizontal so the distance from the center to the
vertex is a. When
                   the major axis is vertical so the distance from the center to the vertex is b.

Standard Form of the Equation an Ellipse with Center

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center  is

When              the major axis is horizontal so the distance from the center to the vertex is a.
When              the major axis is vertical so the distance from the center to the vertex is b.

  EXAMPLE 11.23

Graph:
     Solution

  The equation is in standard form,

The ellipse is centered at                            The center is

Since             and 9 is in the term,

the major axis is horizontal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         11.3 · Ellipses 1077

                                The distance from the center to the vertices is 3.
                                The distance from the center to the endpoints of the
                                minor axis is 2.

Sketch the ellipse.

TRY IT 11.45 Graph:

TRY IT 11.46 Graph:

If we look at the equations of  and                   we see that they are both ellipses with            and

So they will have the same size and shape. They are different in that they do not have the same center.

Notice in the graph above that we could have graphed  by translations. We moved the original
ellipse to the right 3 units and then up 1 unit.
1078 11 · Conics

In the next example we will use the translation method to graph the ellipse.
  EXAMPLE 11.24

Graph                            by translation.

     Solution                                      whose center is            We graph this ellipse first.
This ellipse will have the same size and shape as

The center is                                      Center

Since             the major axis is horizontal.

                                                   The vertices are
                                                   The endpoints of the minor axis are

Sketch the ellipse.
The original equation is in standard form,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 11.3 · Ellipses 1079

The ellipse is centered at                      The center is

We translate the graph of   four

units to the left and then up 6 units.
Verify that the center is
The new ellipse is the ellipse whose equation
is

TRY IT 11.47 Graph                              by translation.

TRY IT 11.48 Graph                              by translation.

When an equation has both an and a with different coefficients, we verify that it is an ellipsis by putting it in
standard form. We will then be able to graph the equation.

EXAMPLE 11.25

Write the equation                              in standard form and graph.

     Solution
We put the equation in standard form by completing the squares in both x and y.

Rewrite grouping the x terms and y terms.
Make the coefficients of and equal 1.
Complete the squares.
Write as binomial squares.
Divide both sides by 16 to get 1 on the right.

Simplify.
1080 11 · Conics

The equation is in standard form,

The ellipse is centered at                                    The center is

Since             and 16 is in the  term,  The distance from the center to the vertices is 4.
                                           The distance from the center to the endpoints of
the major axis is horizontal.              the minor axis is 2.

Sketch the ellipse.

TRY IT 11.49  Write the equation                                   in standard form and  graph.

TRY IT 11.50  Write the equation                                   in standard form and  graph.

Solve Application with Ellipses

The orbits of the planets around the sun follow elliptical paths.

  EXAMPLE 11.26

Pluto (a dwarf planet) moves in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The closest Pluto gets to the Sun is approximately 30
astronomical units (AU) and the furthest is approximately 50 AU. The Sun is one of the foci of the elliptical orbit. Letting
the ellipse center at the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit will look like the figure below. Use the graph to write
an equation for the elliptical orbit of Pluto.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11.3 · Ellipses 1081

  Solution
We recognize this as an ellipse that is centered at the origin.

Since the major axis is horizontal and the distance from the center to the vertex is 40,

we know  and so  .

The minor axis is vertical but the end points aren't given. To find we will use the

location of the Sun. Since the Sun is a focus of the ellipse at the point  , we

know     . Use this to solve for .

Substitute and into the standard form of the ellipse.

TRY IT 11.51  A planet moves in an elliptical orbit around its sun. The closest the planet gets to the sun is
              approximately 20 AU and the furthest is approximately 30 AU. The sun is one of the foci of the
              elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit will
              look like the figure below. Use the graph to write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
              planet.
1082 11 · Conics

TRY IT 11.52      A planet moves in an elliptical orbit around its sun. The closest the planet gets to the sun is
                  approximately 20 AU and the furthest is approximately 50 AU. The sun is one of the foci of the
                  elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit will
                  look like the figure below. Use the graph to write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
                  planet.

       MEDIA
      Access these online resources for additional instructions and practice with ellipses.
      Conic Sections: Graphing Ellipses Part 1 (https://openstax.org/l/37graphellipse1)
      Conic Sections: Graphing Ellipses Part 2 (https://openstax.org/l/37graphellipse2)
      Equation for Ellipse From Graph (https://openstax.org/l/37eqellipse)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  11.3 · Ellipses 1083

        SECTION 11.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph an Ellipse with Center at the Origin
In the following exercises, graph each ellipse.

99.   100.                                                 101.

102.  103.                                                 104.

105.  106.                                                 107.

108.  109.                                                 110.

Find the Equation of an Ellipse with Center at the Origin

In the following exercises, find the equation of the ellipse shown in the graph.

111.                                             112.

113.                                             114.
1084 11 · Conics

Graph an Ellipse with Center Not at the Origin
In the following exercises, graph each ellipse.

115.                                                            116.

117.                                                            118.

In the following exercises, graph each equation by translation.

119.                                                            120.

121.                                                            122.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  graph.

123.                                                            124.

125.                                                            126.

In the following exercises, graph the equation.

127.                             128.                                 129.

130.                             131.                                 132.

133.                             134.                                 135.

136.                             137.                                 138.

Solve Application with Ellipses                                 140. A planet moves in an elliptical orbit around its
                                                                        sun. The closest the planet gets to the sun is
139. A planet moves in an elliptical orbit around its                   approximately 10 AU and the furthest is
        sun. The closest the planet gets to the sun is                  approximately 70 AU. The sun is one of the foci
        approximately 10 AU and the furthest is                         of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at
        approximately 30 AU. The sun is one of the foci                 the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit
        of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at          will look like the figure below. Use the graph to
        the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit               write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
        will look like the figure below. Use the graph to               planet.
        write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
        planet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             11.4 · Hyperbolas 1085

141. A comet moves in an elliptical orbit around a              142. A comet moves in an elliptical orbit around a
        sun. The closest the comet gets to the sun is                   sun. The closest the comet gets to the sun is
        approximately 15 AU and the furthest is                         approximately 15 AU and the furthest is
        approximately 85 AU. The sun is one of the foci                 approximately 95 AU. The sun is one of the foci
        of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at          of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at
        the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit               the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit
        will look like the figure below. Use the graph to               will look like the figure below. Use the graph to
        write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the               write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
        comet.                                                          comet.

Writing Exercises

143. In your own words, define an ellipse and write             144. Explain in your own words how to get the axes
        the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin               from the equation in standard form.
        in standard form. Draw a sketch of the ellipse
        labeling the center, vertices and major and minor       146. Explain in your own words, the difference
        axes.                                                           between a vertex and a focus of the ellipse.

145. Compare and contrast the graphs of the

equations          and

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

11.4 Hyperbolas

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Graph a hyperbola with center at
           Graph a hyperbola with center at
           Identify conic sections by their equations

       BE PREPARED 11.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                              Solve:
                                              If you missed this problem, review Example 9.1.
1086 11 · Conics

BE PREPARED 11.11                Expand:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

BE PREPARED 11.12                Graph
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.4.

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at (0, 0)

The last conic section we will look at is called a hyperbola. We will see that the equation of a hyperbola looks the same
as the equation of an ellipse, except it is a difference rather than a sum. While the equations of an ellipse and a
hyperbola are very similar, their graphs are very different.
We define a hyperbola as all points in a plane where the difference of their distances from two fixed points is constant.
Each of the fixed points is called a focus of the hyperbola.

  Hyperbola

  A hyperbola is all points in a plane where the difference of their distances from two fixed points is constant. Each of
  the fixed points is called a focus of the hyperbola.

The line through the foci, is called the transverse axis. The two points where the transverse axis intersects the
hyperbola are each a vertex of the hyperbola. The midpoint of the segment joining the foci is called the center of the
hyperbola. The line perpendicular to the transverse axis that passes through the center is called the conjugate axis.
Each piece of the graph is called a branch of the hyperbola.

Again our goal is to connect the geometry of a conic with algebra. Placing the hyperbola on a rectangular coordinate

system gives us that opportunity. In the figure, we placed the hyperbola so the foci  are on the x-axis and

the center is the origin.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                11.4 · Hyperbolas 1087

The definition states the difference of the distance from the foci to a point  is constant. So  is a constant

that we will call so  We will use the distance formula to lead us to an algebraic formula for an ellipse.

To graph the hyperbola, it will be helpful to know about the intercepts. We will find the x-intercepts and y-intercepts
using the formula.

The a, b values in the equation also help us find the asymptotes of the hyperbola. The asymptotes are intersecting
straight lines that the branches of the graph approach but never intersect as the x, y values get larger and larger.

To find the asymptotes, we sketch a rectangle whose sides intersect the x-axis at the vertices  and intersect

the y-axis at         The lines containing the diagonals of this rectangle are the asymptotes of the hyperbola. The

rectangle and asymptotes are not part of the hyperbola, but they help us graph the hyperbola.

The asymptotes pass through the origin and we can evaluate their slope using the rectangle we sketched. They have

equations      and

There are two equations for hyperbolas, depending whether the transverse axis is vertical or horizontal. We can tell
whether the transverse axis is horizontal by looking at the equation. When the equation is in standard form, if the
1088 11 · Conics

x2-term is positive, the transverse axis is horizontal. When the equation is in standard form, if the y2-term is positive, the
transverse axis is vertical.

The second equations could be derived similarly to what we have done. We will summarize the results here.

Standard Form of the Equation a Hyperbola with Center

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center        is

Notice that, unlike the equation of an ellipse, the denominator of  is not always  and the denominator of        is not
always

Notice that when the -term is positive, the transverse axis is on the x-axis. When the   -term is positive, the
transverse axis is on the y-axis.

                                 Standard Forms of the Equation a Hyperbola with Center

                  Orientation    Transverse axis on the x-axis.     Transverse axis on the y-axis.
                                       Opens left and right               Opens up and down

                  Vertices

                  x-intercepts                                               none

                  y-intercepts                     none

                  Rectangle      Use                                    Use

                  asymptotes

We will use these properties to graph hyperbolas.
  EXAMPLE 11.27

How to Graph a Hyperbola with Center
Graph

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       11.4 · Hyperbolas 1089

Solution

       TRY IT 11.53 Graph
       TRY IT 11.54 Graph
We summarize the steps for reference.
1090 11 · Conics

       ...

            HOW TO

Graph a hyperbola centered at

Step 1.           Write the equation in standard form.
Step 2.           Determine whether the transverse axis is horizontal or vertical.
Step 3.           Find the vertices.
Step 4.           Sketch the rectangle centered at the origin intersecting one axis at and the other at
Step 5.           Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the diagonals of the rectangle.
Step 6.           Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.

Sometimes the equation for a hyperbola needs to be first placed in standard form before we graph it.
  EXAMPLE 11.28

Graph
     Solution

To write the equation in standard form, divide
each term by 64 to make the equation equal to 1.

Simplify.

Since the y2-term is positive, the transverse axis is

vertical.

Since             then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  11.4 · Hyperbolas 1091

The vertices are on the y-axis,

Since  then

Sketch the rectangle intersecting the x-axis at
                   and the y-axis at the vertices.

Sketch the asymptotes through the diagonals of the
rectangle.
Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.

TRY IT 11.55 Graph

TRY IT 11.56 Graph

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at                                                   the equations changes a bit as

Hyperbolas are not always centered at the origin. When a hyperbola is centered at
reflected in the table.

                    Standard Forms of the Equation a Hyperbola with Center

       Orientation               Transverse axis is horizontal.     Transverse axis is vertical.
                                       Opens left and right            Opens up and down

       Center

       Vertices a units to the left and right of the center a units above and below the center

       Rectangle                  Use a units left/right of center  Use a units above/below the center
                                 b units above/ below the center          b units left/right of center
1092 11 · Conics

          EXAMPLE 11.29
        How to Graph a Hyperbola with Center
        Graph

             Solution

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      11.4 · Hyperbolas 1093

TRY IT 11.57 Graph

TRY IT 11.58 Graph

We summarize the steps for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Graph a hyperbola centered at

Step 1.  Write the equation in standard form.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Determine whether the transverse axis is horizontal or vertical.
Step 4.
Step 5.  Find the center and a, b.
Step 6.
         Sketch the rectangle centered at      using a, b.

         Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the diagonals of the rectangle. Mark the vertices.

         Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.

Be careful as you identify the center. The standard equation has  and      with the center as

EXAMPLE 11.30

Graph
     Solution

Since the term is positive, the hyperbola                                  Center:
opens up and down.

Find the center,
1094 11 · Conics

          Find a, b.

           Sketch the rectangle that goes through the
           points 3 units above and below the center and
           2 units to the left/right of the center.
           Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the
           diagonals of the rectangle.
           Mark the vertices.
           Graph the branches.

               TRY IT 11.59 Graph
               TRY IT 11.60 Graph
        Again, sometimes we have to put the equation in standard form as our first step.
          EXAMPLE 11.31
        Write the equation in standard form and graph
             Solution
           To get to standard form, complete the squares.

           Divide each term by 36 to get the constant to be 1.

          Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.4 · Hyperbolas 1095

Since the term is positive, the hyperbola         Center:
opens left and right.
Find the center,

Find a, b.

Sketch the rectangle that goes through the
points 3 units to the left/right of the center
and 2 units above and below the center.
Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the
diagonals of the rectangle.
Mark the vertices.
Graph the branches.

TRY IT 11.61  Write the equation in standard form and  graph

    TRY IT 11.62  Write the equation in standard form and  graph

Identify Conic Sections by their Equations

Now that we have completed our study of the conic sections, we will take a look at the different equations and recognize
some ways to identify a conic by its equation. When we are given an equation to graph, it is helpful to identify the conic
so we know what next steps to take.

To identify a conic from its equation, it is easier if we put the variable terms on one side of the equation and the
constants on the other.

Conic      Characteristics of and terms                            Example

Parabola Either OR Only one variable is squared.

Circle     and terms have the same coefficients

Ellipse    and terms have the same sign, different coefficients

Hyperbola  and terms have different signs, different coefficients
1096 11 · Conics

EXAMPLE 11.32

Identify the graph of each equation as a circle, parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola.

                                                                                              

     Solution



The - and -terms have the same sign and different coefficients.                    Ellipse

                                                                                   Hyperbola

  The - and -terms have different signs and different coefficients.

                                                  Circle

  The - and -terms have the same coefficients.



Only one variable, , is squared.   Parabola

  TRY IT 11.63    Identify the graph of each equation as a circle, parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola.

                                                                                              

  TRY IT 11.64    Identify the graph of each equation as a circle, parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola.

                                                                                                     

  MEDIA
  Access these online resources for additional instructions and practice with hyperbolas.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 11.4 · Hyperbolas 1097

      Graph a Hyperbola with Center at the Origin (https://openstax.org/l/37ghyperborig)
      Graph a Hyperbola with Center not at the Origin (https://openstax.org/l/37ghyperbnorig)
      Graph a Hyperbola in General Form (https://openstax.org/l/37ghyperbgen)
      Identifying Conic Sections in General Form (https://openstax.org/l/37conicsgen)

        SECTION 11.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at
In the following exercises, graph.

147.   148.                                                     149.

150.   151.                                                     152.

153.   154.                                                     155.

156.   157.                                                     158.

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at
In the following exercises, graph.

159.   160.                                                     161.

162.   163.                                                     164.

165.   166.                                                     167.

168.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  graph.

169.                                                     170.

171.                                                     172.

173.

Identify the Graph of each Equation as a Circle, Parabola, Ellipse, or Hyperbola

In the following exercises, identify the type of graph.

174.                                                     175.                                    
                

       

Mixed Practice
In the following exercises, graph each equation.

176.   177.                                                       178.
                                                                181.
179.   180.

182.   183.
1098 11 · Conics

Writing Exercises

184. In your own words, define a hyperbola and write   185. Explain in your own words how to create and use
        the equation of a hyperbola centered at the            the rectangle that helps graph a hyperbola.
        origin in standard form. Draw a sketch of the
        hyperbola labeling the center, vertices, and   187. Explain in your own words, how to distinguish
        asymptotes.                                            the equation of an ellipse with the equation of a
                                                               hyperbola.
186. Compare and contrast the graphs of the

equations                        and

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

11.5 Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve a system of nonlinear equations using graphing
           Solve a system of nonlinear equations using substitution
           Solve a system of nonlinear equations using elimination
           Use a system of nonlinear equations to solve applications

BE PREPARED 11.13                Solve the system by graphing:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.2.

BE PREPARED 11.14                Solve the system by substitution:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.7.

BE PREPARED 11.15                Solve the system by elimination:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.9.

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Graphing

We learned how to solve systems of linear equations with two variables by graphing, substitution and elimination. We
will be using these same methods as we look at nonlinear systems of equations with two equations and two variables. A
system of nonlinear equations is a system where at least one of the equations is not linear.

For example each of the following systems is a system of nonlinear equations.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1099

System of Nonlinear Equations
A system of nonlinear equations is a system where at least one of the equations is not linear.

Just as with systems of linear equations, a solution of a nonlinear system is an ordered pair that makes both equations
true. In a nonlinear system, there may be more than one solution. We will see this as we solve a system of nonlinear
equations by graphing.

When we solved systems of linear equations, the solution of the system was the point of intersection of the two lines.
With systems of nonlinear equations, the graphs may be circles, parabolas or hyperbolas and there may be several
points of intersection, and so several solutions. Once you identify the graphs, visualize the different ways the graphs
could intersect and so how many solutions there might be.

To solve systems of nonlinear equations by graphing, we use basically the same steps as with systems of linear
equations modified slightly for nonlinear equations. The steps are listed below for reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of nonlinear equations by graphing.

Step 1.  Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.
Step 2.  Graph the first equation.
Step 3.  Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.
Step 4.  Determine whether the graphs intersect.
Step 5.  Identify the points of intersection.
Step 6.  Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

  EXAMPLE 11.33
Solve the system by graphing:

     Solution
  Identify each graph.

Sketch the possible options for
intersection of a parabola and a line.
1100 11 · Conics

Graph the line,
Slope-intercept form
Graph the parabola,

Identify the points of intersection.    The points of intersection appear to be  and

Check to make sure each solution makes
both equations true.

                                        The solutions are  and

       TRY IT 11.65 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 11.66 Solve the system by graphing:
To identify the graph of each equation, keep in mind the characteristics of the and terms of each conic.

  EXAMPLE 11.34
Solve the system by graphing:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1101

  Solution
Identify each graph.

Sketch the possible options for the
intersection of a circle and a line.

Graph the circle,

Center:          radius: 2

Graph the line,

It is a horizontal line.

Identify the points of intersection.   The point of intersection appears to be

Check to make sure the solution makes
both equations true.

                                                                              The solution is

       TRY IT 11.67 Solve the system by graphing:

       TRY IT 11.68 Solve the system by graphing:

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution

The graphing method works well when the points of intersection are integers and so easy to read off the graph. But
more often it is difficult to read the coordinates of the points of intersection. The substitution method is an algebraic
method that will work well in many situations. It works especially well when it is easy to solve one of the equations for
one of the variables.
The substitution method is very similar to the substitution method that we used for systems of linear equations. The
steps are listed below for reference.
1102 11 · Conics

...

     HOW TO

Solve a system of nonlinear equations by substitution.

Step 1.           Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.
Step 2.           Solve one of the equations for either variable.
Step 3.           Substitute the expression from Step 2 into the other equation.
Step 4.           Solve the resulting equation.
Step 5.           Substitute each solution in Step 4 into one of the original equations to find the other variable.
Step 6.           Write each solution as an ordered pair.
Step 7.           Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

  EXAMPLE 11.35
Solve the system by using substitution:

     Solution
  Identify each graph.

Sketch the possible options for intersection of an
ellipse and a line.

The equation                     is solved for y.

Substitute        for y in the first equation.

Solve the equation for x.

Substitute        and            into              to find y.

                                                               The ordered pairs are

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1103

Check both ordered pairs in both equations.

                                             The solutions are

       TRY IT 11.69 Solve the system by using substitution:

       TRY IT 11.70 Solve the system by using substitution:

So far, each system of nonlinear equations has had at least one solution. The next example will show another option.
  EXAMPLE 11.36

Solve the system by using substitution:
     Solution

  Identify each graph.

Sketch the possible options for
intersection of a parabola and a line

The equation  is solved for y.

Substitute    for y in the first equation.

Solve the equation for x.
1104 11 · Conics

This doesn't factor easily, so we can
check the discriminant.

                                             The discriminant is negative, so there is no real solution.
                                             The system has no solution.

TRY IT 11.71 Solve the system by using substitution:

TRY IT 11.72 Solve the system by using substitution:

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination

When we studied systems of linear equations, we used the method of elimination to solve the system. We can also use
elimination to solve systems of nonlinear equations. It works well when the equations have both variables squared.
When using elimination, we try to make the coefficients of one variable to be opposites, so when we add the equations
together, that variable is eliminated.

The elimination method is very similar to the elimination method that we used for systems of linear equations. The steps
are listed for reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve a system of equations by elimination.

Step 1.           Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.
Step 2.           Write both equations in standard form.
Step 3.           Make the coefficients of one variable opposites.
                  Decide which variable you will eliminate.
Step 4.           Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.
Step 5.           Add the equations resulting from Step 3 to eliminate one variable.
Step 6.           Solve for the remaining variable.
Step 7.           Substitute each solution from Step 5 into one of the original equations. Then solve for the other variable.
Step 8.           Write each solution as an ordered pair.
                  Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

  EXAMPLE 11.37
Solve the system by elimination:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1105

  Solution
Identify each graph.

Sketch the possible options for
intersection of a circle and a parabola.

Both equations are in standard form.
To get opposite coefficients of
we will multiply the second equation by
Simplify.

Add the two equations to eliminate

Solve for y.

Substitute  and       into one of

the original equations. Then solve for x.

                                               The ordered pairs are

Write each solution as an ordered pair.    The solutions are          and

Check that each ordered pair is a
solution to both original equations.

We will leave the checks for each of
the four solutions to you.

TRY IT 11.73 Solve the system by elimination:
1106 11 · Conics

               TRY IT 11.74 Solve the system by elimination:
        There are also four options when we consider a circle and a hyperbola.

          EXAMPLE 11.38
        Solve the system by elimination:

             Solution
          Identify each graph.

          Sketch the possible options for intersection
          of a circle and hyperbola.

          Both equations are in standard form.
          The coefficients of are opposite, so we
          will add the equations.
          Simplify.

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1107

Substitute       and   into one of the

original equations. Then solve for y.

Write each solution as an ordered pair.        The ordered pairs are
                                                                            and

Check that the ordered pair is a solution to   The solutions are
both original equations.                                                 and

We will leave the checks for each of the four
solutions to you.

TRY IT 11.75 Solve the system by elimination:

TRY IT 11.76 Solve the system by elimination:

Use a System of Nonlinear Equations to Solve Applications

Systems of nonlinear equations can be used to model and solve many applications. We will look at an everyday
geometric situation as our example.

EXAMPLE 11.39

The difference of the squares of two numbers is 15. The sum of the numbers is 5. Find the numbers.

Solution

Identify what we are looking for.              Two different numbers.

Define the variables.                          first number
                                               second number

Translate the information into a system of
equations.

First sentence.                                The difference of the squares of two numbers is 15.

Second sentence.                               The sum of the numbers is 5.
1108 11 · Conics

          Solve the system by substitution
          Solve the second equation for x.
          Substitute x into the first equation.

          Expand and simplify.

Solve for y.
Substitute back into the second equation.

                                                 The numbers are 1 and 4.

TRY IT 11.77           The difference of the squares of two numbers is  The sum of the numbers is 10. Find the
                       numbers.

TRY IT 11.78           The difference of the squares of two numbers is 35. The sum of the numbers is  Find the
                       numbers.

EXAMPLE 11.40

Myra purchased a small 25" TV for her kitchen. The size of a TV is measured on the diagonal of the screen. The screen
also has an area of 300 square inches. What are the length and width of the TV screen?

Solution

Identify what we are looking for.                The length and width of the rectangle

Define the variables.                            Let width of the rectangle
                                                            length of the rectangle

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1109

Draw a diagram to help visualize the situation.

Translate the information into a system of                      Area is 300 square inches.
equations.                                       The diagonal of the right triangle is 25 inches.

                                                 The area of the rectangle is 300 square inches.

Solve the system using substitution.
Solve the second equation for x.
Substitute x into the first equation.

Simplify.
Multiply by to clear the fractions.
Put in standard form.
Solve by factoring.

Since y is a side of the rectangle, we discard
the negative values.

Substitute back into the second equation.
1110 11 · Conics

                                       If the length is 15 inches, the width is 20 inches.
                                       If the length is 20 inches, the width is 15 inches.

      TRY IT 11.79  Edgar purchased a small 20" TV for his garage. The size of a TV is measured on the diagonal of
                    the screen. The screen also has an area of 192 square inches. What are the length and width of
                    the TV screen?

      TRY IT 11.80  The Harper family purchased a small microwave for their family room. The diagonal of the door
                    measures 15 inches. The door also has an area of 108 square inches. What are the length and
                    width of the microwave door?

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instructions and practice with solving nonlinear equations.

      Nonlinear Systems of Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37nonsyseq)
      Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations (https://openstax.org/l/37nonsyseq2)
      Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations by Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/37nonsyselim)
      System of Nonlinear Equations - Area and Perimeter Application (https://openstax.org/l/37nonsysapps)

        SECTION 11.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Graphing
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using graphing.

188.                             189.  190.

191.                             192.  193.

194.                             195.  196.

197.                             198.  199.

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using substitution.

200.                             201.  202.

203.                             204.  205.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 11.5 · Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations 1111

206.                             207.                        208.

209.                             210.                        211.

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using elimination.

212.                             213.                        214.

215.                             216.                        217.

218.                             219.                        220.

221.                             222.                        223.

224.                             225.                        226.

227.

Use a System of Nonlinear Equations to Solve Applications

In the following exercises, solve the problem using a system of equations.

228. The sum of two numbers is   and the product             229. The sum of two numbers is 11 and the product is
        is 8. Find the numbers.                                             Find the numbers.

230. The sum of the squares of two numbers is 65.            231. The sum of the squares of two numbers is 113.
        The difference of the numbers is 3. Find the                 The difference of the numbers is 1. Find the
        numbers.                                                     numbers.

232. The difference of the squares of two numbers is         233. The difference of the squares of two numbers is
        15. The difference of twice the square of the first          20. The difference of the square of the first
        number and the square of the second number is                number and twice the square of the second
        30. Find the numbers.                                        number is 4. Find the numbers.

234. The perimeter of a rectangle is 32 inches and its       235. The perimeter of a rectangle is 52 cm and its
        area is 63 square inches. Find the length and
        width of the rectangle.                              area is 165         Find the length and width of the

                                                             rectangle.

236. Dion purchased a new microwave. The diagonal            237. Jules purchased a microwave for his kitchen. The
        of the door measures 17 inches. The door also                diagonal of the front of the microwave measures
        has an area of 120 square inches. What are the               26 inches. The front also has an area of 240
        length and width of the microwave door?                      square inches. What are the length and width of
                                                                     the microwave?
1112 11 · Conics

238. Roman found a widescreen TV on sale, but isn't           239. Donnette found a widescreen TV at a garage
        sure if it will fit his entertainment center. The TV          sale, but isn't sure if it will fit her entertainment
        is 60". The size of a TV is measured on the                   center. The TV is 50". The size of a TV is measured
        diagonal of the screen and a widescreen has a                 on the diagonal of the screen and a widescreen
        length that is larger than the width. The screen              has a length that is larger than the width. The
        also has an area of 1728 square inches. His                   screen also has an area of 1200 square inches.
        entertainment center has an insert for the TV                 Her entertainment center has an insert for the
        with a length of 50 inches and width of 40                    TV with a length of 38 inches and width of 27
        inches. What are the length and width of the TV               inches. What are the length and width of the TV
        screen and will it fit Roman's entertainment                  screen and will it fit Donnette's entertainment
        center?                                                       center?

Writing Exercises

240. In your own words, explain the advantages and            241. Explain in your own words how to solve a system
        disadvantages of solving a system of equations                of equations using substitution.
        by graphing.
                                                              243. A circle and a parabola can intersect in ways that
242. Explain in your own words how to solve a system                  would result in 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 solutions. Draw a
        of equations using elimination.                               sketch of each of the possibilities.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             11 · Chapter Review 1113

Chapter Review

Key Terms

circle A circle is all points in a plane that are a fixed distance from a fixed point in the plane.
ellipse An ellipse is all points in a plane where the sum of the distances from two fixed points is constant.
hyperbola A hyperbola is defined as all points in a plane where the difference of their distances from two fixed points

    is constant.
parabola A parabola is all points in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed point and a fixed line.
system of nonlinear equations A system of nonlinear equations is a system where at least one of the equations is not

    linear.

Key Concepts

11.1 Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles

· Distance Formula: The distance d between the two points        and  is

· Midpoint Formula: The midpoint of the line segment whose endpoints are the two points      and                           is

To find the midpoint of a line segment, we find the average of the x-coordinates and the average of the

y-coordinates of the endpoints.

· Circle: A circle is all points in a plane that are a fixed distance from a fixed point in the plane. The given point is

called the center,  and the fixed distance is called the radius, r, of the circle.

· Standard Form of the Equation a Circle: The standard form of the equation of a circle with center,     and

radius, r, is

· General Form of the Equation of a Circle: The general form of the equation of a circle is

11.2 Parabolas

  · Parabola: A parabola is all points in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed point and a fixed line. The fixed
      point is called the focus, and the fixed line is called the directrix of the parabola.

                                                                           Vertical Parabolas

                                      General form                    Standard form

                    Orientation       up;                  down       up;           down
                    Axis of symmetry

                    Vertex            Substitute           and

                    y- intercept      solve for y.
                    x-intercepts
                                      Let                             Let
                                                                      Let
                                      Let
1114 11 · Chapter Review

· How to graph vertical parabolas                  or                      using properties.

Step 1. Determine whether the parabola opens upward or downward.

Step 2. Find the axis of symmetry.

Step 3. Find the vertex.

Step 4. Find the y-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the y-intercept across the axis of symmetry.

Step 5. Find the x-intercepts.

Step 6. Graph the parabola.

                                                   Horizontal Parabolas    Standard form
                                                      General form

                                 Orientation       right;          left    right;  left
                                 Axis of symmetry

                                 Vertex            Substitute      and

                                 y-intercepts      solve for x.
                                 x-intercept
                                                   Let                     Let
                                                                           Let
                                                   Let

· How to graph horizontal parabolas                            or          using properties.

Step 1. Determine whether the parabola opens to the left or to the right.

Step 2. Find the axis of symmetry.

Step 3. Find the vertex.

Step 4. Find the x-intercept. Find the point symmetric to the x-intercept across the axis of symmetry.

Step 5. Find the y-intercepts.

Step 6. Graph the parabola.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                        11 · Chapter Review 1115

11.3 Ellipses

  · Ellipse: An ellipse is all points in a plane where the sum of the distances from two fixed points is constant. Each of
      the fixed points is called a focus of the ellipse.

If we draw a line through the foci intersects the ellipse in two points--each is called a vertex of the ellipse.

The segment connecting the vertices is called the major axis.

The midpoint of the segment is called the center of the ellipse.

A segment perpendicular to the major axis that passes through the center and intersects the ellipse in two points is

called the minor axis.

· Standard Form of the Equation an Ellipse with Center            The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with

center  is

The x-intercepts are    and

The y-intercepts are    and

· How to an Ellipse with Center

Step 1. Write the equation in standard form.

Step 2. Determine whether the major axis is horizontal or vertical.

Step 3. Find the endpoints of the major axis.

Step 4. Find the endpoints of the minor axis

Step 5. Sketch the ellipse.

· Standard Form of the Equation an Ellipse with Center            The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with

center  is

When    the major axis is horizontal so the distance from the center to the vertex is a.
When    the major axis is vertical so the distance from the center to the vertex is b.

11.4 Hyperbolas

  · Hyperbola: A hyperbola is all points in a plane where the difference of their distances from two fixed points is

      constant.

Each of the fixed points is called a focus of the hyperbola.
The line through the foci, is called the transverse axis.
The two points where the transverse axis intersects the hyperbola are each a vertex of the hyperbola.
The midpoint of the segment joining the foci is called the center of the hyperbola.
The line perpendicular to the transverse axis that passes through the center is called the conjugate axis.
Each piece of the graph is called a branch of the hyperbola.
1116 11 · Chapter Review

                                 Standard Forms of the Equation a Hyperbola with Center

                          Orientation   Transverse axis on the x-axis.  Transverse axis on the y-axis.
                                              Opens left and right            Opens up and down

                          Vertices

                          x-intercepts                                       none

                          y-intercepts            none                       ,

                          Rectangle     Use                             Use

                          asymptotes

· How to graph a hyperbola centered at
    Step 1. Write the equation in standard form.
    Step 2. Determine whether the transverse axis is horizontal or vertical.
    Step 3. Find the vertices.
    Step 4. Sketch the rectangle centered at the origin intersecting one axis at and the other at
    Step 5. Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the diagonals of the rectangle.
    Step 6. Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.

                                       Standard Forms of the Equation a Hyperbola with Center

Orientation                             Transverse axis is horizontal.  Transverse axis is vertical.
                                              Opens left and right         Opens up and down

Center

Vertices a units to the left and right of the center a units above and below the center

Rectangle                            Use a units left/right of center   Use a units above/below the center
                                     b units above/below the center           b units left/right of center

· How to graph a hyperbola centered at
    Step 1. Write the equation in standard form.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         11 · Exercises 1117

      Step 2.  Determine whether the transverse axis is horizontal or vertical.
      Step 3.
      Step 4.  Find the center and
      Step 5.
      Step 6.  Sketch the rectangle centered at  using

               Sketch the asymptotes--the lines through the diagonals of the rectangle. Mark the vertices.

               Draw the two branches of the hyperbola.

               Conic                      Characteristics of and terms                            Example

               Parabola Either OR Only one variable is squared.

               Circle               and terms have the same coefficients

               Ellipse              and terms have the same sign, different coefficients

               Hyperbola            and terms have different signs, different coefficients

11.5 Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations

  · How to solve a system of nonlinear equations by graphing.
      Step 1. Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.
      Step 2. Graph the first equation.
      Step 3. Graph the second equation on the same rectangular coordinate system.
      Step 4. Determine whether the graphs intersect.
      Step 5. Identify the points of intersection.
      Step 6. Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

  · How to solve a system of nonlinear equations by substitution.
      Step 1. Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.

      Step 2.  Solve one of the equations for either variable.
      Step 3.  Substitute the expression from Step 2 into the other equation.
      Step 4.  Solve the resulting equation.
      Step 5.  Substitute each solution in Step 4 into one of the original equations to find the other variable.
      Step 6.  Write each solution as an ordered pair.
      Step 7.  Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

  · How to solve a system of equations by elimination.
      Step 1. Identify the graph of each equation. Sketch the possible options for intersection.
      Step 2. Write both equations in standard form.
      Step 3. Make the coefficients of one variable opposites.
                  Decide which variable you will eliminate.
                  Multiply one or both equations so that the coefficients of that variable are opposites.
      Step 4. Add the equations resulting from Step 3 to eliminate one variable.
      Step 5. Solve for the remaining variable.
      Step 6. Substitute each solution from Step 5 into one of the original equations. Then solve for the other variable.
      Step 7. Write each solution as an ordered pair.
      Step 8. Check that each ordered pair is a solution to both original equations.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Distance and Midpoint Formulas; Circles

Use the Distance Formula

In the following exercises, find the distance between the points. Round to the nearest tenth if needed.

244.           and                  245.         and    246.                     and
1118 11 · Exercises

247.       and

Use the Midpoint Formula

In the following exercises, find the midpoint of the line segments whose endpoints are given.

248.            and              249.  and                                250.            and

251.       and

Write the Equation of a Circle in Standard Form
In the following exercises, write the standard form of the equation of the circle with the given information.
252. radius is 15 and center is 253. radius is and center is 254. radius is 9 and center is

255. radius is 7 and center is   256. center is          and a point      257. center is          and a point

                                       on the circle is                         on the circle is

Graph a Circle

In the following exercises,  find the center and radius, then  graph each circle.

258.                             259.                                     260.

261.                             262.                                     263.

Parabolas

Graph Vertical Parabolas

In the following exercises, graph each equation by using its properties.

264.                                                     265.

266.                                                     267.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form, then  use properties of the standard form to graph
the equation.

268.                                                     269.

270.                                                     271.

Graph Horizontal Parabolas

In the following exercises, graph each equation by using its properties.

272.                                                     273.

274.                                                     275.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form, then  use properties of the standard form to graph
the equation.

276.                                                     277.

278.                                                     279.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  11 · Exercises 1119

Solve Applications with Parabolas

In the following exercises, create the equation of the parabolic arch formed in the foundation of the bridge shown. Give
the answer in standard form.

280.                                             281.

Ellipses
Graph an Ellipse with Center at the Origin
In the following exercises, graph each ellipse.

282.                                             283.

284.                                             285.

Find the Equation of an Ellipse with Center at the Origin

In the following exercises, find the equation of the ellipse shown in the graph.

286.                                             287.

Graph an Ellipse with Center Not at the Origin
In the following exercises, graph each ellipse.

288.                                             289.

290.                                             291.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  graph.

292.                                             293.

294.                                             295.
1120 11 · Exercises

Solve Applications with Ellipses

In the following exercises, write the equation of the ellipse described.

296. A comet moves in an elliptical orbit around a
        sun. The closest the comet gets to the sun is
        approximately 10 AU and the furthest is
        approximately 90 AU. The sun is one of the foci
        of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at
        the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit
        will look like the figure below. Use the graph to
        write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
        comet.

Hyperbolas
Graph a Hyperbola with Center at
In the following exercises, graph.

297.                                                     298.

299.                                                     300.

Graph a Hyperbola with Center at
In the following exercises, graph.

301.                                                     302.

303.                                                     304.

In the following exercises,  write the equation in standard form and  graph.

305.                                                     306.

307.                                                     308.

Identify the Graph of each Equation as a Circle, Parabola, Ellipse, or Hyperbola

In the following exercises, identify the type of graph.

309.                                                     310.

                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         11 · Exercises 1121

Solve Systems of Nonlinear Equations
Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Graphing
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using graphing.

311.                                                    312.

313.                                                    314.

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using substitution.

315.                                                    316.

317.                                                    318.

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination
In the following exercises, solve the system of equations by using elimination.

319.                                                    320.

321.                                                    322.

Use a System of Nonlinear Equations to Solve Applications

In the following exercises, solve the problem using a system of equations.

323. The sum of the squares of two numbers is 25.       324. The difference of the squares of two numbers is
        The difference of the numbers is 1. Find the            45. The difference of the square of the first
        numbers.                                                number and twice the square of the second
                                                                number is 9. Find the numbers.

325. The perimeter of a rectangle is 58 meters and its  326. Colton purchased a larger microwave for his
        area is 210 square meters. Find the length and          kitchen. The diagonal of the front of the
        width of the rectangle.                                 microwave measures 34 inches. The front also
                                                                has an area of 480 square inches. What are the
                                                                length and width of the microwave?

Practice Test

In the following exercises, find the distance between the points and the midpoint of the line segment with the given
endpoints. Round to the nearest tenth as needed.

327.  and                                               328.  and

In the following exercises, write the standard form of the equation of the circle with the given information.

329. radius is 11 and center is                         330. radius is 12 and center is
1122 11 · Exercises

331. center is       and a point on the circle is      332. Find the equation of the ellipse shown in the
                                                               graph.

In the following exercises,  identify the type of graph of each equation as a circle, parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola, and 
graph the equation.

333.                             334.                        335.

336.                             337.                        338.

339.

In the following exercises,  identify the type of graph of each equation as a circle, parabola, ellipse, or hyperbola, 
write the equation in standard form, and  graph the equation.

340.                                                   341.

342.                                                   343.

344.                                                   345. Solve the nonlinear system of equations by

                                                             graphing:

346. Solve the nonlinear system of equations using     347. Solve the nonlinear system of equations using
        substitution:                                          elimination:

348. Create the equation of the parabolic arch formed  349. A comet moves in an elliptical orbit around a
                                                               sun. The closest the comet gets to the sun is
      in the foundation of the bridge shown. Give the          approximately 20 AU and the furthest is
                                                               approximately 70 AU. The sun is one of the foci
      answer in                  form.                         of the elliptical orbit. Letting the ellipse center at
                                                               the origin and labeling the axes in AU, the orbit
                                                               will look like the figure below. Use the graph to
                                                               write an equation for the elliptical orbit of the
                                                               comet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      11 · Exercises 1123

350. The sum of two numbers is 22 and the product is  351. For her birthday, Olive's grandparents bought
                 Find the numbers.                            her a new widescreen TV. Before opening it she
                                                              wants to make sure it will fit her entertainment
                                                              center. The TV is 55". The size of a TV is measured
                                                              on the diagonal of the screen and a widescreen
                                                              has a length that is larger than the width. The
                                                              screen also has an area of 1452 square inches.
                                                              Her entertainment center has an insert for the
                                                              TV with a length of 50 inches and width of 40
                                                              inches. What are the length and width of the TV
                                                              screen and will it fit Olive's entertainment center?
1124 11 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        12 · Introduction 1125

12  SEQUENCES, SERIES AND BINOMIAL
    THEOREM

Figure 12.1 Cryptographers protect private data by encrypting it; this means they convert the data into a code that
hackers and thieves cannot easily break. (credit: "joffi"/pixabay)

Chapter Outline

  12.1 Sequences
  12.2 Arithmetic Sequences
  12.3 Geometric Sequences and Series
  12.4 Binomial Theorem

      Introduction

A strange charge suddenly appears on your credit card. But your card is in your wallet--it's not even lost or stolen. Sadly,
you may have been a victim of cyber crime. In this day and age, most transactions take advantage of the benefit of
computers in some way. Cyber crime is any type of crime that uses a computer or computer network. Thankfully, many
people are working to prevent cyber crime. Sometimes known as cryptographers, these people develop complex
patterns in computer codes that block access to would-be thieves as well as write codes to intercept and decode
information from them so that they may be identified. In this chapter, you will explore basic sequences and series related
to those used by computer programmers to prevent cyber crime.

12.1 Sequences

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Write the first few terms of a sequence
           Find a formula for the general term (nth term) of a sequence
           Use factorial notation
           Find the partial sum
           Use summation notation to write a sum

    BE PREPARED 12.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                      Evaluate  for the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

    BE PREPARED 12.2  Evaluate  for the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.
1126 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

BE PREPARED 12.3                 If               find

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.49.

Write the First Few Terms of a Sequence

Let's look at the function           and evaluate it for just the counting numbers.

                                                           1  2

                                                           2  4

                                                           3  6

                                                           4  8

                                                           5 10

                                                           ......

If we list the function values in order as 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10, ... we have a sequence. A sequence is a function whose domain
is the counting numbers.

  Sequences

  A sequence is a function whose domain is the counting numbers.

A sequence can also be seen as an ordered list of numbers and each number in the list is a term. A sequence may have
an infinite number of terms or a finite number of terms. Our sequence has three dots (ellipsis) at the end which indicates
the list never ends. If the domain is the set of all counting numbers, then the sequence is an infinite sequence. Its
domain is all counting numbers and there is an infinite number of counting numbers.

If we limit the domain to a finite number of counting numbers, then the sequence is a finite sequence. If we use only
the first four counting numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4 our sequence would be the finite sequence,

Often when working with sequences we do not want to write out all the terms. We want more compact way to show how

each term is defined. When we worked with functions, we wrote      and we said the expression was the rule

that defined values in the range. While a sequence is a function, we do not use the usual function notation. Instead of

writing the function as              we would write it as        The is the nth term of the sequence, the term in the

nth position where n is a value in the domain. The formula for writing the nth term of the sequence is called the general

term or formula of the sequence.

General Term of a Sequence

The general term of the sequence is found from the formula for writing the nth term of the sequence. The nth term
of the sequence, an, is the term in the nth position where n is a value in the domain.

When we are given the general term of the sequence, we can find the terms by replacing n with the counting numbers in
order. For

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    12.1 · Sequences 1127

                                           1  2                3  4  5

                                                                                2n

To find the values of a sequence, we substitute in the counting numbers in order into the general term of the sequence.

EXAMPLE 12.1

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is     in order.

     Solution
We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 into the formula,

The first five terms of the sequence are 1, 5, 9, 13, and 17.

TRY IT 12.1 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

TRY IT 12.2 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

For some sequences, the variable is an exponent.                     in order.

  EXAMPLE 12.2

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is
     Solution

We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 into the formula,

The first five terms of the sequence are 3, 5, 9, 17, and 33.

TRY IT 12.3 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

TRY IT 12.4 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

It is not uncommon to see the expressions     or               in the general term for a sequence. If we evaluate each of

these expressions for a few values, we see that this expression alternates the sign for the terms.
1128 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

                                                  1  2            3              4  5

The terms in the next example will alternate signs as a result of the powers of

EXAMPLE 12.3

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is     in order.

     Solution
We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 into the formula,

The first five terms of the sequence are                and

       TRY IT 12.5 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

       TRY IT 12.6 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

Find a Formula for the General Term (nth Term) of a Sequence

Sometimes we have a few terms of a sequence and it would be helpful to know the general term or nth term. To find the
general term, we look for patterns in the terms. Often the patterns involve multiples or powers. We also look for a
pattern in the signs of the terms.

  EXAMPLE 12.4
Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

     Solution

We look for a pattern in the terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          12.1 · Sequences 1129

  The numbers are all multiples of 4.
                                                        The general term of the sequence is

       TRY IT 12.7 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

       TRY IT 12.8 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

  EXAMPLE 12.5
Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

     Solution

  We look for a pattern in the terms.
  The numbers are powers of 2. The signs are
  alternating, with even negative.

                                                                     The general term of the sequence is

       TRY IT 12.9 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

       TRY IT 12.10 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown

  EXAMPLE 12.6
Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.
1130 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

             Solution

We look for a pattern in the terms.
The numerators are all 1.
The denominators are powers of 3. The general term of the sequence is

TRY IT 12.11 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

TRY IT 12.12 Find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

Use Factorial Notation

Sequences often have terms that are products of consecutive integers. We indicate these products with a special

notation called factorial notation. For example, , read 5 factorial, means  The exclamation point is not

punctuation here; it indicates the factorial notation.

Factorial Notation

If n is a positive integer, then is

We define as 1, so

The values of for the first 5 positive integers are shown.

EXAMPLE 12.7

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is       .

     Solution                                               in order.
We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 into the formula,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               12.1 · Sequences 1131

The first five terms of the sequence are

TRY IT 12.13 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

TRY IT 12.14 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

When there is a fraction with factorials in the numerator and denominator, we line up the factors vertically to make our
calculations easier.

EXAMPLE 12.8

Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

     Solution                                                     in order.
We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 into the formula,

The first five terms of the sequence are 2, 6, 12, 20, and 30.

TRY IT 12.15 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

TRY IT 12.16 Write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is

Find the Partial Sum

Sometimes in applications, rather than just list the terms, it is important for us to add the terms of a sequence. Rather
than just connect the terms with plus signs, we can use summation notation.

For example,  can be written as                                 We read this as "the sum of a sub i from i equals one to

five." The symbol means to add and the i is the index of summation. The 1 tells us where to start (initial value) and
the 5 tells us where to end (terminal value).
1132 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

          Summation Notation
          The sum of the first n terms of a sequence whose nth term is is written in summation notation as:

          The i is the index of summation and the 1 tells us where to start and the n tells us where to end.
        When we add a finite number of terms, we call the sum a partial sum.

          EXAMPLE 12.9
        Expand the partial sum and find its value:

             Solution

          We substitute the values 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in order.
          Simplify.
          Add.

               TRY IT 12.17 Expand the partial sum and find its value:
               TRY IT 12.18 Expand the partial sum and find its value:
       The index does not always have to be i we can use any letter, but i and k are commonly used. The index does not have to
        start with 1 either--it can start and end with any positive integer.
          EXAMPLE 12.10
        Expand the partial sum and find its value:

         Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             12.1 · Sequences 1133

  Solution

We substitute the values 0, 1, 2, 3, in order.
Evaluate the factorials.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 12.19 Expand the partial sum and find its value:

       TRY IT 12.20 Expand the partial sum and find its value:

Use Summation Notation to Write a Sum

In the last two examples, we went from summation notation to writing out the sum. Now we will start with a sum and
change it to summation notation. This is very similar to finding the general term of a sequence. We will need to look at
the terms and find a pattern. Often the patterns involve multiples or powers.

  EXAMPLE 12.11
Write the sum using summation notation:

     Solution

We look for a pattern in the terms.                  Terms:
The numerators are all one.                     Pattern:
1134 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

The denominators are the counting numbers         The sum written in summation notation is
from one to five.

       TRY IT 12.21 Write the sum using summation notation:
       TRY IT 12.22 Write the sum using summation notation:
When the terms of a sum have negative coefficients, we must carefully analyze the pattern of the signs.
  EXAMPLE 12.12
Write the sum using summation notation:
     Solution

  We look for a pattern in the terms.
  The signs of the terms alternate,
  and the odd terms are negative.
  The numbers are the cubes of the
  counting numbers from one to five.

                                                          The sum written in summation notation is

       TRY IT 12.23 Write each sum using summation notation:
       TRY IT 12.24 Write each sum using summation notation:
       MEDIA
      Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with sequences.
      Series and Sequences-Finding Patterns (https://openstax.org/l/37serseqfindpat)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     12.1 · Sequences 1135

        SECTION 12.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Write the First Few Terms of a Sequence

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is given.

1.                                       2.

3.                                       4.

5.                                       6.

7.                                       8.

9.                                       10.

11.                                      12.

13.                                      14.

15.                                      16.

17.                                      18.

Find a Formula for the General Term (nth Term) of a Sequence

In the following exercises, find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

19.                                      20.

21.                                      22.

23.                                      24.

25.                                      26.

27.                                      28.

29.                                      30.

31.                                      32.

33.                                      34.

35.                                      36.

Use Factorial Notation

In the following exercises, using factorial notation, write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is given.

37.                                      38.

39.                                      40.

41.                                      42.

43.                                      44.

45.                                      46.

47.                                      48.
1136 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Find the Partial Sum
In the following exercises, expand the partial sum and find its value.

49.                                                    50.

51.                                                    52.

53.                                                    54.

55.                                                    56.

57.                                                    58.

59.                                                    60.

Use Summation Notation to write a Sum

In the following exercises, write each sum using summation notation.

61.                                                    62.

63.                                                    64.

65.                                                    66.

67.                                                    68.

69.                                                    70.

71.                                                    72.

Writing Exercises

73. In your own words, explain how to write the terms  74. Which terms of the sequence are negative when
      of a sequence when you know the formula. Show          the nth term of the sequence is
      an example to illustrate your explanation.

75. In your own words, explain what is meant by        76. Explain what each part of the notation
      Show some examples to illustrate your                  means.
      explanation.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 12.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1137

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help?Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no - I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

12.2 Arithmetic Sequences

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine if a sequence is arithmetic
           Find the general term ( th term) of an arithmetic sequence
           Find the sum of the first terms of an arithmetic sequence

BE PREPARED 12.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                               Evaluate    for the integers 1, 2, 3, and 4.

                               If you missed this problem, review Example 1.6.

BE PREPARED 12.5               Solve the system of equations:
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 4.9.

BE PREPARED 12.6               If          find

                               If you missed this problem, review Example 3.49.

Determine if a Sequence is Arithmetic

The last section introduced sequences and now we will look at two specific types of sequences that each have special
properties. In this section we will look at arithmetic sequences and in the next section, geometric sequences.

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between consecutive terms is constant. The difference

between consecutive terms in an arithmetic sequence,  is d, the common difference, for n greater than or

equal to two.

Arithmetic Sequence

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between consecutive terms is always the same.

The difference between consecutive terms,             is d, the common difference, for n greater than or equal to
two.

In each of these sequences, the difference between consecutive terms is constant, and so the sequence is arithmetic.
1138 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

          EXAMPLE 12.13

        Determine if each sequence is arithmetic. If so, indicate the common difference.

    
    
    

             Solution
        To determine if the sequence is arithmetic, we find the difference of the consecutive terms shown.

    

  Find the difference of
  the consecutive terms.

                                       The sequence is arithmetic. The common difference is



  Find the difference of
  the consecutive terms.

                                       The sequence is not arithmetic as all the differences between
                                       the consecutive terms are not the same.
                                       There is no common difference.



Find the difference of
the consecutive terms.

                                    The sequence is arithmetic. The common difference is

TRY IT 12.25  Determine if each sequence is arithmetic. If so, indicate the common difference.
TRY IT 12.26
                                                                                             

              Determine if each sequence is arithmetic. If so, indicate the common difference.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         12.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1139

                                                                       

If we know the first term, and the common difference, d, we can list a finite number of terms of the sequence.

EXAMPLE 12.14

Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 5 and the common difference is

     Solution
We start with the first term and add the common difference. Then we add the common difference to that result to get
the next term, and so on.

The sequence is

TRY IT 12.27     Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 7 and the common difference
                 is

TRY IT 12.28     Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 11 and the common difference
                 is

Find the General Term (nth Term) of an Arithmetic Sequence

Just as we found a formula for the general term of a sequence, we can also find a formula for the general term of an
arithmetic sequence.

Let's write the first few terms of a sequence where the first term is  and the common difference is d. We will then look
for a pattern.

As we look for a pattern we see that each term starts with .

The first term adds 0d to the , the second term adds 1d, the third term adds 2d, the fourth term adds 3d, and the fifth
term adds 4d. The number of ds that were added to is one less than the number of the term. This leads us to the
following

  General Term (nth term) of an Arithmetic Sequence
  The general term of an arithmetic sequence with first term and the common difference d is

We will use this formula in the next example to find the 15th term of a sequence.
1140 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

EXAMPLE 12.15

Find the fifteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 3 and the common difference is 6.

Solution

To find the fifteenth term,      use the
formula with

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

TRY IT 12.29            Find the twenty-seventh term of a sequence where the first term is 7 and the common
                        difference is 9.

TRY IT 12.30            Find the eighteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 13 and the common difference
                        is .

Sometimes we do not know the first term and we must use other given information to find it before we find the
requested term.

EXAMPLE 12.16

Find the twelfth term of a sequence where the seventh term is 10 and the common difference is    . Give the formula for
the general term.

Solution

To first find the first term,    use the
formula with

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

Find the twelfth term,           using the
formula with

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     12.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1141

                                             The twelfth term of the sequence is 0,

To find the general term, substitute
the values into the formula.

                                             The general term is

TRY IT 12.31  Find the eleventh term of a sequence where the ninth term is 8 and the common difference is
                   Give the formula for the general term.

TRY IT 12.32  Find the nineteenth term of a sequence where the fifth term is 1 and the common difference is
                   Give the formula for the general term.

Sometimes the information given leads us to two equations in two unknowns. We then use our methods for solving
systems of equations to find the values needed.

  EXAMPLE 12.17

Find the first term and common difference of a sequence where the fifth term is 19 and the eleventh term is 37. Give the
formula for the general term.

     Solution
Since we know two terms, we can make a system of equations using the formula for the general term.

We know the value of and so we will use      and

Substitute in the values,  and

Simplify.

Prepare to eliminate the   term by multiplying the top equation
by
Add the equations.

Substituting  back into the first equation.
Solve for
1142 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Use the formula with             and

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

                                                                                       The first term is
                                                                                 The common difference is

                                                                               The general term of the sequence is

TRY IT 12.33          Find the first term and common difference of a sequence where the fourth term is 17 and the
                      thirteenth term is 53. Give the formula for the general term.

TRY IT 12.34          Find the first term and common difference of a sequence where the third term is 2 and the

                      twelfth term is             Give the formula for the general term.

Find the Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence

As with the general sequences, it is often useful to find the sum of an arithmetic sequence. The sum, of the first

terms of any arithmetic sequence is written as    To find the sum by merely adding all the

terms can be tedious. So we can also develop a formula to find the sum of a sequence using the first and last term of the

sequence.

We can develop this new formula by first writing the sum by starting with the first term,    and keep adding a d to get
the next term as:

We can also reverse the order of the terms and write the sum by starting with  and keep subtracting d to get the next
term as

If we add these two expressions for the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence, we can derive a formula for
the sum of the first n terms of any arithmetic series.

Because there are n sums of                       on the right side of the equation, we rewrite the right side as
We divide by two to solve for

This gives us a general formula for the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                12.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1143

Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence
The sum, of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence is

where is the first term and is the nth term.

We apply this formula in the next example where the first few terms of the sequence are given.

EXAMPLE 12.18

Find the sum of the first 30 terms of the arithmetic sequence: 8, 13, 18, 23, 28, ...

     Solution                                 We know       ,                          and      but we need to find in
To find the sum, we will use the formula
order to use the sum formula.

Simplify.

use the sum formula.
Substitute in the values.
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 12.35 Find the sum of the first 30 terms of the arithmetic sequence: 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, ...

TRY IT 12.36 Find the sum of the first 30 terms of the arithmetic sequence: 7, 10, 13, 16, 19, ...

In the next example, we are given the general term for the sequence and are asked to find the sum of the first 50 terms.

EXAMPLE 12.19

Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose general term is

     Solution                                 We know          but we need to find and in order to
To find the sum, we will use the formula
use the sum formula.
1144 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Find by substituting

Find by substituting

Simplify.

Knowing                          and              use the sum formula.

Substitute in the values.
Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 12.37 Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose general term is

TRY IT 12.38 Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose general term is

In the next example we are given the sum in summation notation. To add all the terms would be tedious, so we extract
the information needed to use the formula to find the sum of the first n terms.

  EXAMPLE 12.20

Find the sum:                                     We know               but we need to find and in order to

     Solution
To find the sum, we will use the formula
use the sum formula.

Expand the summation notation.

Simplify.

Identify

Identify

Knowing                          and

use the sum formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     12.2 · Arithmetic Sequences 1145

Substitute in the values.
Simplify.
Simplify.

     TRY IT 12.39 Find the sum:

     TRY IT 12.40 Find the sum:

     MEDIA

     Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with arithmetic sequences

     Arithmetic Sequences (https://openstax.org/l/37ArithSequenc)
     Arithmetic Sequences: A Formula for the `n-th' Term (https://openstax.org/l/37AritSeqnthter)
     Arithmetic Series (https://openstax.org/l/37ArithSeries)

        SECTION 12.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine if a Sequence is Arithmetic

In the following exercises, determine if each sequence is arithmetic, and if so, indicate the common difference.

77.                                                      78.

79.                                                      80.

81.                                                      82.

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of each sequence with the given first term and common difference.

83.  and                                                 84.  and

85.  and                                                 86.  and

87.  and                                                 88.  and

Find the General Term (nth Term) of an Arithmetic Sequence

In the following exercises, find the term described using the information provided.

89. Find the twenty-first term of a sequence where       90. Find the twenty-third term of a sequence where
      the first term is three and the common difference        the first term is six and the common difference is
      is eight.                                                four.

91. Find the thirtieth term of a sequence where the      92. Find the fortieth term of a sequence where the
      first term is and the common difference is               first term is and the common difference is
      five.                                                    seven.
1146 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

93. Find the sixteenth term of a sequence where the         94. Find the fourteenth term of a sequence where the
      first term is 11 and the common difference is               first term is eight and the common difference is

95. Find the twentieth term of a sequence where the         96. Find the thirteenth term of a sequence where the
      fifth term is and the common difference is                  sixth term is and the common difference is
      Give the formula for the general term.                      Give the formula for the general term.

97. Find the eleventh term of a sequence where the          98. Find the fifteenth term of a sequence where the
      third term is 19 and the common difference is five.         tenth term is 17 and the common difference is
      Give the formula for the general term.                      seven. Give the formula for the general term.

99. Find the eighth term of a sequence where the            100. Find the fifteenth term of a sequence where the
      seventh term is and the common difference is                  tenth term is and the common difference is
            Give the formula for the general term.                        Give the formula for the general term.

In the following exercises, find the first term and common difference of the sequence with the given terms. Give the
formula for the general term.

101. The second term is 14 and the thirteenth term is       102. The third term is 18 and the fourteenth term is
        47.                                                         73.

103. The second term is 13 and the tenth term is            104. The third term is four and the tenth term is .

105. The fourth term is          and the fifteenth term is  106. The third term is  and the seventeenth term
        27.                                                         is 15.

Find the Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first 30 terms of each arithmetic sequence.

107.                                                        108.

109.                                                        110.

111.                                                        112.

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first 50 terms of the arithmetic sequence whose general term is given.

113.                                                        114.

115.                                                        116.

In the following exercises, find each sum.

117.                                                        118.

119.                                                        120.

121.                                                        122.

Writing Exercises                                           124. In your own words, explain how the first two
                                                                    terms are used to find the tenth term. Show an
123. In your own words, explain how to determine                    example to illustrate your explanation.
        whether a sequence is arithmetic.
                                                            126. In your own words, explain how to find the sum
125. In your own words, explain how to find the                     of the first terms of an arithmetic sequence
        general term of an arithmetic sequence.                     without adding all the terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                       12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1147

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

12.3 Geometric Sequences and Series

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine if a sequence is geometric
           Find the general term (nth term) of a geometric sequence
           Find the sum of the first terms of a geometric sequence
           Find the sum of an infinite geometric series
           Apply geometric sequences and series in the real world

       BE PREPARED 12.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.24.

BE PREPARED 12.8           Evaluate:  

                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.

BE PREPARED 12.9           If         find     

                           If you missed this problem, review Example 3.49.

Determine if a Sequence is Geometric

We are now ready to look at the second special type of sequence, the geometric sequence.

A sequence is called a geometric sequence if the ratio between consecutive terms is always the same. The ratio
between consecutive terms in a geometric sequence is r, the common ratio, where n is greater than or equal to two.

Geometric Sequence

A geometric sequence is a sequence where the ratio between consecutive terms is always the same.

The ratio between consecutive terms,  is r, the common ratio. n is greater than or equal to two.

Consider these sequences.
1148 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

          EXAMPLE 12.21
        Determine if each sequence is geometric. If so, indicate the common ratio.

    
    
    

             Solution
        To determine if the sequence is geometric, we find the ratio of the consecutive terms shown.

    

          Find the ratio of the consecutive terms.

                                                                       The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is

    

          Find the ratio of the consecutive terms.

                                                                       The sequence is not geometric. There is no common ratio.

    

Find the ratio of the consecutive terms.

                                          The sequence is geometric. The common ratio is

TRY IT 12.41  Determine if each sequence is geometric. If so indicate the common ratio.

              
              

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1149

              

TRY IT 12.42  Determine if each sequence is geometric. If so indicate the common ratio.

              
              
              

If we know the first term, and the common ratio, r, we can list a finite number of terms of the sequence.

  EXAMPLE 12.22

Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 3 and the common ratio is

     Solution
We start with the first term and multiply it by the common ratio. Then we multiply that result by the common ratio to get
the next term, and so on.

The sequence is
       TRY IT 12.43 Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 7 and the common ratio is

TRY IT 12.44 Write the first five terms of the sequence where the first term is 6 and the common ratio is

Find the General Term (nth Term) of a Geometric Sequence

Just as we found a formula for the general term of a sequence and an arithmetic sequence, we can also find a formula
for the general term of a geometric sequence.

Let's write the first few terms of the sequence where the first term is  and the common ratio is r. We will then look for
a pattern.

As we look for a pattern in the five terms above, we see that each of the terms starts with

The first term, is not multiplied by any r. In the second term, the is multiplied by r. In the third term, the is

multiplied by r two times ( or ). In the fourth term, the is multiplied by r three times (   or ) and in the fifth

term, the is multiplied by r four times. In each term, the number of times is multiplied by r is one less than the

number of the term. This leads us to the following
1150 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

          General Term (nth term) of a Geometric Sequence
          The general term of a geometric sequence with first term and the common ratio r is

We will use this formula in the next example to find the fourteenth term of a sequence.

EXAMPLE 12.23

Find the fourteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 64 and the common ratio is

Solution

To find the fourteenth term,

use the formula with             and

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

TRY IT 12.45 Find the thirteenth term of a sequence where the first term is 81 and the common ratio is

TRY IT 12.46 Find the twelfth term of a sequence where the first term is 256 and the common ratio is

Sometimes we do not know the common ratio and we must use the given information to find it before we find the
requested term.

EXAMPLE 12.24

Find the twelfth term of the sequence 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96, ... Find the general term for the sequence.

     Solution                                  and so we need to first determine and the common ratio r.
To find the twelfth term, we use the formula,

The first term is three.
Find the common ratio.

                                               The common ratio is

To find the twelfth term,        use the
formula with

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1151

Substitute in the values.
Simplify.

Find the general term.
We use the formula with

TRY IT 12.47  Find the ninth term of the sequence 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1,458, ... Then find the general term for
              the sequence.

TRY IT 12.48  Find the eleventh term of the sequence 7, 14, 28, 56, 112, 224, ... Then find the general term for
              the sequence.

Find the Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Sequence

We found the sum of both general sequences and arithmetic sequence. We will now do the same for geometric

sequences. The sum, of the first n terms of a geometric sequence is written as                             We can

write this sum by starting with the first term, and keep multiplying by r to get the next term as:

Let's also multiply both sides of the equation by r.

Next, we subtract these equations. We will see that when we subtract, all but the first term of the top equation and the
last term of the bottom equation subtract to zero.

  We factor both sides.
  To obtain the formula for
  divide both sides by

  Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Series
  The sum, of the first n terms of a geometric sequence is

  where is the first term and r is the common ratio, and r is not equal to one.

We apply this formula in the next example where the first few terms of the sequence are given. Notice the sum of a
geometric sequence typically gets very large when the common ratio is greater than one.
1152 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

EXAMPLE 12.25

Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the geometric sequence 7, 14, 28, 56, 112, 224, ...

Solution

To find the sum, we will use the formula          We know  and

Knowing               and

use the sum formula.

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

TRY IT 12.49 Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the geometric sequence 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96, ...

TRY IT 12.50 Find the sum of the first 20 terms of the geometric sequence 6, 18, 54, 162, 486, 1,458, ...

In the next example, we are given the sum in summation notation. While adding all the terms might be possible, most
often it is easiest to use the formula to find the sum of the first n terms.

To use the formula, we need r. We can find it by writing out the first few terms of the sequence and find their ratio.

Another option is to realize that in summation notation, a sequence is written in the form  where r is the

common ratio.

EXAMPLE 12.26

Find the sum:                                     which requires and r. We will write out a few of the terms, so

     Solution
To find the sum, we will use the formula
we can get the needed information.

Write out the first few terms.
Identify .

Find the common ratio.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1153

Knowing                  and

use the sum formula.

Substitute in the values.

Simplify.

       TRY IT 12.51 Find the sum:

       TRY IT 12.52 Find the sum:

Find the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

If we take a geometric sequence and add the terms, we have a sum that is called a geometric series. An infinite
geometric series is an infinite sum whose first term is and common ratio is r and is written

  Infinite Geometric Series
  An infinite geometric series is an infinite sum whose first term is and common ratio is r and is written

We know how to find the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series using the formula,  But how do
we find the sum of an infinite sum?

Let's look at the infinite geometric series  Each term gets larger and larger so it makes

sense that the sum of the infinite number of terms gets larger. Let's look at a few partial sums for this series. We see

and

As n gets larger and larger, the sum gets larger and larger. This is true when  and we call the series divergent. We
cannot find a sum of an infinite geometric series when

Let's look at an infinite geometric series whose common ratio is a fraction less than one,
                                              . Here the terms get smaller and smaller as n gets larger. Let's look at a few finite sums

for this series. We see       and
1154 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Notice the sum gets larger and larger but also gets closer and closer to one. When  the expression gets

smaller and smaller. In this case, we call the series convergent. As n approaches infinity, (gets infinitely large), gets

closer and closer to zero. In our sum formula, we can replace the with zero and then we get a formula for the sum, S,

for an infinite geometric series when

This formula gives us the sum of the infinite geometric sequence. Notice the S does not have the subscript n as in as
we are not adding a finite number of terms.

  Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

  For an infinite geometric series whose first term is and common ratio r,

  EXAMPLE 12.27                                                 and then we can use the sum formula
Find the sum of the infinite geometric series

     Solution
To find the sum, we first have to verify that the common ratio

  Find the common ratio.

Identify

Knowing
use the sum formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1155

Substitute in the values.
Simplify.

TRY IT 12.53 Find the sum of the infinite geometric series

TRY IT 12.54 Find the sum of the infinite geometric series

An interesting use of infinite geometric series is to write a repeating decimal as a fraction.

EXAMPLE 12.28

Write the repeating decimal  as a fraction.
     Solution

Rewrite the showing the repeating five.

Use place value to rewrite this as a sum.

This is an infinite geometric series.

Find the common ratio.

Identify
Knowing
use the sum formula.
Substitute in the values.
Simplify.
Multiply numerator and denominator by 10.
We are asked to find the fraction form.

       TRY IT 12.55 Write the repeating decimal as a fraction.

       TRY IT 12.56 Write the repeating decimal as a fraction.

Apply Geometric Sequences and Series in the Real World

One application of geometric sequences has to do with consumer spending. If a tax rebate is given to each household,
1156 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

the effect on the economy is many times the amount of the individual rebate.

  EXAMPLE 12.29

The government has decided to give a $1,000 tax rebate to each household in order to stimulate the economy. The
government statistics say that each household will spend 80% of the rebate in goods and services. The businesses and
individuals who benefitted from that 80% will then spend 80% of what they received and so on. The result is called the
multiplier effect. What is the total effect of the rebate on the economy?

     Solution
Every time money goes into the economy, 80% of it is spent and is then in the economy to be spent. Again, 80% of this
money is spent in the economy again. This situation continues and so leads us to an infinite geometric series.

Here the first term is 1,000,                     The common ratio is      We can evaluate this sum since         We use

the formula for the sum on an infinite geometric series.

Substitute in the values,                         and

Evaluate.

The total effect of the $1,000 received by each household will be a $5,000 growth in the economy.

TRY IT 12.57            What is the total effect on the economy of a government tax rebate of $1,000 to each
                        household in order to stimulate the economy if each household will spend 90% of the rebate in
                        goods and services?

TRY IT 12.58            What is the total effect on the economy of a government tax rebate of $500 to each household
                        in order to stimulate the economy if each household will spend 85% of the rebate in goods and
                        services?

We have looked at a compound interest formula where a principal, P, is invested at an interest rate, r, for t years. The

new balance, A, is               when interest is compounded n times a year. This formula applies when a lump sum

was invested upfront and tells us the value after a certain time period.

An annuity is an investment that is a sequence of equal periodic deposits. We will be looking at annuities that pay the

interest at the time of the deposits. As we develop the formula for the value of an annuity, we are going to let  That

means there is one deposit per year.

Let
Simplify.

Suppose P dollars is invested at the end of each year. One year later that deposit is worth        dollars, and another

year later it is worth           dollars. After t years, it will be worth  dollars.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1157

                                End of year 1      End of year 2                        End of year 3

               First Deposit P                  P  Amount 1 year later Amount 2 years later

               @ end of year 1

               2nd Deposit P                       P                              Amount 1 year later
               @ end of year 2
                                                                                        P
               3rd Deposit P
               @ end of year 3

After three years, the value of the annuity is

This a sum of the terms of a geometric sequence where the first term is P and the common ratio is      We substitute

these values into the sum formula. Be careful, we have two different uses of r. The r in the sum formula is the common

ratio of the sequence. In this case, that is       where r is the interest rate.

Substitute in the values.
Simplify.

Remember our premise was that one deposit was made at the end of each year.
We can adapt this formula for n deposits made per year and the interest is compounded n times a year.

  Value of an Annuity with Interest Compounded Times a Year

  For a principal, P, invested at the end of a compounding period, with an interest rate, r, which is compounded n times
  a year, the new balance, A, after t years, is

EXAMPLE 12.30

New parents decide to invest $100 per month in an annuity for their baby daughter. The account will pay 5% interest per
year which is compounded monthly. How much will be in the child's account at her eighteenth birthday?

     Solution

To find the Annuity formula,                       we need to identify P, r, n, and t.
1158 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Identify P, the amount invested each month.

Identify r, the annual interest rate, in decimal form.

Identify n,
the number of times the deposit
will be made and the interest compounded
each year.

Identify t, the number of years.

Knowing
          use the sum formula.

Substitute in the values.

Use the calculator to evaluate. Be sure to
use parentheses as needed.

                                                        The child will have $34,920.20 when she turns
                                                        18.

      TRY IT 12.59  New grandparents decide to invest $200 per month in an annuity for their grandson. The
                    account will pay 5% interest per year which is compounded monthly. How much will be in the
                    child's account at his twenty-first birthday?

      TRY IT 12.60  Arturo just got his first full-time job after graduating from college at age 27. He decided to
                    invest $200 per month in an IRA (an annuity). The interest on the annuity is 8%, which is
                    compounded monthly. How much will be in the Arturo's account when he retires at his sixty-
                    seventh birthday?

      MEDIA

      Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sequences.

      Geometric Sequences (https://openstax.org/l/37GeomSequence)
      Geometric Series (https://openstax.org/l/37GeometricSer)
      Future Value Annuities and Geometric Series (https://openstax.org/l/37FutValAnnGeoS)
      Application of a Geometric Series: Tax Rebate (https://openstax.org/l/37AppGeomSerTax)

        SECTION 12.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine if a Sequence is Geometric

In the following exercises, determine if the sequence is geometric, and if so, indicate the common ratio.

127.                                                    128.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          12.3 · Geometric Sequences and Series 1159

129.                             130.

131.                             132.

In the following exercises, determine if each sequence is arithmetic, geometric or neither. If arithmetic, indicate the
common difference. If geometric, indicate the common ratio.

133.                             134.

135.                             136.

137.                             138.

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of each geometric sequence with the given first term and common
ratio.

139.  and                        140.                                and

141.  and                        142.                                and

143.  and                        144.                                and

Find the General Term (nth Term) of a Geometric Sequence

In the following exercises, find the indicated term of a sequence where the first term and the common ratio is given.

145. Find given  and             146. Find given                          and

147. Find given  and             148. Find given                          and

149. Find given             and  150. Find given                                                 and

In the following exercises, find the indicated term of the given sequence. Find the general term for the sequence.

151. Find of the sequence,       152. Find of the sequence,

153. Find of the sequence,       154. Find of the sequence,

155. Find of the sequence,       156. Find of the sequence,

Find the Sum of the First n terms of a Geometric Sequence

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first fifteen terms of each geometric sequence.

157.                             158.

159.                             160.

161.                             162.

In the following exercises, find the sum of the geometric sequence.

163.                             164.

165.                             166.

167.                             168.
1160 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Find the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

In the following exercises, find the sum of each infinite geometric series.

169.                                                         170.

171.                                                         172.

173.                                                         174.

175.                                                         176.

In the following exercises, write each repeating decimal as a fraction.

177.                                                         178.

179.                                                         180.

181.                                                         182.

Apply Geometric Sequences and Series in the Real World

In the following exercises, solve the problem.

183. Find the total effect on the economy of each            184. New grandparents decide to invest     per
        government tax rebate to each household in
        order to stimulate the economy if each                     month in an annuity for their grandchild. The
        household will spend the indicated percent of
        the rebate in goods and services.                          account will pay interest per year which is

                                                                   compounded monthly (12 times a year). How

                                                                   much will be in the child's account at their

                                                                   twenty-first birthday?

        Tax rebate                Percent            Total
          to each                 spent on        Effect on
                                 goods and
        household                 services            the
                                                  economy

      

      

      

      

185. Berenice just got her first full-time job after         186. Alice wants to purchase a home in about five

      graduating from college at age 30. She decided               years. She is depositing  a month into an

      to invest  per quarter in an IRA (an annuity).               annuity that earns per year that is

      The interest on the annuity is which is                      compounded monthly (12 times a year). How

      compounded quarterly (4 times a year). How                   much will Alice have for her down payment in

      much will be in the Berenice's account when she              five years?

      retires at age 65?

187. Myra just got her first full-time job after

      graduating from college. She plans to get a

      master's degree, and so is depositing           a

      year from her year-end bonus into an annuity.

      The annuity pays           per year and is

      compounded yearly. How much will she have

      saved in five years to pursue her master's

      degree?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1161

Writing Exercises                                     189. In your own words, explain how to find the
                                                              general term of a geometric sequence.
188. In your own words, explain how to determine
        whether a sequence is geometric.              191. In your own words, explain how to determine if
                                                              an infinite geometric series has a sum and how
190. In your own words, explain the difference                to find it.
        between a geometric sequence and a geometric
        series.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

12.4 Binomial Theorem

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use Pascal's Triangle to expand a binomial
           Evaluate a binomial coefficient
           Use the Binomial Theorem to expand a binomial

       BE PREPARED 12.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                              Simplify:
                                              If you missed this problem, review Example 1.25.

BE PREPARED 12.11  Expand:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

BE PREPARED 12.12  Expand:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.32.

Use Pascal's Triangle to Expand a Binomial

In our previous work, we have squared binomials either by using FOIL or by using the Binomial Squares Pattern. We can
also say that we expanded

To expand  we recognize that this is                  and multiply.
1162 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

To find a method that is less tedious that will work for higher expansions like          we again look for patterns in
some expansions.

                                                                     Number of terms First term Last term

                                                                     2

                                                                     3

                                                                     4

                                                                     5

                                                                     6

Notice the first and last terms show only one variable. Recall that        so we could rewrite the first and last terms to

include both variables. For example, we could expand            to show each term with both variables.

Generally, we don't show the zero exponents, just as we usually write x rather than 1x.

  Patterns in the expansion of

    · The number of terms is
    · The first term is and the last term is
    · The exponents on a decrease by one on each term going left to right.
    · The exponents on b increase by one on each term going left to right.
    · The sum of the exponents on any term is n.

Let's look at an example to highlight the last three patterns.

From the patterns we identified, we see the variables in the expansion of        would be

To find the coefficients of the terms, we write our expansions again focusing on the coefficients. We rewrite the
coefficients to the right forming an array of coefficients.

The array to the right is called Pascal's Triangle. Notice each number in the array is the sum of the two closest numbers

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1163

in the row above. We can find the next row by starting and ending with one and then adding two adjacent numbers.

This triangle gives the coefficients of the terms when we expand binomials.
  Pascal's Triangle

In the next example, we will use this triangle and the patterns we recognized to expand the binomial.

EXAMPLE 12.31

Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

Solution

We know the variables for this expansion will follow the pattern we identified. The nonzero exponents of x will start at six

and decrease to one. The nonzero exponents of y will start at one and increase to six. The sum of the exponents in each

term will be six. In our pattern,  and
1164 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

               TRY IT 12.61 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

               TRY IT 12.62 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

        In the next example we want to expand a binomial with one variable and one constant. We need to identify the a and b
        to carefully apply the pattern.

          EXAMPLE 12.32
        Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

             Solution
        We identify the a and b of the pattern.

In our pattern,  and

We know the variables for this expansion will follow the pattern we identified. The sum of the exponents in each term
will be five.

       TRY IT 12.63 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand
       TRY IT 12.64 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand
In the next example, the binomial is a difference and the first term has a constant times the variable. Once we identify
the a and b of the pattern, we must once again carefully apply the pattern.
  EXAMPLE 12.33
Use Pascal's Triangle to expand
     Solution
We identify the a and b of the pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1165

In our pattern,       and

TRY IT 12.65 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

TRY IT 12.66 Use Pascal's Triangle to expand

Evaluate a Binomial Coefficient

While Pascal's Triangle is one method to expand a binomial, we will also look at another method. Before we get to that,
we need to introduce some more factorial notation. This notation is not only used to expand binomials, but also in the
study and use of probability.

To find the coefficients of the terms of expanded binomials, we will need to be able to evaluate the notation  which

is called a binomial coefficient. We read    as "n choose r" or "n taken r at a time".

Binomial Coefficient

A binomial coefficient     where r and n are integers with  is defined as

We read          as "n choose r" or "n taken r at a time".

EXAMPLE 12.34

Evaluate:                                  

Solution

 We will use the definition of a binomial coefficient,
1166 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

Use the definition,                               where

Simplify.
Rewrite
Simplify, by removing common factors.
Simplify.

                                                  where

  Use the definition,
  Simplify.
  Simplify. Remember

                                                  where

  Use the definition,
  Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1167

Simplify.



Use the definition,  where

Simplify.            and remove common factors.
Rewrite
Simplify.

  TRY IT 12.67       Evaluate each binomial coefficient:

                     

  TRY IT 12.68       Evaluate each binomial coefficient:

                            

In the previous example, parts (a), (b), (c) demonstrate some special properties of binomial coefficients.
  Properties of Binomial Coefficients

Use the Binomial Theorem to Expand a Binomial

We are now ready to use the alternate method of expanding binomials. The Binomial Theorem uses the same pattern
for the variables, but uses the binomial coefficient for the coefficient of each term.

  Binomial Theorem

  For any real numbers a and b, and positive integer n,
1168 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

  EXAMPLE 12.35

Use the Binomial Theorem to expand
     Solution

We identify the a and b of the pattern.

In our pattern,  and

We use the Binomial Theorem.

Substitute in the values      and

Simplify the exponents.

Evaluate the coefficients. Remember,

TRY IT 12.69 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

TRY IT 12.70 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

Notice that when we expanded                      in the last example, using the Binomial Theorem, we got the same coefficients

we would get from using Pascal's Triangle.

The next example, the binomial is a difference. When the binomial is a difference, we must be careful in identifying the
values we will use in the pattern.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1169

  EXAMPLE 12.36

Use the Binomial Theorem to expand
     Solution

We identify the a and b of the pattern.

In our pattern,  and

We use the Binomial Theorem.

Substitute in the values                 and

Simplify the exponents and evaluate the coefficients. Remember,

       TRY IT 12.71 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

       TRY IT 12.72 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

Things can get messy when both terms have a coefficient and a variable.
  EXAMPLE 12.37

Use the Binomial Theorem to expand
     Solution

We identify the a and b of the pattern.

In our pattern,  and

We use the Binomial Theorem.

Substitute in the values                 and
1170 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

        Simplify the exponents.
        Evaluate the coefficients. Remember,

       TRY IT 12.73 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

       TRY IT 12.74 Use the Binomial Theorem to expand

The real beauty of the Binomial Theorem is that it gives a formula for any particular term of the expansion without
having to compute the whole sum. Let's look for a pattern in the Binomial Theorem.

Notice, that in each case the exponent on the b is one less than the number of the term. The  term is the term

where the exponent of b is r. So we can use the format of the  term to find the value of a specific term.

Find a Specific Term in a Binomial Expansion

The  term in the expansion of                     is

  EXAMPLE 12.38
Find the fourth term of

     Solution

In our pattern,                  and

We are looking for the fourth term.

Write the formula.

Substitute in the values,                         and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1171

Simplify.
Simplify.

TRY IT 12.75 Find the third term of
TRY IT 12.76 Find the fifth term of

EXAMPLE 12.39

Find the coefficient of the  term of
     Solution

In our pattern, then         and

We are looking for the coefficient of the term.

           Since      and             we know

Write the formula.

Substitute in the values,             and

Simplify.
Simplify.
Simplify.

                                                 The coefficient of the term is 2268.

TRY IT 12.77 Find the coefficient of the term of

TRY IT 12.78 Find the coefficient of the term of

MEDIA
Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sequences.
Binomial Expansion Using Pascal's Triangle (https://openstax.org/l/37binexpanpastr)
Binomial Coefficients (https://openstax.org/l/37binocoeffic)
1172 12 · Sequences, Series and Binomial Theorem

        SECTION 12.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Pascal's Triangle to Expand a Binomial

In the following exercises, expand each binomial using Pascal's Triangle.

192.                                               193.

194.                                               195.

196.                                               197.

198.                                               199.

200.                                               201.

202.                                               203.

204.                                               205.

206.                                               207.

208.                                               209.

Evaluate a Binomial Coefficient
In the following exercises, evaluate.

210.                                               211.                                  

212.                                               213.                                  

Use the Binomial Theorem to Expand a Binomial

In the following exercises, expand each binomial.

214.                                               215.

216.                                               217.

218.                                               219.

220.                                               221.

222.                                               223.

224.                                               225.

In the following exercises, find the indicated term in the expansion of the binomial.

226. Sixth term of                                 227. Fifth term of

228. Fourth term of                                229. Seventh term of

In the following exercises, find the coefficient of the indicated term in the expansion of the binomial.

230. term of                                       231. term of

232. term of                                       233. term of

234.   term of                                     235.   term of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             12.4 · Binomial Theorem 1173

Writing Exercises

236. In your own words explain how to find the rows          237. In your own words, explain the pattern of
        of the Pascal's Triangle. Write the first five rows          exponents for each variable in the expansion of.
        of Pascal's Triangle.
                                                             239. In your own words, explain how to find a specific
238. In your own words, explain the difference                       term in the expansion of a binomial without
                                                                     expanding the whole thing. Use an example to
between            and                                               help explain.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?
1174 12 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

annuity An annuity is an investment that is a sequence of equal periodic deposits.

arithmetic sequence An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between consecutive terms is

constant.

common difference The difference between consecutive terms in an arithmetic sequence,                   is d, the

common difference, for n greater than or equal to two.

common ratio The ratio between consecutive terms in a geometric sequence,           is r, the common ratio, where n is

    greater than or equal to two.
finite sequence A sequence with a domain that is limited to a finite number of counting numbers.
general term of a sequence The general term of the sequence is the formula for writing the nth term of the

    sequence. The nth term of the sequence, is the term in the nth position where n is a value in the domain.
geometric sequence A geometric sequence is a sequence where the ratio between consecutive terms is always the

    same
infinite geometric series An infinite geometric series is an infinite sum infinite geometric sequence.
infinite sequence A sequence whose domain is all counting numbers and there is an infinite number of counting

    numbers.
partial sum When we add a finite number of terms of a sequence, we call the sum a partial sum.
sequence A sequence is a function whose domain is the counting numbers.

Key Concepts

12.1 Sequences

  · Factorial Notation
      If n is a positive integer, then is

    We define as 1, so                                            is written in summation notation as:
· Summation Notation

   The sum of the first n terms of a sequence whose nth term

The i is the index of summation and the 1 tells us where to start and the n tells us where to end.

12.2 Arithmetic Sequences                                         and the common difference d is

  · General Term (nth term) of an Arithmetic Sequence

      The general term of an arithmetic sequence with first term

· Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence               is the first term and          is the nth term is
   The sum, of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence, where

12.3 Geometric Sequences and Series

  · General Term (nth term) of a Geometric Sequence: The general term of a geometric sequence with first term
      and the common ratio r is

  · Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Series: The sum, of the n terms of a geometric sequence is

   where is the first term and r is the common ratio.                                             and common ratio is
· Infinite Geometric Series: An infinite geometric series is an infinite sum whose first term is

   r and is written

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 12 · Exercises 1175

  · Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series: For an infinite geometric series whose first term is and common ratio r,

  · Value of an Annuity with Interest Compounded Times a Year: For a principal, P, invested at the end of a
      compounding period, with an interest rate, r, which is compounded n times a year, the new balance, A, after t years,
      is

12.4 Binomial Theorem

  · Patterns in the expansion of
       The number of terms is
       The first term is and the last term is
       The exponents on a decrease by one on each term going left to right.
       The exponents on b increase by one on each term going left to right.
       The sum of the exponents on any term is n.

· Pascal's Triangle     : A binomial coefficient                where r and n are integers with      is defined as
· Binomial Coefficient

      We read  as "n choose r" or "n taken r at a time".

· Properties of Binomial Coefficients

· Binomial Theorem: For any real numbers a, b, and positive integer n,

Exercises

Review Exercises

Sequences

Write the First Few Terms of a Sequence

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is given.

240.                                                      241.
1176 12 · Exercises

242.                                   243.

244.

Find a Formula for the General Term (nth Term) of a Sequence

In the following exercises, find a general term for the sequence whose first five terms are shown.

245.                                   246.

247.                                   248.

249.

Use Factorial Notation

In the following exercises, using factorial notation, write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is given.

250.                                   251.

252.

Find the Partial Sum
In the following exercises, expand the partial sum and find its value.

253.                                   254.

255.                                   256.

Use Summation Notation to write a Sum

In the following exercises, write each sum using summation notation.

257.                                   258.

259.

Arithmetic Sequences

Determine if a Sequence is Arithmetic

In the following exercises, determine if each sequence is arithmetic, and if so, indicate the common difference.

260.                                   261.

262.

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of each arithmetic sequence with the given first term and common
difference.

263.  and                              264.                             and

265.  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           12 · Exercises 1177

Find the General Term (nth Term) of an Arithmetic Sequence

In the following exercises, find the term described using the information provided.

266. Find the twenty-fifth term of a sequence where       267. Find the thirtieth term of a sequence where the
        the first term is five and the common difference          first term is 16 and the common difference is
        is three.

268. Find the seventeenth term of a sequence where
        the first term is and the common difference
        is two.

In the following exercises, find the indicated term and give the formula for the general term.

269. Find the eighteenth term of a sequence where         270. Find the twenty-first term of a sequence where
        the fifth term is and the common difference is            the seventh term is and the common
        seven.                                                    difference is

In the following exercises, find the first term and common difference of the sequence with the given terms. Give the
formula for the general term.

271. The fifth term is 17 and the fourteenth term is      272. The third term is and the sixteenth term is
        53.

Find the Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Sequence

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first 30 terms of each arithmetic sequence.

273.                                                      274.

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first fifteen terms of the arithmetic sequence whose general term is given.

275.                                                      276.

In the following exercises, find each sum.

277.                                                      278.

279.

Geometric Sequences and Series

Determine if a Sequence is Geometric

In the following exercises, determine if the sequence is geometric, and if so, indicate the common ratio.

280.                                                      281.

282.                                                      283.

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of each geometric sequence with the given first term and common
ratio.

284.  and                                                 285.  and

286.  and

Find the General Term (nth Term) of a Geometric Sequence

In the following exercises, find the indicated term of a sequence where the first term and the common ratio is given.

287. Find given  and                                      288. Find given                       and
1178 12 · Exercises

In the following exercises, find the indicated term of the given sequence. Find the general term of the sequence.

289. Find of the sequence,                            290. Find of the sequence,

Find the Sum of the First n terms of a Geometric Sequence

In the following exercises, find the sum of the first fifteen terms of each geometric sequence.

291.                                                  292.

293.

In the following exercises, find the sum

294.                                                  295.

Find the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series

In the following exercises, find the sum of each infinite geometric series.

296.                                                  297.

In the following exercises, write each repeating decimal as a fraction.

298.                                                  299.

Apply Geometric Sequences and Series in the Real World

In the following exercises, solve the problem.

300. What is the total effect on the economy of a     301. Adam just got his first full-time job after

      government tax rebate of   to each                    graduating from high school at age 17. He

      household in order to stimulate the economy if        decided to invest  per month in an IRA (an

      each household will spend  of the rebate in           annuity). The interest on the annuity is which

      goods and services?                                   is compounded monthly. How much will be in

                                                            Adam's account when he retires at his sixty-

                                                            seventh birthday?

Binomial Theorem

Use Pascal's Triangle to Expand a Binomial

In the following exercises, expand each binomial using Pascal's Triangle.

302.                                                  303.

304.                                                  305.

306.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          12 · Exercises 1179

Evaluate a Binomial Coefficient                       308.
In the following exercises, evaluate.
307.                                                      
                                                          
                                                          
                                                          
    
    

309.

    
    
    
    

Use the Binomial Theorem to Expand a Binomial

In the following exercises, expand each binomial, using the Binomial Theorem.

310.                                                  311.

312.                                                  313.

314.

In the following exercises, find the indicated term in the expansion of the binomial.

315. Seventh term of                                  316. Third term of

In the following exercises, find the coefficient of the indicated term in the expansion of the binomial.

317. term of                                          318. term of

319.  term of

Practice Test

In the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence whose general term is given.

320.                                                  321.

322. Find a general term for the sequence,            323. Expand the partial sum and find its value.

324. Write the following using summation notation.    325. Write the first five terms of the arithmetic

326. Find the twentieth term of an arithmetic               sequence with the given first term and common
        sequence where the first term is two and the
        common difference is                                difference.                and

                                                      327. Find the twenty-third term of an arithmetic
                                                              sequence whose seventh term is and
                                                              common difference is three. Then find a formula
                                                              for the general term.
1180 12 · Exercises

328. Find the first term and common difference of an        329. Find the sum of the first 25 terms of the
                                                                    arithmetic sequence,
      arithmetic sequence whose ninth term is and

      the sixteenth term is      Then find a formula

      for the general term.

330. Find the sum of the first 50 terms of the              331. Find the sum.
        arithmetic sequence whose general term is

In the following exercises, determine if the sequence is arithmetic, geometric, or neither. If arithmetic, then find the
common difference. If geometric, then find the common ratio.

332.                                                        333.

334. Write the first five terms of the geometric            335. In the geometric sequence whose first term and

      sequence with the given first term and common               common ratio are  and  find

      ratio.         and

336. Find     of the geometric sequence,                    337. Find the sum of the first thirteen terms of the
                                       Then find a formula          geometric sequence,

      for the general term.

In the following exercises, find the sum.

338.                                                        339.

340. Write the repeating decimal as a fraction.             341. Dave just got his first full-time job after
                                                                    graduating from high school at age 18. He
342. Expand the binomial using Pascal's Triangle.                   decided to invest $450 per month in an IRA (an
344. Expand the binomial using the Binomial                         annuity). The interest on the annuity is 6% which
                                                                    is compounded monthly. How much will be in
        Theorem.                                                    Adam's account when he retires at his sixty-fifth
                                                                    birthday?

                                                            343. Evaluate each binomial coefficient. 

                                                                

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                Answer Key 1181

Answer Key                  1.2  no  yes  yes  no  1.3
                                   no
Chapter 1                                          1.6
                            1.5
Try It                                             1.9 86
                            1.8 23
1.1  yes  yes  no  yes                             1.12  216  64  185
       no                   1.11  9  64  40
                            1.14                   1.15           
1.4                                                          

1.7 16

1.10 1

1.13

1.16                        1.17                   1.18      
            

1.19                        1.20                   1.21

1.22                        1.23                   1.24   
                                                           

1.25 16                     1.26 9                 1.27   2 
                                                   1.30  3  
1.28   3                    1.29  2         10     1.33 3            11
                                            
1.31                        1.32  

                                       

1.34 13                     1.35  23  60           1.36  39  39  -28  -7

1.37  81                    1.38  49               1.39  4  21

1.40  9  6                  1.41 31                1.42 67

1.43                        1.44                   1.45 The difference in
                                                           temperatures was 45
1.46 The difference in      1.47                           degrees.
        temperatures was 9
        degrees.            1.50                   1.48
                            1.53
1.49                        1.56                   1.51
                            1.59 4
1.52                        1.62 272               1.54

1.55                                               1.57      

1.58                                               1.60 2

1.61                                               1.63 2
1182 Answer Key

1.64                             1.65                           1.66

1.67       7                     1.68                           1.69       

                                       

1.70                             1.71                           1.72
                                                                1.75
1.73  25.8  258  2,580           1.74  142  1,420  14,200       1.78  

1.76                             1.77  

1.79  0.09, 0.87, 0.039  17%,    1.80  0.03, 0.91, 0.083  41%,  1.81  6  13 
        175%, 8.25%                      225%, 9.25%

1.82  4  14                      1.83                           1.84 

                                                                       

                                                                       

                                                                       
                                                                       

1.85                             1.86                           1.87 

                                                                         

1.88                             1.89                           1.90
        

1.91                             1.92                           1.93
1.94                             1.95                           1.96
1.97  0  undefined               1.98  0  undefined             1.99
1.100                            1.101                          1.102
1.103                            1.104                          1.105
1.106                            1.107                          1.108
1.109                            1.110                          1.111
1.112

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Answer Key 1183

Section 1.1 Exercises    3. Divisible by 2        5. Divisible by 3, 5
                         9.                       11.
1. Divisible by 2, 3, 6  15. 280                  17. 440
7.                       21. 58                   23. 29
13. 24                   27. 50                   29. 5
19. 5                    33. 21                   35. 9
25. 149                  39.                      41.
31.  64  16  7
37.

43.                      45.                      47.   
                                 
        

49.                      51.                      53.

55. Answers will vary.   57. Answers will vary.

Section 1.2 Exercises    61.                      63. 0
                         67. 15                   69. 1
59.                      73. 32                   75.
65. 8                    79.  6                   81.
71.                      85.  16  16              87.  45  45
77.                      91. 4                    93. 6
83. 22                   97.                      99.  
89. 0
95.                                               105.
                         103.                     111.
                         109.                     117.
101.                     115.                     123.
107.                     121.                     129. 
113.                     127.
119.                                                      
125.                                              135. 21 yards
                                                  141. Answers will vary.
131.                     133.

137.                     139. Answers will vary.
1184 Answer Key

Section 1.3 Exercises

143.                             145.                     147.

149.                             151.                     153.
                                 157.
155.                             163.                     159.
161.                             169.                     165.
167.                             175.                     171.
                                 181.
173.                             187.                     177.
                                 193.
179.                             199.                     183.
                                 205.
185.                             211.                     189.   
                                 217.
191.                             223.                     195.
                                 229.  
197.                             235. Answers will vary.  201.

203.                                                      207.

209.                                                      213.
215.                                                      219.
221.                                                      225.

227.                                                      231.

233.                                                      237. Answers will vary.

Section 1.4 Exercises            241.  0.30  0.3  0       243.  63.48  63.5  63
                                 247.                     249.
239.  5.78  5.8  6               253.                     255.
245.                             259.                     261.
251.                             265. 2.5                 267. 55200
257.                             271.                     273.
263.                             277.                     279.
269.                             283.                     285.
275.
281.

Access for free at openstax.org
287.                     289.                     291. 8                                  Answer Key 1185

293. 12                  295.                     297.       
                                                                        

                                                            

299.  none                301.                    303.
                         307.
                                                  309. Answers will vary.
         none
        

305.

311. Answers will vary.

Section 1.5 Exercises    315.                     317.
                         321.                     323.
313.                     327.                     329.
319.                     333.                     335.
325.                     339. undefined           341. undefined
331.                     345.                     347.
337. 0                   351.                     353.
343.                     357.                     359.
349.                     363.                     365.
355.                     369.                     371.
361.                     375.                     377.
367.                     381. Answers will vary.  383. Answers will vary.
373.
379.

Review Exercises         387. 120                 389. 4        
                         393.                     395.        22
385. Divisible by        399.                     401.  8 
391. 3
397.    
1186 Answer Key                  405.     17          407. 28
                                 411. 9               413.
403.  40  40                     417.                 419.
409.                                                  425.
415.                             423.                 431.
421.                             429.                 437.
427. 75                          435. 488.1813        443.
433.                             441.                 449.
439.                             447. no real number
445.

451.                             453.                 455.
457. undefined                   459.                 461.
463.                             465.
                                                      471.       
Practice Test                    469.
                                    475. 1            477.
467.

473.

479.                             481.                 483.
485.                             487.                 489. -160
491.                             493.  0  undefined   495.

Chapter 2                        2.2                  2.3
                                 2.5                  2.6
Be Prepared                      2.8                  2.9
                                 2.11                 2.12
2.1                              2.14                 2.15
2.4
2.7
2.10
2.13 is greater than .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     Answer Key 1187

2.16                              2.17                             2.18 a. >; b. >; c. >; d. >
2.19
                                  2.2  yes  no                     2.3
Try It
                                  2.5                              2.6
2.1  no  yes
2.4                               2.8                              2.9
2.7
2.10                              2.11 identity; all real numbers  2.12 identity; all real numbers
2.13 conditional equation;        2.14 conditional equation;       2.15 contradiction; no solution

2.16 contradiction; no solution 2.17                               2.18
                                                                   2.21
2.19                              2.20                             2.24
2.22                              2.23                             2.27 He bought two
2.25                              2.26
                                                                           notebooks.
2.28 He did seven crosswords      2.29                             2.30
        puzzles.
                                  2.32                             2.33
2.31                              2.35 32, 34, 36                  2.36
2.34                              2.38 The median price was        2.39  36  $26 
2.37 The average cost was
                                          $19,300.                 2.42 2,375 mg
        $5,000.                   2.41 25 grams                    2.45
2.40  33  $36                     2.44 40%                         2.48  $2,975  $11,475
2.43 50%                          2.47  $600  $1,800               2.51 The rate of simple interest
2.46 50%                          2.50 She earned $7,020.
2.49 He will earn $2,500.                                                  was 6%.
                                                                   2.54 She deposited $9,600.
2.52 The rate of simple interest  2.53 He paid $17,590.
        was 5.5%.                                                  2.57
                                                                   2.60
2.55                              2.56                             2.63 The window's height is 12

2.58                              2.59                                     meters.

2.61                              2.62
1188 Answer Key

2.64 The length of the base is       2.65 The measures of the           2.66 The measures of the
        6 feet.                              angles are 20°, 70°, and           angles are 30°, 60°, and
                                             90°.                               90°.

2.67 The length of the leg is 8.     2.68 The length of the leg is      2.69 The length is 39 inches
                                             12.                                and the width is 16
                                                                                inches.

2.70 The length is 17 yards and      2.71 The lengths of the sides      2.72 The lengths of the sides
        the width is 26 yards.               of the triangle are 5, 11          of the triangle are 4, 7
                                             and 12 inches.                     and 9 feet.

2.73 The length of the               2.74 The length of the garden      2.75 The ladder reaches 12
        swimming pool is 70 feet             is 90 yards and the width          feet.
        and the width is 30 feet.            is 60 yards.

2.76 He should attach the            2.77 Jess has 41 nickels and 18    2.78 Elane has 22 nickels and
        lights 8 feet from the base          quarters.                          59 dimes.
        of the mast.

2.79 Eric bought thirty-two          2.80 Kailee bought twenty-six      2.81 84 adult tickets, 31
        49-cent stamps and                   49-cent stamps and ten             student tickets
        twelve 35-cent stamps.               20-cent stamps.

2.82 615 children's tickets and      2.83 Orlando mixed five            2.84 Becca mixed 21 gallons of
        195 adult tickets                    pounds of cereal squares           fruit punch and seven
                                             and 25 pounds of nuts.             gallons of soda.

2.85  The speed of the local         2.86 Jeromy drove at a speed       2.87 Christopher's speed was
      train is 48 mph and the                of 80 mph and his mother           50 mph and his parents'
      speed of the express train             drove 60 mph.                      speed was 40 mph.
      is 60 mph.

2.88 Ashley's parents drove 55       2.89 Pierre and Monique will       2.90 Thanh and Nhat will be
        mph and Ashley drove 62              be 429 miles apart in 3            330 miles apart in 2.2
        mph.                                 hours.                             hours.

2.91 Suzy's speed uphill is          2.92  The boat's speed             2.93 Hamilton drove 40 mph in
        mph and downhill is three          upstream is eight mph                the city and 70 mph in the
        mph.                               and downstream is12                  desert.
                                           mph.

2.94 Phuong rode uphill at a         2.95                               2.96 
        speed of 12 mph and on
        the flat street at 20 mph.

                                                                        

                                                                                                
                                           

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       Answer Key 1189

2.97       2.98         2.99 
                                
                                

2.100       2.101          2.102 
                                     
         
           2.104        2.105
2.103      2.107        2.108
2.106      2.110        2.111
2.109
1190 Answer Key                   2.113 Angie can buy 7 packs of   2.114 Daniel can have 11
                                           juice.                           people at the party.
2.112

2.115 Sergio and Lizeth can       2.116 Rameen can use no          2.117 Caleb must work at least
         travel no more than 500           more than 76 therms.             96 hours.
         miles.
                                  2.119 Brenda must babysit at     2.120 Josue must shovel at
2.118 Elliot must work at least            least 27 hours.                  least 20 driveways.
         85 jobs.                                                            2.123
                                       2.122
2.121

2.124                             2.125                                   2.126

2.127                             2.128                                   2.129

2.130                             2.131                                   2.132

2.133  The homeowner can use      2.134  The homeowner can use     2.135    no solution  0
       5-20 hcf and still fall           16-40 hcf and still fall
       within the "conservation          within the "normal
       usage" billing range.             usage" billing range.

2.136   no solution  0 2.137                                       2.138

2.139                             2.140                            2.141 No solution

2.142 No solution                 2.143                            2.144

2.145                             2.146                                   2.147

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 1191

2.148                           2.149                           2.150

2.151                           2.152                           2.153 The diameter of the rod
                                                                         can be between 79.991
                                                                         and 80.009 mm.

2.154 The diameter of the rod
         can be between 74.95
         and 75.05 mm.

Section 2.1 Exercises           3.  no  yes                     5.
                                9.                              11.
1.  yes  no                     15.                             17.
7.                              21.                             23.
13.                             27.                             29.
19.                             33. conditional equation;       35. conditional equation;
25.
31. identity; all real numbers

37. contradiction; no solution  39. contradiction; no solution  41. identity; all real numbers
43.                             45.                             47.
                                51.                             53.
49.                             57.                             59.
                                63.                             65.
55.                             69.                             71.
                                75. Answers will vary.          77. Answers will vary.
61.

67.

73.    feet

79. Answers will vary.

Section 2.2 Exercises           83. six boys                    85. 58 hardback books
                                89. 5                           91. 12
81. Answers will vary.

87. 15
1192 Answer Key

93.                              95. 18, 24                 97. 8, 12
99. 32, 46
105. 25, 26, 27                  101. 4, 10                 103. 38, 39
111.
117.  54  108  30%               107.                       109. 84, 86, 88
123. 24.2 g
129. 25%                         113. $750                  115. $13,500
135.
141.  $576  30%                  119.           $35  150%   121.
147. $116
153.                             125. 2407 mg               127. 45%
159.
                                 131. 12%                   133. 200%

                                 137.                       139.           

                                 143.                       145.           

                                 149. $4836                 151. 3%

                                 155. $35,000               157. $3345

                                 161. Answers will vary.    163. Answers will vary.

Section 2.3 Exercises

165.                             167.                       169.
                                                            175.
171.                             173.

177.                             179.                       181.
183.                             185.
189.                             191.                       187.
195. 1 foot                      197. 23 inches
201.                             203. 15                    193.
207. 8                           209. 12
213.                             215. 18 meters, 11 meters  199.
219. 25 ft, 50 ft                221. 7 m, 11 m
225. 3 ft, 6 ft, 8 ft            227. 120 yd, 160 yd        205. 25
231. 5 feet                      233. 14.1 feet
                                                            211.

                                                            217.       m,      m

                                                            223. 12 ft, 13 ft, 14 ft

                                                            229. 40 ft, 85 ft

                                                            235.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        Answer Key 1193

237. 240 ft                       239. Answers will vary.            241.  Answers will vary.  The
                                                                             areas are the same. The
                                                                                      rectangle has a
                                                                             larger perimeter than the
                                                                                      square.
                                                                              Answers will vary.

Section 2.4 Exercises             245. ten $10 bills, five $5 bills  247. 63 dimes, 20 quarters
                                  251. 330 day passes, 367           253. 40 postcards, 100 stamps
243. nine nickels, 16 dimes
                                          tournament passes          259. 114 general, 246 student
249. 16 nickels, 12 dimes,        257. 34 general, 61 youth
        seven quarters                                               265. $33,000 in Fund A,
                                  263. lbs Bermuda seed,                     $22,000 in Fund B
255. 15 $10 shares, five $12              lbs Fescue seed
        shares                                                       271. commercial 550 mph,
                                  269. Kathy 5 mph, Cheryl 3                 private plane 340 mph
261. Four pounds of                       mph
        macadamia nuts, eight                                        277. DaMarcus 16 mph, Fabian
        pounds almonds            275. Ethan 22 mph, Leo 16                  22 mph
                                          mph
267.                                                                 283. uphill mph, downhill
                                  281. 4.5 hours                                  mph
273. Violet 65 mph, Charlie 55
        mph                                                          289. running eight mph,
                                                                             walking three mph
279. four hours
                                                                     295. Answers will vary.
285. light traffic 54 mph, heavy  287. freeway 67 mph,
        traffic 30 mph                    mountain road 22.3 mph

291.  15 minutes  20              293. Answers will vary.
        minutes  one hour (d)
        1:25
1194 Answer Key

Section 2.5 Exercises            299.                  301.
                                                               
297.                                                           
                                                               

                                                       307.
                                                               

                                                               
                                                               
303.                             305.
                                                       313.

                                         

                                         

309.                             311.
                                         

                                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  Answer Key 1195

315.                     317.                            319.

321.                     323.                            325.

327.                     329.                            331.

333.                     335.                            337.

339.                     341.                            343.

345.                     347. A maximum of 14 people     349. five drinks
                                 can safely ride in the
351. 86 cars                     elevator.
357. 260 messages
363. 62 necklaces        353. $16,875                    355. $110,000
369. 20 people           359. 35 people                  361. 32 jobs
375. Answers will vary.  365. seven lawns                367. 20 hours
                         371. 42 guests                  373. Answers will vary.
1196 Answer Key

Section 2.6 Exercises

377.                             379.                     381.

383.                             385.                     387.

389.                             391.                     393.

395.                             397.                     399.

401.                             403.                     405.

407.                             409.                     411.

413.                             415.                     417.

419.                             421.                     423.

425.                             427.                     429.

431.  answers vary  answers      433. Answers will vary.
        vary

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1197

Section 2.7 Exercises

435.                no   437.                no            439.
        solution                 solution 
                                                           445.
441.                     443.                              451. no solution
                                                           457.
447.                     449. no solution

453.                     455.

459.                     461.                                    463.

465.                     467.                                    469.

471.                     473.                                    475.

477.                     479.                                    481.

483.                     485.                              487.
489.
                         491. The minimum to               493. The acceptable weight is
495. Answers will vary.          maximum expected                  22.5 to 25.5 ounces.
                                 production is 207,500 to
                                 2,225,000 bottles

Review Exercises

497. no                  499.                              501.
                                                           507.
503.                     505.                              513.
                                                           519. 38
509. contradiction; no solution 511.

515.                     517. There are 116 people.
1198 Answer Key

521.                             523. 76, 78, 80           525. $922
527. 160                         529.                      531. 35%
533. 32%                         535.  $105                537. $428.22
539. $1,900                      541.                      543.
                                 547. 26
545.                             553. 9 ft, 14 ft, 12 ft   549. 6 feet
                                                           555. nine pennies, six dimes,
551.  cm,         cm
                                                                   12 quarters
557. 57 students, 68 general     559. lbs of raisins, lbs  561.
        admission                        of nuts
                                                           567. heavy traffic 32 mph, light
563. Louellen 65 mph, Tracy 66   565. upstream 3 mph,              traffic 68 mph
        mph                              downstream 5 mph
                                                                 573.
569.                             571.

575.                             577.                            579.

581.                             583.                            585.

587. $33 per day                 589. at least $300,000    591. at least 112 jobs
593.                                595.                         597.

599.                             601.                            603.

605.                             607. no solution          609.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               Answer Key 1199

611.                         613.             615.
                                                    621.
617.                         619.

623. The minimum to
        maximum expected
        usage is 210,000 to
        220,000 bottles

Practice Test

625.                         627.             629. contradiction; no solution
                                              635.
631.                         633.
                                                    641.
637.                         639.
                                                 647.
643.                         645.
                                              653. hours
649. 12 dimes, seven quarters 651.
                                              3.3
655. At most $55.56 per                       3.6
        costume.                              3.9

Chapter 3                    3.2                 3.12 is between 3 and 8, not
                             3.5 ; undefined             inclusive
Be Prepared                  3.8

3.1                             3.11
3.4

3.7

3.10
1200 Answer Key                  3.14      3.15
                                 3.17  ;   3.18  ; 
3.13
3.16  ;                          3.2       3.3  yes, yes  yes, yes

Try It

3.1

3.4  no, no  yes, yes            3.5       3.6

3.7                              3.8       3.9 

                                                

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Answer Key 1201

3.10                  3.11                  3.12

      

3.13 x-intercept:     3.14 x-intercept:     3.15 x-intercept:
        y-intercept:          y-intercept:          y-intercept:

3.16 x-intercept:     3.17                     3.18
        y-intercept:

3.19                  3.20                  3.21
1202 Answer Key                  3.23                            3.24

3.22

3.25 undefined                   3.26 0                          3.27
3.28 10                          3.29                               3.30

3.31                             3.32                            3.33
                                         

3.34                             3.35  intercepts  horizontal    3.36  vertical line  slope-
                                         line  slope-intercept           intercept  horizontal line
                                         vertical line                    intercepts

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           Answer Key 1203

3.37   50 inches                    3.38   40 degrees                 3.39   $25
       66 inches                           65 degrees                        $85
       The slope, 2, means                 The slope, means                  The slope, 4, means that
      that the height, h,                 that the temperature              the weekly cost, C,
      increases by 2 inches               Fahrenheit (F) increases 1        increases by $4 when the
      when the shoe size, s,              degree when the number            number of pizzas sold, p,
      increases by 1. The                 of chirps, n, increases by        increases by 1. The
      h-intercept means that              4. The T-intercept means          C-intercept means that
      when the shoe size is 0,            that when the number of           when the number of pizzas
      the height is 50 inches.            chirps is 0, the                  sold is 0, the weekly cost is
                                          temperature is 40°.               $25.
                                          
                                                                            

3.40   $35                          3.41  parallel  not parallel;     3.42  parallel  not parallel;
       $170                                 same line                         same line
       The slope, means
      that the weekly cost, C,

      increases by        when

      the number of invitations,

      n, increases by 1.

      The C-intercept means that

      when the number of

      invitations is 0, the weekly

      cost is $35.

      

3.43  parallel  parallel            3.44  parallel  parallel          3.45  perpendicular  not
                                    3.47                                      perpendicular
3.46  perpendicular  not            3.50
        perpendicular               3.53                              3.48

3.49                                                                  3.51
3.52                                                                  3.54
1204 Answer Key

3.55                              3.56                              3.57
                                                                    3.60
3.58                              3.59                              3.63
                                                                    3.66
3.61                              3.62                              3.69

3.64                              3.65                              3.72
                                                                     3.75
3.67  yes  yes  yes  yes          3.68  yes  yes  no  no
        no                                 yes

3.70                              3.71

3.73                              3.74

      All points in the shaded          All points in the shaded           All points in the shaded
      region and on the                 region, but not those on           region, but not those on
      boundary line, represent          the boundary line,                 the boundary line,
      the solutions to                  represent the solutions to         represent the solutions to

3.76                              3.77                              3.78

      All points in the shaded          All points in the shaded           All points in the shaded
      region, but not those on          region, but not those on           region and on the
      the boundary line,                the boundary line,                 boundary line, represent
      represent the solutions to        represent the solutions to         the solutions to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1205

3.79                              3.80                               3.81 
                                                                             

      All points in the shaded          All points in the shaded      Answers will vary.
      region, but not those on          region and on the
      the boundary line,                boundary line represent
      represent the solutions to        the solutions to

3.82                              3.83                               3.84 
                                                                             

       Answers will vary.

3.85   (Khanh Nguyen,             3.86   (Maria, November 6),        3.87 
      kn68413), (Abigail Brown,         (Arm and o, January 18),
      ab56781), (Sumantha               (Cynthia, December 8),               
      Mishal, sm32479), (Jose           (Kelly, March 15), (Rachel,          
      Hern and ez, jh47983)             November 6)  {Maria,
      {Khanh Nguyen, Abigail            Arm and o, Cynthia, Kelly,
      Brown, Sumantha Mishal,           Rachel}  {November 6,
      Jose Hern and ez}                 January 18, December 8,
      {kn68413, ab56781,                March 15}
      sm32479, jh47983}

3.88                              3.89  Yes;                         3.90  No;

                                                                      Yes;

                                         No;

      
1206 Answer Key

3.91    no  {NBC, HGTV, HBO}      3.92   No  {Neal, Krystal,      3.93  yes  no  yes
        {Ellen Degeneres Show,          Kelvin, George, Christa,
       Law and Order, Tonight           Mike}  {123-567-4839
       Show, Property Brothers,         work, 231-378-5941 cell,
       House Hunters, Love it or        743-469-9731 cell,
       List it, Game of Thrones,        567-534-2970 work,
       True Detective, Sesame           684-369-7231 cell,
       Street}                          798-367-8541 cell,
                                        639-847-6971 cell}

3.94  no  yes  yes                3.95                            3.96   

                                                                  

3.97                              3.98                            3.99  t IND; N DEP  205; the
                                                                          number of unread emails
                                                                          in Bryan's account on the
                                                                          seventh day.

3.100   t IND; N DEP  460;        3.101  yes  no                  3.102  no  yes
       the number of unread         3.104
       emails in Anthony's
       account on the
       fourteenth day

3.103                                                             3.105

3.106                             3.107                           3.108

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         Answer Key 1207

3.109                             3.110              3.111

3.112                         3.113                  3.114

3.115 The domain is           3.116 The domain is    3.117                               
         The range is                  The range is           
                                                                                         for

                                                                    

                                                                  

3.118                    
         
                         for

                       

             

Section 3.1 Exercises

1.                            3.                     5.  A: yes, B: no, C: yes, D: yes
                                                          A: yes, B: no, C: yes, D: yes
1208 Answer Key                       11.
                                         17.
7.  A: yes, B: yes, C: yes, D: no 9.
     A: yes, B: yes, C: yes, D: no

13.                              15.

19.                              21.  23.

Access for free at openstax.org
25.    27.                                                           Answer Key 1209

              29.

            

31.    33.    35.

37.    39.    41.

43.    45.    47.
1210 Answer Key

49.                              51.                     53.

55.                              57.                     59.

61.                              63.                     65.

67.                              69. Answers will vary.  71. Answers will vary.

Section 3.2 Exercises

73.                              75.                     77.
                                                         83. undefined
79.                              81. 0                   89.

85.                              87.

Access for free at openstax.org
91.   93.                                                                          Answer Key 1211

                          95.

97.   99.                 101.

103.  105.                107.

109.  111.                113.

115.  117. vertical line  119. slope-intercept
1212 Answer Key                  123. intercepts                 125.  $31

121. intercepts

                                                                  $52

                                                                  The slope,         means

                                                                 that the payment, P,

                                                                 increases by        when

                                                                 the number of units of

                                                                 water used, w, increases

                                                                 by 1. The P-intercept

                                                                 means that when the

                                                                 number units of water

                                                                 Tuyet used is 0, the

                                                                 payment is $31.

                                                                 

127.  $42                        129.  $400                      131.  $1570
         $168.50                                                          $2690
         The slope, 0.575 means   $940                                    The slope gives the cost
        that the amount he is                                            per guest. The slope, 28,
       reimbursed, R, increases   The slope,              means         means that the cost, C,
        by $0.575 when the                                               increases by $28 when
        number of miles driven,  that Cherie's salary, S,                the number of guests
       m, increases by 1. The                                            increases by 1. The
       R-intercept means that    increases by $0.15 for                 C-intercept means that if
        when the number miles                                            the number of guests was
        driven is 0, the amount  every $1 increase in her                0, the cost would be $450.
        reimbursed is $42.
                                 sales. The S-intercept                  
        
                                 means that when her

                                 sales are $0, her salary is

                                 $400.

                                 

133. parallel                    135. neither                    137. parallel
139. perpendicular               141. neither                    143. perpendicular
145. perpendicular               147. neither                    149. parallel
151. It is perpendicular to the  153. Answers will vary.

        second line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             Answer Key 1213

Section 3.3 Exercises

155.                     157.                       159.

161.                     163.                       165.

167.                     169.                       171.

173.                     175.                       177.

179.                     181.                       183.

185.                     187.                       189.

191.                     193.                       195.

197.                     199.                       201.

203.                     205.                       207.

209.                     211.                       213.

215.                     217.                       219.

221.                     223.                       225.

227.                     229.                       231.

233.                     235. Answers will vary.

Section 3.4 Exercises    239.  no  no  no  yes  no  241.  yes  no  no  yes 
                                                            no
237.  yes  yes  no  no 
        no

243.                     245.                       247.

249.                     251.                       253.
1214 Answer Key                  257.  259.

255.

261.                             263.  265.

267.                             269.  271.

273.                             275.  277. 

                                             

                                              Answers will vary.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               Answer Key 1215

279.                                281. Answers will vary.
        

 Answers will vary.

Section 3.5 Exercises               285.  {1, 5, 7, -2}  {7, 3, 9,      287.  (Rebecca, January 18),
                                            -3, 8}                              (Jennifer, April 1), (John,
283.  {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}  {4, 8, 12,                                               January 18), (Hector, June
        16, 20}                                                                 23), (Luis, February 15),
                                                                                (Ebony, April 7), (Raphael,
                                                                                November 6), (Meredith,
                                                                                August 19), (Karen,
                                                                                August 19), (Joseph, July
                                                                                30)
                                                                                 {Rebecca, Jennifer, John,
                                                                                Hector, Luis, Ebony,
                                                                                Raphael, Meredith, Karen,
                                                                                Joseph}
                                                                                 {January 18, April 1,
                                                                                June 23, February 15, April
                                                                                7, November 6, August
                                                                                19, July 30}

289.  (+100, 17. 2), (110, 18.9),   291.  (2, 3), (4, -3), (-2, -1),    293.  (1, 4), (1, -4), (-1, 4), (-1,
        (120, 20.6), (130, 22.3),           (-3, 4), (4, -1), (0, -3)           -4), (0, 3), (0, -3)  {-1, 0,
                                            {-3, -2, 0, 2, 4}                   1}  {-4, -3, 3,4}
        (140, 24.0), (150, 25.7),
                                             {-3, -1, 3, 4}
        (160, 27.5)  {+100, 110,
        120, 130, 140, 150, 160,} 
        {17.2, 18.9, 20.6, 22.3,

        24.0, 25.7, 27.5}

295.  yes  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,    297.  yes  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,    299.  yes  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,
        3}  {9, 4, 1, 0}                    3}  0, 1, 8, 27}                    3}  {0, 1, 2, 3}

301.  no  {Jenny, R and y,          303.  yes  yes  no                  305.  yes  no  yes
        Dennis, Emily, Raul} 
        {RHern and ez@state.edu,
        JKim@gmail.com,
        Raul@gmail.com,
        ESmith@state.edu,
        DBroen@aol.com,
        jenny@aol.cvom, R and
        y@gmail.com}
1216 Answer Key

307.                             309.             311.      

                                                  

313.                             315.             317. 
                                                          
                                                          

319.                             321. 2           323. 6
        
                                 327. 4           329.  t IND; N DEP

325. 22

                                                                      the

                                                  number of unwatched

                                                  shows in Sylvia's DVR at

                                                  the fourth week.

331.  x IND; C DEP

                    the daily

cost if no books are

printed

                      the

daily cost of printing 1000

books

Section 3.6 Exercises            339.  no  yes    341. 

337.  no  yes

                                                   D:(-,), R:(-,)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Answer Key 1217

343.                     345.                     347. 

         D:(-,), R:(-,)           D:(-,), R:(-,)           D:(-,), R:(-,)
349.                     351.                     353. 

         D:(-,), R:{5}         D:(-,), R:               D:(-,), R:(-,)
355.                     357.                     359. 

                                 D:(-,), R:[0,)           (-,), R:(-,0]

 D:(-,), R:(-,)
1218 Answer Key                    363.                    365. 

361. 

         (-,), R:[0,)                      (-,), R:[ )              D:(-,), R:(-,)
367.                               369.                    371. 

         D:(-,), R:(-,)                    D:[0,), R:[0,)          D:[1,), R:[0,)
373.                               375.                    377. D: [2,), R: [0,)

                                    D:(-,), R:[1,)

379. D: (-,), R: [4,)              381. D:  R: [0, 2]      383.           
                                                                                 

                                                                       for
                                                                   
                                                                      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            Answer Key 1219

385.                   for
       no x  none   

        

Review Exercises

391.                        393.  ,   395.

397.                        399.      401.

403.                        405.      407.

409.                        411.      413.
1220 Answer Key                  417.            419. 1

415.

421.                             423. undefined  425. 0

427.                             429.            431.

433.                             435.            437.

439.                             441.            443. horizontal line

Access for free at openstax.org
445. intercepts  447. plotting points                                                             Answer Key 1221

                                       449. 
                                                $450
                                                The slope, 35, means
                                               that Marjorie's weekly
                                              profit, P, increases by $35
                                               for each additional
                                               student lesson she
                                               teaches.
                                              The P-intercept means
                                               that when the number of
                                               lessons is 0, Marjorie loses
                                               $250.
                                               

451. neither     453. neither          455.
457.             459.                  461.
463.             465.                  467.
469.             471.
475.             477.                  473.

481.             483.                  479.  yes  no  yes  yes; 
                                               no

                                       485.
1222 Answer Key                     489.                               491. 
                                                                               
487.

493.  D: {-3, -2, -1, 0}            495.  (4, 3), (-2, -3), (-2, -1),            Answers will vary.
         R: {7, 3, 9, -3, 8}                (-3, 1), (0, -1), (0, 4),  497.  yes  {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,
                                             D: {-3, -2, 0, 4}
499.  yes                                    R: {-3, -1, 1, 3, 4}              3}
         {-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3}                                               {0, 1, 8, 27}
         {-243, -32, -1, 0, 1, 32,  501. yes
        243}                                                           503. yes

505.                                507.                               509. 2
          
                                                                       515. no
                                                                       521. 
511. 18                             513. yes

517. yes                            519. no

                                                                        D: (-,), R: (-,)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               Answer Key 1223

523.                       525.                       527. 

                                                             D: (-,), R: [2,)

         D: (-,), R: (6)            D: (-,), R: [0,)  533. D: (-,), R: [2,)
529.                       531. 

 D: [ ), R: [0,)            D: (-,), R: [1,)

535.         
                 
        for
                         

  

Practice Test              539.   undefined           541.

537.
1224 Answer Key                  545.                            547.

543.

549.                             551.                            553.

555.  yes                                 557. 12                559. 
        {0, 1, 8, 27}            

                                                                        D: (-,), R: [1,)

561.                   
                           

       D: (-,)  R: [ )

Chapter 4                        4.2                             4.3
                                 4.5 Jon earned $22,000 and
Be Prepared                                                      4.6 The speed of the local train
                                       Ron earned $74,000.             is 48 mph and the speed of
4.1  yes;  no                                                          the express train is 60
                                 4.8                                   mph.
4.4                              4.11 conditional; one solution
                                                                 4.9
4.7
4.10                                                             4.12 conditional; one solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 1225

4.13                             4.14                               4.15
4.16                             4.17                               4.18
4.19                             4.20 no

Try It                           4.2  no  yes                       4.3

4.1  yes  no                     4.5                                4.6
4.4
4.7 no solution                  4.8 no solution                    4.9 infinitely many solutions
4.10 infinitely many solutions
                                 4.11   no solution,                4.12   no solution,
4.13                                   inconsistent, independent          inconsistent, independent

                                        one solution,                      one solution,
                                       consistent, independent            consistent, independent

                                 4.14                               4.15

4.16                             4.17                               4.18

4.19                             4.20                               4.21

4.22                             4.23 infinitely many solutions 4.24 infinitely many solutions

4.25   Since both equations      4.26   Since one equation is       4.27 3, 7
      are in standard form,            already solved for y, using
      using elimination will be        substitution will be most
      most convenient.  Since          convenient.  Since both
      one equation is already          equations are in standard
      solved for x, using              form, using elimination
      substitution will be most        will be most convenient.
      convenient.

4.28 2,                          4.29 160 policies                  4.30 1000 suits

4.31  Mark burned 11 calories    4.32  Erin burned 11 calories      4.33 The angle measures are
      for each minute of yoga          for each minute on the               55 and 35.
      and 7 calories for each          rowing machine and 5
      minute of jumping jacks.         calories for each minute
                                       of weight lifting.

4.34 The angle measures are 5    4.35 The angle measures are        4.36 The angle measures are
        and 85.                          42 and 138.                        66 and 114.

4.37 22, 68                      4.38 36, 54                        4.39 The length is 60 feet and
                                                                            the width is 35 feet.

4.40 The length is 60 feet and   4.41 It will take Clark 4 hours    4.42 It will take Sally hours
        the width is 38 feet.            to catch Mitchell.                 to catch up to Charlie.

4.43 The rate of the boat is 11  4.44 The speed of the canoe is     4.45 The speed of the jet is 236
        mph and the rate of the          7 mph and the speed of             mph and the speed of the
        current is 1 mph.                the current is 1 mph.              wind is 29 mph.
1226 Answer Key

4.46 The speed of the jet is 408  4.47 206 adults, 347 children      4.48 42 adults, 105 children
        mph and the speed of the
        wind is 24 mph.

4.49 13 dimes and 29 quarters     4.50 19 quarters and 51 nickels    4.51 3 pounds peanuts and 2
                                                                             pounds cashews

4.52 10 pounds of beans, 10       4.53 120 ml of 25% solution        4.54 125 ml of 10% solution
        pounds of ground beef             and 30 ml of 50% solution          and 125 ml of 40%
                                                                             solution

4.55 $42,000 in the stock fund    4.56 $1750 at 11% and $5250        4.57 Bank $4,000; Federal
        and $8000 in the savings          at 13%                             $14,000
        account

4.58 $41,200 at 4.5%, $24,000     4.59                                    4.60 
        at 7.2%                                                                   
                                                                                  

                                                ; when 1,500                        ; when 3,000

                                        benches are sold, the cost         benches are sold, the

                                        and revenue will be both           revenue and costs are both

                                        48,000                             $510,000

4.61  yes  no                     4.62  no  yes                      4.63
4.64
4.67 no solution                  4.65                               4.66

4.70 infinitely many solutions    4.68 no solution                   4.69 infinitely many
        where                                                                solutions
        is any real number                                                                 where
                                                                             real number     is any

                                        4.71  The fine arts department     4.72     The soccer team sold 200
                                              sold 75 adult tickets, 200            adult tickets, 300 student
                                              student tickets, and 75               tickets, and 100 child
                                              child tickets.                        tickets.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            Answer Key 1227

4.73                                     4.74                                   4.75
                                                 
                                                 

4.76                                     4.77
                                                 

                                                 
                                                 

4.78                                     4.79                                  4.80
        

        
        

4.81 The solution is                     4.82 The solution is            4.83
                                         4.85 no solution
4.84                                     4.88 infinitely many solutions  4.86 no solution

4.87  infinitely many solutions                               where      4.89         
                  where                          is any real number.
                                 is any  4.91  3  11  2
                                         4.94 7
      real number.                       4.97
                                         4.100
4.90  2                                  4.103 yes                       4.92   23
                                                                         4.95
4.93 37

4.96                                                                     4.98

4.99                                                                     4.101 no solution
4.102 infinite solutions                                                 4.104 yes
1228 Answer Key                    4.106  yes  no                     4.107

4.105  no  yes

4.108                              4.109                                   The solution is the grey
                                                                           region.

                                                                      4.110

         The solution is the grey           The solution is the grey           The solution is the grey
         region.                            region.                            region.

4.111                              4.112                              4.113

         The solution is the grey           The solution is the grey           No solution.
         region.                            region.                   4.116

4.114                              4.115

         No solution.                     The solution is the grey           The solution is the grey
                                          region.                            region.
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1229

4.117                           4.118                        4.119 
                                                                      

                                                              yes
                                                              no

          yes                    no
          no                     no

4.120 

         

 yes
 no

Section 4.1 Exercises           3.  yes  no                  5.
                                9.                           11.
1.  yes  no                     15.                          17. no solution
7.                              21. infinite solutions       23. infinite solutions
13.                             27. 1 point, consistent and  29. infinite solutions,
19. no solution
25. No solution, Inconsistent,        independent                  consistent, dependent
                                33.                          35.
      Independent               39.                          41.
31.                             45. no solution              47.

37.
43.
1230 Answer Key

49.                              51.                                53.
55.                              57.
61. infinitely many              63. infinitely many                59.

67.  elimination  substituion 69. Answers will vary.                65.  substitution 
                                                                          elimination

                                                                    71. Answers will vary.

Section 4.2 Exercises            75. and                            77. 14 and 23

73. 13 and 17                    81. Eighty cable packages          83. Mitchell would need to sell
                                       would need to be sold to           120 stoves for the
79. 22 and                             make the total pay the             companies to be equal.
                                       same.

85. 8 and 40 gallons             87. 1000 calories playing          89. Oranges cost $2 per pound
                                       basketball and 400 calories        and bananas cost $1 per
                                       canoeing                           pound

91. Package of paper $4,         93. Hot dog 150 calories, cup      95. Owen will need 80 quarts
      stapler $7                       of cottage cheese 220              of water and 20 quarts of
                                       calories                           concentrate to make 100
                                                                          quarts of lemonade.

97.  degrees and                 99. 16 degrees and 74 degrees      101. 134 degrees and 46
                                                                            degrees
     degrees

103. 37 degrees and 143          105. 16 degrees and 74             107. 45 degrees and 45
        degrees                          degrees                            degrees

109. Width is 41 feet and        111. Width is 10 feet and          113. 12 hours
        length is 118 feet.              length is 40 feet.

115. 1.83 hour                   117. Boat rate is 16 mph and       119. Boat rate is 18 mph and
                                         current rate is 4 mph.             current rate is 2 mph.

121. Jet rate is 265 mph and     123. Jet rate is 415 mph and       125. Answers will vary.
        wind speed is 22 mph.            wind speed is 25 mph.

Section 4.3 Exercises            129. 6 good seats, 10 cheap        131. 92 adult tickets, 220
                                         seats                              children tickets
127. 110 adult tickets, 190
        child tickets            135. 42 dimes, 8 quarters          137. 17 $10 bills, 37 $20 bills

133. 13 nickels, 3 dimes         141. 9 pounds of Chicory           143. 10 bags of M&M's, 15
                                         coffee, 3 pounds of                bags of Reese's Pieces
139. 80 pounds nuts and 40               Jamaican Blue Mountain
        pounds raisins                   coffee

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       Answer Key 1231

145. liters of each solution    147. 80 liters of the 25%          149. 240 liters of the 90%
                                        solution and 40 liters of          solution and 120 liters of
151. $1600 at 8%, 960 at 6%             the 10% solution                   the 75% solution
157. $55,000 on loan at 6%
                                153. $28,000 at 9%, $36,000 at     155. $8500 CD, $1500 savings
        and $30,000 on loan at                                             account
                                159. 
                                                                     161. Answers will vary.
                                        

                                       1,300; when 1,300 water
                                      bottles are sold, the cost
                                      and the revenue equal
                                      $13,000

Section 4.4 Exercises           165.  no  no                       167.
                                171.                               173.
163.  no  yes                   177.                               179.
169.                                                               185.

175.                                                               191. 45 degrees, 60 degrees,
                                                                           75 degrees
181.                            183. no solution

187.    where                   189.          where

      is any real number              is any real number

193. $20, $5, $10               195. Answers will vary.

Section 4.5 Exercises

197.                                  199.                         201.

                                            

                                            
1232 Answer Key                  205.                            207.
                                                                         
203.                                                                     
                                         
                                                                         

209.                             211.                            213.

215.                             217.                            219.
221.                             223. no solution                225. no solution
227. infinitely many solutions   229. infinitely many solutions  231. Answers will vary.

                   where                            where
                                         is any real number
        is any real number

Section 4.6 Exercises            235. 10                         237.  6  
                                 241.                            243. 49
233. 4                           247. 25                         249.
239.  9   8                      253.                            255.
245.                             259.                            261.
251.                             265. infinitely many solutions  267. inconsistent
257.                             271. infinitely many solutions  273. yes
263.                             277. Answers will vary.         279. Answers will vary.
269. inconsistent
275. yes

Section 4.7 Exercises            283.  false  true               285.  false  true

281.  false  true

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 1233

287.                              289.                              291.

        The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey
        region.                           region.                           region.

293.                              295.                              297.

        The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey
        region.                           region.                           region.

299.                              301.                              303.

        The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey
        region.                           region.                           region.

305.                              307.                              309.

      The solution is the grey          The solution is the grey          No solution.
      region.                           region.
1234 Answer Key                  313.                            315.

311.

        No solution.                   The solution is the grey        The solution is the grey
317.                                   region.                         region.

                                 319.                            321. 
                                                                         

The solution is the grey                yes                               yes
region.                                 no                                no

323.                             325.                            327. Answers will vary.
                                         

 no                                     no
 yes                                    yes

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    Answer Key 1235

Review Exercises

329.  yes  no                   331.                               333.

                                                                         no solution

335. one solution, consistent   337.                               339.
        system, independent
        equations               343.                               345.

341. infinitely many solutions  349. 50 irises and 150 tulips      351. 10 calories jogging and 10
                                                                           calories cycling
347. elimination
                                355. 35 degrees and 55             357. Length = 502 feet, Width =
353. 119 degrees and 61                 degrees                            212 feet
        degrees
                                361. the rate of the jet is 395    363. 41 dimes and 11 pennies
359. an hour                            mph, the rate of the wind
                                        is 7 mph

365.     liters of 30%          367. $29,000 for the federal       369.  no  no
                                        loan, $14,000 for the
      solution,     liters of           private loan

      60% solution

371.                            373. no solution                   375. 25, 20, 15

377.                                  379.                               381.

                                                                               

                                                                               

                                                                               

383.                            385. no solution                   387.
389. 33
                                391.                               393.
1236 Answer Key                  397.  yes  yes      399.

395. inconsistent

                                                           The solution is the grey
                                                           region.

401.                             403.                405. 

                                                           

      The solution is the grey         No solution.
      region.

Practice Test                                                 yes
                                                              no
407.                             409.
                                                     411.

413.                             415.                417. 15 liters of 1% solution, 5
                                                             liters of 5% solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               Answer Key 1237

419. The candy cost $20; the      421. 
        cookies cost $5; and the          
        popcorn cost $10.

                                        no
                                        yes

Chapter 5

Be Prepared

5.1                               5.2                            5.3

5.4                               5.5                            5.6

5.7                               5.8  ;  ;                      5.9
5.10                              5.11                           5.12

Try It                            5.2  binomial, 3  trinomial, 3 5.3   

5.1  monomial, 0                        monomial, 0 
       polynomial, 3 
      trinomial, 4                     polynomial, 4  monomial,
       binomial, 2  monomial,
      10                               7

5.4                               5.5                            5.6 
                                                                       
5.7
5.10                              5.8                            5.9
5.13                              5.11                           5.12
5.16                              5.14                           5.15
                                  5.17  18  50                   5.18  20  2 
1238 Answer Key                  5.20 The height is 31 feet.  5.21 

5.19 The height is feet.

                                                              
                                                              

                                                              

5.22                             5.23                         5.24              
                                         
                                                              
        
                                 5.26                         5.27  1  1
5.25                                     
                                                              5.30            
                                 5.29    
5.28  1  1

                                                              

5.31                             5.32                         5.33            

5.34                             5.35                         5.36   

5.37      1                      5.38        1                5.39        
                                         
                                                                            

5.40                             5.41                         5.42            
                                         
                                                 20,000       
                                 5.44        
5.43                                                          5.45  1,300 

5.46          0.075              5.47                         5.48           400,000
5.49                             5.50 
                                                              5.51 
                                                                      

5.52                               5.53                         5.54 
                                                                        

5.55                             5.56                         5.57 
                                                                      

5.58                             5.59                         5.60
        
                                 5.62                         5.63 
5.61                                                                  
        

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      Answer Key 1239

5.64                             5.65                            5.66          
                                         

5.67  FOIL;                      5.68   Binomial Squares;        5.69 
         Binomial Squares;                                               

         Binomial Squares;             Product of Conjugates;

         Product of Conjugates;                      FOIL;
                                                               

                                       Binomial Squares;

5.70                                     5.71                            5.72
        
                                 5.74                            5.75
5.73                             5.77                            5.78
5.76                             5.80                            5.81
5.79                             5.83                            5.84
5.82                             5.86                            5.87 
5.85
                                 5.89                                    
5.88                             5.92 yes                        5.90
         undefined

5.91 yes

Section 5.1 Exercises            3.  binomial, 1 trinomial, 2    5.                 
                                      polynomial, 3 trinomial,                     
1.  trinomial, 5  polynomial,        5                               
    3  binomial, 2  monomial,                                              
    0                                 monomial, 0                11. 
     binomial, 2                                                              
                                                                 17. 
7.                   9.                                          23. 

                                                                       
                                                                 29.
                                                                 35.
                                                                 41.
13.                              15.

19.                              21. 
                                       

25.                              27.

31.                              33.

37.                              39.
1240 Answer Key

43.                              45.                          47.
49.
55.                              51.                          53.
61.
67. The height is 11 feet.       57.                          59.
73. 
                                 63.  187  40  2              65.      4  40
                                 69. The revenue is $10,800.
                                                              71. The cost is $456.
                                   75.
                                                                    77. Answers will vary.
79. Answers will vary.
                                          
                                          
                                          

Section 5.2 Exercises

81.                              83.                          85.
                                       
87.                                                           91.    
                                 89. 

93.  1  1                        95.                          97.     

99.                              101.                         103.  
                                 107.  
                                                              109.   
105.  

111.  1                          113.                         115.    

117.                             119.        1                121.    1                     
                                         

123.                             125.                          127.   
        

129.                             131.                         133.    
                                 137.                         139.
135.                             143.                         145.
141.                             149.                         151.
147.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1241

153.                     155.           157.  

159.                     161.           163.        

165.                     167.    0.038  169.  16,000,000,000
                                                 0.00000843

171.  0.02  500,000,000  173.  0.0000056  20,000,000 175. Answers will vary.

177. Answers will vary.

Section 5.3 Exercises

179.                     181.           183. 
                                                
185.                     187.
                                           189.

      

191.                     193.           195.

197.                     199.           201.

203.                     205.           207.

209.                     211.                 213.

215.                     217.           219.

221.                     223.           225.

227.                     229.           231.

233.                     235.           237.

239.                     241.           243.

245.                     247.           249.

251.                     253.           255.

257.                     259.           261.

263.                     265.           267.

269.                     271.           273.

275.                     277.           279.

                                              

                                              
1242 Answer Key

281.                             283.                                       285. Answers will vary.
                                         
                                                        293.
287. Answers will vary.                                 299.
                                                        305.
Section 5.4 Exercises                                   311.
                                                        317.
289.                             291.                   323.
                                                        329.
295.                             297.
301.                             303.                           
307.                             309.                           
313.                             315.                   335. no
319.                             321.                   341. Answers will vary.
325.                             327. 
                                                        347.
                                                        353.
                                                        359.
331.                             333. -6                365.  165  39  5
337. yes                         339. answer will vary  371.

Review Exercises                 345. trinomial         377.
                                 351.                   383.
343. binomial                    357.                   389.
                                 363.
349.                             369. 

355.                                     
                                         
361.                                     
                                 375.
367. The height is       .       381. 1

373.                             387.
379.
385.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                       Answer Key 1243

391. 36             393.     395.
397.                399.     401.
403.                405.     407.
409.                411. 1   413.
                    417.     419.
415.                423.     425.
421.                429.     431.
427.                435.     437.
433.                441.     443.
439.                447.     449.
445.                453.     455.
451.                459.     461.
457.                465.     467.
463.                471.     473.
                    477.     479.
469.                483.     485. no
475.
481.                489.     491.
                    495.     497.
                    501.     503.
                    507.     509. yes
Practice Test       513.     515. 

487.  trinomial  4                   
493.
499.
505.
511.
1244 Answer Key

Chapter 6                             6.2 72      6.3
                                      6.5         6.6 -54, 54
Be Prepared
                                      6.8         6.9
6.1                                   6.11        6.12

6.4 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 18, 24,              6.3
      36, 72                                      6.6
                                                  6.9
6.7                                               6.12
                                                  6.15 
6.10
                                                          
Try It                                            6.18

6.1                                   6.2         6.21
                                                  6.24
6.4                                   6.5         6.27
                                                  6.30
6.7                                   6.8         6.33
                                                  6.36
6.10                                  6.11        6.39
                                                  6.42
6.13                                  6.14        6.45
                                                  6.48
6.16                                  6.17        6.51
                                                  6.54
                                      6.20        6.57
6.19                                  6.23
6.22                                  6.26 prime     6.60
6.25 prime                            6.29
6.28                                  6.32
6.31                                  6.35
6.34                                  6.38
6.37                                  6.41
6.40                                  6.44
6.43                                  6.47
6.46                                  6.50
6.49                                  6.53
6.52                                  6.56
6.55
6.58                                     6.59

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 Answer Key 1245

6.61                                6.62                         6.63
6.64                                      6.65
6.67                                                                   6.66
6.70                                6.68
6.73                                6.71                             6.69
6.76                                6.74
6.79                                6.77                         6.72
6.82                                                             6.75
6.85                                 6.80
6.88                                6.83                                    6.78
6.91
6.94                                 6.86                            6.81
6.97                                6.89
                                    6.92                         6.84
                                    6.95                            6.87
                                    6.98
                                                                 6.90

                                                                 6.93

                                                                 6.96

6.100    or                         6.101       or               6.99             or
                                                                         
                                                                                   or
                                                                 6.102                        
                                                                          

6.103    and 15, 17                 6.104       and 21, 23       6.105 The width is 5 feet and
                                                                          length is 6 feet.
6.106 The width of the patio is     6.107 5 feet and 12 feet
         12 feet and the length is                               6.108 The other leg is 24 feet
         15 feet.                                                         and the hypotenuse is
                                                                          25 feet.

6.109  5 seconds;  0 and 3          6.110  4 seconds;  0 and 2
         seconds;  196 feet                  seconds;  144 feet

Section 6.1 Exercises

1.                                  3.                           5.

7.                                  9.                           11.

13.                                 15.                          17.

19.                                 21.                          23.

25.                                 27.                          29.
1246 Answer Key

31.                              33.                     35.
                                                         41.
37.                              39.                     47.
                                                         53.
43.                              45.                     59. Answers will vary.

49.                              51.                     65.
                                                         71.
55.                              57. Answers will vary.  77.
                                                         83.
Section 6.2 Exercises            63.                     89.
                                 69.                     95.
61.                              75.                     101.
67.                              81.                     107.
73.                              87. Prime               113.
79.                              93.                     119.
85. Prime                        99.                     125.
91.                              105.                    131.
97.                              111.                    137.
103.                             117.                    143.
109.                             123.                    149.
115.                             129.                    155. Answers will vary.
121.                             135.
127.                             141.                    163.
133.                             147.                    169.
139.                             153.                    175.
145.                                                     181.
151.
157. Answers will vary.

Section 6.3 Exercises

159.                             161.

165.                             167.

171.                             173.

177.                             179.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1247

183.                     185.                     187.
189.                           191.                     193.
195.
201.                     197.                     199.
207.                          203.                            205.
213.
219.                     209.                     211.
225.                     215.                     217.
231. Answers will vary.  221.                     223.
                         227.                     229. Answers will vary.

Section 6.4 Exercises

233.                     235.                     237.
                                                  243.
239.                     241.                     249.

245.                     247.                         255.
                                                  261.
251.                     253.
                                                                      271.
257.                     259. prime

263.                     265.

267.                                 269.

273. Answers will vary.  275. Answers will vary.

Section 6.5 Exercises

277.                     279.                     281.

283.                     285.                     287.

289.                     291.                     293.

295.                     297.                     299.

301.                     303.                     305.

307.                     309.                     311.

313.   or                315.        or           317.    or

                                                          ,                 
1248 Answer Key

319.   or                           321.  and 11, 13                323.    and 12, 14

       ,         

325. Width: 4 feet; Length: 7       327. Width: 5 feet; Length: 11  329. The sides are 6 feet and 8
        feet.                               feet.                           feet.

331. The building side is 8 feet,   333.  0 seconds and 2           335. Answers will vary.
        the hypotenuse is 17 feet,          seconds  1 second
        and the third side is 15
        feet.

Review Exercises                    339.                            341.
                                    345.
337.                                351.                            347.
343.                                357.
349.                                363. Prime                      353.
355.                                369.                            359.
361.                                375. Prime                      365.
367.                                381.                            371.
373.                                387.                            377.
379.                                393.
385.                                399.                            383.
391.                                405.
397.                                411. prime                      389.
403.                                417.
409.                                                                395.
415.                                 423.
421.                                429.                            401.
427.                                435.
433.                                                                407.
                                    441. The numbers are
                                                  or 19 and 21.     413.

                                                                    419.

                                                                    425.

                                                                    431.

                                                                    437.    or

                                                                          

439.   or                                                        and 443. The lengths are 8, 15, and
                                                                                   17 ft.
                 

Access for free at openstax.org
Practice Test                                                                                                                 Answer Key 1249

445.                              447.                              449.
                                                                    455.
451.                              453.                              461. The width is 12 inches

457.                              459.                                      and the length is 14
                                                                            inches.

463.    or          

Chapter 7                         7.2                               7.3

Be Prepared                       7.5                               7.6

7.1                               7.8                               7.9

7.4                               7.11                              7.12

7.7                               7.14 The speed of the bus is 28   7.15
                                          mph.
7.10
7.13

7.16  1;  -8;  0                  7.17                              7.18

Try It

7.1                               7.2                               7.3

                                                                    7.6
                                                                    7.9
7.4                               7.5                               7.12

7.7                               7.8

7.10                              7.11

7.13                              7.14                              7.15

7.16                              7.17                              7.18

7.19 The domain of        is all  7.20 The domain of        is all  7.21

      real numbers where                real numbers where

        and                               and

7.22                              7.23                              7.24
1250 Answer Key

7.25                             7.26                          7.27

7.28                             7.29                          7.30

7.31                             7.32                          7.33
                                              ,
                      ,

7.34                             7.35                          7.36
7.37                             7.38                          7.39
7.40                             7.41                          7.42
7.43                             7.44                          7.45
7.46                             7.47                          7.48
7.49                             7.50                          7.51
7.52                             7.53                          7.54
7.55                             7.56                          7.57
7.58                             7.59                          7.60

7.61                             7.62                          7.63
                                                               7.66
7.64                             7.65                          7.69
                                                               7.72 There is no solution.
7.67                             7.68                          7.75 There is no solution.
                                                               7.78 There is no solution.
7.70                             7.71 There is no solution.    7.81

7.73                             7.74                          7.84
                                                               7.87 The pediatrician will
7.76 There is no solution.       7.77 There is no solution.
                                                                       prescribe 12 ml of
7.79  The domain is all real     7.80  The domain is all real          acetaminophen to Emilia.
                                         numbers except
      numbers except

      and                              and                   

      

7.82                             7.83
                                 7.86
7.85

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 1251

7.88 The pediatrician will         7.89 The distance is 150 miles.  7.90 The distance is 350 miles.
        prescribe 180 mg of fever
        reducer to Isabella.

7.91 The telephone pole is 40      7.92 The pine tree is 60 feet    7.93 Link's biking speed is 15
        feet tall.                         tall.                            mph.

7.94 The speed of Danica's         7.95 Dennis's uphill speed was   7.96 Joon's rate on the country
        boat is 17 mph.                    5 mph and his downhill           roads was 50 mph.
                                           speed was 10 mph.

7.97 Kayla's biking speed was      7.98 Victoria jogged 6 mph on    7.99 When the two gardeners
        15 mph.                            the flat trail.                  work together it takes 2
                                                                            hours and 24 minutes.

7.100  When Daria and her          7.101 Kristina can paint the     7.102 It will take Jordan 6
       mother work together it              room in 12 hours.                hours.
       takes 2 hours and 6
       minutes.

7.103              He would        7.104       It would             7.105    hours

       burn 432 calories.                 travel 250 miles.         7.108       

7.106              500 units       7.107      

7.109                              7.110                            7.111   

7.112                              7.113                            7.114

7.115                              7.116                            7.117  
                                                                            More than 150 items
                                                                           must be produced to
                                                                           keep the average cost
                                                                           below $60 per item.

7.118              More

       than 60 items must be

       produced to keep the

       average cost below $20

       per item.

Section 7.1 Exercises

1.                                 3.      ,  ,                     5.

     

7.                                 9.                               11.

13.                                15.                              17.

19.                                21.                              23.
1252 Answer Key

25.                              27.               29.
                                                   35.
31.                              33.               41.

37.                              39.

43.                              45.               47.

49.                              51.               53.

55.                              57.               59.     and

61.       and                    63.               65.

67.                              69.               71. Answers will vary.

73. Answers will vary.

Section 7.2 Exercises

75.                              77.               79.

81.                              83.               85.

87.                              89.               91.

93.                              95.               97.

99.                              101.              103. 
      
                 ,                              ,                          ,

105.                                    107.       109.
                        ,

111.                             113.              115.
                                                   121.
117.                             119.              127.
                                                   133.
123.                             125.              139.

129.                             131.

135.                             137.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           Answer Key 1253

141.                          143.                           145. 
147. Answers will vary.                                              

                              149.  Answers will vary.
                                       Answers will vary.
                                       Answers will vary.

                                      

Section 7.3 Exercises

151.                          153.                           155.

157.                          159.                           161.

163.                          165.                           167.

169.                          171.                           173.

175.                          177.                           179.

181.                          183.                           185.

187.                          189.                           191.

193.                          195. Answers will vary.

Section 7.4 Exercises

197.                          199.                           201.

203.                          205.                           207.

209.                          211.                           213.
                                                             219.
215.                          217.

221.                          223.                           225.

227.                          229. no solution               231.  The domain is all real

                                                                   numbers except

                                                                   and  

                                                                                   

233.  The domain is all real  235.                           237.

      numbers except

      and                
1254 Answer Key

239.                               241.                         243.

245.                               247.                         249.

251. Answers will vary.

Section 7.5 Exercises

253.                               255.                         257.

259.                               261.                         263.  162 beats per minute 
                                                                        yes

265. ml                            267.   calories              269.   Canadian dollars
271. cups
277. 950 miles                     273. 4 bags                  275.  6 

                                   279. 680 miles               281. foot ( in.)

283.   feet                        285.   mph                   287. mph

289. mph                           291. mph                     293. mph

295. mph                           297.   mph                   299. mph

301. mph                           303. 3 mph                   305. hours

307. hours and minutes             309. hours and minutes       311. min

313.                               315.                         317.        

319.             liters            321.             pounds 323.

325.                               327.               16.8 mpg  329.         hours
                                   333.             $55
331.       cavity                                               335. Answers will vary.

337. Answers will vary.

Section 7.6 Exercises

339.                               341.                         343.              
                                                                349.               
345.                               347.                         355.                 
351.                                                            361.               
357.                               353.             
                                                                367.
363.                               359.             

                                   365.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         Answer Key 1255

369.                     371.                              373.

375. Answers will vary.

Review Exercises         379.                              381.

377.                     385.                              387.
383.
389.                     391.                              393.
395.
401.                     397.                              399.

407.                     403.                              405.

                         409.                              411.

413.                     415.                              417.
419.                     421.
425.                     427.                              423.
431.                     433.
437.                     439. no solution                  429.

                                                           435.

                                                           441.  The domain is all real

                                                                 numbers except

                                                                 and     

                                                                 

443.                     445.                              447.

449.                     451.  calories                    453.

455. 23 feet             457. mph                          459. mph

461. minutes             463. days                         465.

467.   mph               469.  feet                        471. tickets

473.                     475.                              477.            

479.                     481.

                                 
                                  More than 10,000 items
                                 must be produced to keep
                                 the average cost below

                                        per item.
1256 Answer Key                    485.               487.
                                   491.
Practice Test                                         493.
                                   497. 
483.                                                  499.
489.                               503.
495.                                                  505. Oliver's dad would take
501.                                                               hours to split the logs

                                                              himself.

507. The distance between
        Dayton and Columbus is
        64 miles.

Chapter 8                          8.2 3.85           8.3  ;  ; 
                                   8.5                8.6
Be Prepared                        8.8
                                   8.11               8.9                                   
8.1  8;  -1;  -729                 8.14               8.12
8.4                                8.17               8.15
                                   8.20               8.18
8.7
8.10                                                           8.21
8.13

8.16

8.19 

8.22                               8.23               8.24
              

Try It                             8.2  10            8.3  not a real number 
                                   8.5  3  4  3       8.6  10  2  4
8.1   15                           8.8   not real 
8.4   not a real number                               8.9 
                                                            
8.7   not real 

8.10                               8.11               8.12           
        
                                                            
8.13   w   q
                                   8.14   p   q       8.15  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1257

8.16                     8.17                8.18  

8.19                     8.20                8.21  

8.22                     8.23                8.24              

                                             

8.25                     8.26                8.27                  
8.28 
                         8.29                8.30            

                                             

8.31                     8.32                8.33 

                                                                 

8.34                     8.35                8.36             no real

                                             number

8.37                     8.38                8.39   
                                             8.42   
8.40                     8.41   

8.43                     8.44                8.45              

                                             

8.46                     8.47                8.48            

                                             

8.49                     8.50                8.51   
        
                         8.53                8.54            
8.52   

                                             

8.55  6  2  2            8.56  10  3  3      8.57  No real solution 
                                                     

8.58  No real solution   8.59                8.60  
                                                     
                         8.62  8                                  not a real
8.61  9                                      8.63  
                                                     number
1258 Answer Key

8.64                 not a       8.65                8.66      

       real number

8.67                             8.68                8.69  

8.70                             8.71                8.72        
                                                             
8.73                                                               
                                 8.74                8.75 
8.76                  
                                 8.77                8.78 
                                                             
8.79                             8.80                              
8.82                                                 8.81            
                                 8.83                8.84 

8.85                             8.86                8.87
                                         

8.88                             8.89                8.90 
                                                             
8.91                             8.92
8.94                             8.95                8.93  
8.97                             8.98
                                                     8.96      

                                                     8.99      

8.100                            8.101               8.102             

8.103                            8.104               8.105

                                        

8.106                            8.107               8.108

8.109                            8.110               8.111
8.112                            8.113               8.114
8.115                            8.116               8.117
8.118                            8.119               8.120

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Answer Key 1259

8.121            8.122                       8.123

8.124            8.125                       8.126

8.127            8.128                       8.129

8.130            8.131 9 seconds             8.132 seconds

8.133   feet     8.134             feet      8.135            no value at

8.136          no value at 8.137             8.138 
                                                      
8.139            8.140                   
                                             8.141 

8.142            8.143                       8.144 

8.145            8.146                       8.147  domain:    

                                                    

                                                     range: 

8.148  domain:   8.149  domain:              8.150  domain:    
                                                      
         

        range:                                         range:  

                         range:  

8.151            8.152                       8.153

8.154            8.155                       8.156           

8.157            8.158                       8.159
1260 Answer Key

8.160                            8.161                       8.162
8.163                            8.164                       8.165
8.166                            8.167 25                    8.168 29
8.169 109                        8.170 41                    8.171 i
8.172 i                          8.173                       8.174
8.175                            8.176                       8.177
8.178

Section 8.1 Exercises            3.  14                      5.  

1.  8 

7.  not real number              9.         not real number  11.  6  4
13.  8  3  1                     15. 
                                                             17.          

19.                              21.                         23.        
                                       
                                                             
25.                              27.  u 
                                                             29.  
           
31.                              33.                         35.  

37.                              39.                         41.        

43.                              45.                         47.        

                                                             

49.                              51. Answers will vary.      53. Answers will vary.

     

Section 8.2 Exercises

55.                              57.                         59.
                                                             65. 
61.                              63.                         71.        
                                                                            
67.                              69.                               
73.                                                          77.                  
                                                                              
                                 75.                         83.             

79.         not real             81.   not real

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Answer Key 1261

85.                       87.                        89.   
                          93.                        95.
91.   

97.                       99.                        101.

103.                      105.                       107.             

                               

109.                      111.                       113.    

                                                           

115. Answers will vary.   117. Answers will vary.

Section 8.3 Exercises

119.                      121.                       123.   
                                                     129.  9  5  8
125.                      127.            
                                    
     
                          133. 
131.  2  4  5                                        135.  not real  

137.  not real            139.  not real             141.           

143.                      145.  32,768   9           147.  4   not real
                                                     153.   
149.            not real  151.                       159.  

155.                      157.      

161.                      163. Answers will vary.

Section 8.4 Exercises

165.                      167.                       169.    0
                                                     175. 
171.                      173.                       181.           
                                                     187. 
177.      0               179.          

183.                      185.                                 
1262 Answer Key

189.                             191.                     193.        

195.                             197.                     199. 
                                                                  

201.                             203.                     205.        
207.                             209. 14
                                                          211.
                                 215.
213.                             221.                     217.
219.                             227.                     223.
225.                             233. 29                  229.
231.                             239.                     235.
237.                                                      241. Answers will vary.
243. Answers will vary.

Section 8.5 Exercises

245.                             247.                     249.  
                                                          255.
251.                             253.     

257.                             259.                     261.          

263.                             265.                     267.          

269.                             271.                     273.

275.                             277.                     279.
                                                          285. Answers will vary.
281.                             283. Answers will vary.

Section 8.6 Exercises            289. no solution         291.
                                 295.                     297.
287.                             301.                     303.
293.

299. no solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   Answer Key 1263

305.                   307.                     309.
311.                   313.                     315.
317.                   319.                     321.
323.                   325.                     327.
329.                   331.                     333.
335.                   337.                     339.
341.                   343. feet                345. seconds
347. 72 feet           349. Answers will vary.

Section 8.7 Exercises

351.           no value at 353.                 355.           

357.                   359.                     361.           

363.                   365.                     367. 

369.                   371.                     373.             

375.                   377.                     379.    

381.                   383.  domain:            385.  domain:    

                                                      

                                                      
1264 Answer Key                  389.  domain:            391.  domain: 

387.  domain:                                                     

        

                                                          

393.  domain:                    395.  domain:            397.  domain:  
                                                                  
        

                                                           

399.  domain:                    401.  domain:            403.  domain:  
                                                                  

                                                                 

405. Answers will vary.          407. Answers will vary.  413.
                                                          419.
Section 8.8 Exercises                                     425.
                                                          431.
409.                             411.           

415.                             417.

421.                             423.

427.                             429.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    Answer Key 1265

433.              435.                     437.
439.              441.                     443.
445.              447.                     449. 5
451. 53           453. 50                  455. 85
457. i            459.                     461.
463.              465.                     467.
469. i            471.                     473. 1
475. i            477. Answers will vary.  479. Answers will vary.

Review Exercises  483.  2  3  3            485. 
                                                   
481.  15          489.  
                                           491.  
487.  a 
493.              495.                     497.              

                                                 

499.   not real   501.                     503.
                  507.   
505.                                       509.  5  3  2

      

511.              513.  125   16           515.   
                                           521.
517.              519.             

523.              525.                     527.              
                          

529.              531.                     533.                

535.              537.                     539. no solution

541.              543.                     545.
547.              549.
                                           551.    feet

553.              555.                     557. 
1266 Answer Key                  561.  domain:   563.  domain:  
                                                         
559.                                     

565.                                    range:          range:  
571.
577. 1                           567.            569.
                                 573.            575.
Practice Test
                                 581.            583.  
579.                             587.            589.
                                 593.            595.
585.                             599.            601.

591.

597.

603.  domain:    

      

       range: 

Chapter 9

Be Prepared

9.1                              9.2             9.3

9.4                              9.5             9.6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                Answer Key 1267

9.7          9.8          9.9
9.10         9.11         9.12  ;  ; 
9.13         9.14         9.15
9.16         9.17         9.18

9.19         9.20         9.21

9.22         9.23         9.24                

Try It       9.2          9.3
             9.5          9.6
9.1          9.8          9.9
9.4          9.11
             9.14
9.7
                    9.17
9.10         9.20         9.12

9.13      ,  9.23               9.15

9.16                                  9.18
9.19
                          9.21              

                                

9.22                      9.24

      
1268 Answer Key

9.25                              9.26                                    9.27
9.28                                    9.29                               9.30
9.31                                                                        9.33
9.34                                  9.32
9.37                              9.35                               9.36
                                  9.38                               9.39

9.40                              9.41                               9.42

9.43                              9.44                               9.45

9.46                              9.47                                     9.48

9.49                              9.50                               9.51

9.52                              9.53                               9.54

9.55  2 complex solutions;  2     9.56  2 real solutions;  2         9.57  factoring;  Square
        real solutions;  1 real           complex solutions;  1              Root Property; 
        solution                          real solution                      Quadratic Formula

9.58   Quadratic Forumula;        9.59                                     9.60
       Factoring or Square
      Root Property  Square
      Root Property

9.61                              9.62                               9.63

9.64                              9.65                               9.66

9.67                              9.68                               9.69 The two consecutive odd
                                                                             integers whose product is
                                                                             99 are 9, 11, and -9, -11

9.70  The two consecutive even    9.71 The height of the triangle    9.72 The height of the triangle
      integers whose product is           is 12 inches and the base          is 11 feet and the base is
      128 are 12, 14 and -12,             is 76 inches.                      20 feet.
      -14.

9.73 The length of the garden     9.74  The length of the            9.75  The length of the flag
        is approximately 18 feet        tablecloth is approximatel         pole's shadow is
        and the width 11 feet.          11.8 feet and the width            approximately 6.3 feet
                                        6.8 feet.                          and the height of the flag
                                                                           pole is 18.9 feet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        Answer Key 1269

9.76 The distance between the      9.77  The arrow will reach 180    9.78  The ball will reach 48 feet
        opposite corners is              feet on its way up after 3        on its way up after
        approximately 7.2 feet.          seconds and again on its          approximately .6 second
                                         way down after                    and again on its way
                                         approximately 3.8                 down after approximately
                                         seconds.                          5.4 seconds.

9.79 The speed of the jet          9.80 The speed of the jet         9.81  Press #1 would take 12
        stream was 100 mph.                stream was 50 mph.              hours, and Press #2
                                                                           would take 6 hours to do
                                                                           the job alone.

9.82 The red hose take 6 hours     9.83                              9.84
        and the green hose take 3
        hours alone.

9.85  up;  down                    9.86  down;  up                   9.87   

9.88                               9.89 y-intercept:                 9.90 y-intercept:
                                           x-intercepts                      x-intercepts

9.91 y-intercept:  no              9.92 y-intercept:                 9.93
                                           x-intercepts
      x-intercept

9.94                               9.95                              9.96
1270 Answer Key                    9.98                                9.99

9.97

9.100                              9.101  The minimum value of         9.102      The maximum value of
                                          the quadratic function is               the quadratic function is
                                          -4 and it occurs when x                 5 and it occurs when x =
                                          = 4.                                    2.

9.103  It will take 4 seconds for  9.104  It will 6.5 seconds for the  9.105
       the stone to reach its             rocket to reach its                   
       maximum height of 288              maximum height of 676
       feet.                              feet.

                                                                              The graph of

                                                                                            is the same

                                                                             as the graph of

                                                                             but shifted up 1 unit. The

                                                                             graph of               is

                                                                             the same as the graph of

                                                                                       but shifted

                                                                             down 1 unit.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        Answer Key 1271

9.106                                    9.107                                   9.108
         

        The graph of

                      is the same

       as the graph of

       but shifted up 6 units. The

       graph of               is

       the same as the graph of

                 but shifted

       down 6 units.

9.109                                    9.110                                   9.111
                                                  

        The graph of                             The graph of
                              is the                                   is the

       same as the graph of                     same as the graph of
                      but shifted left                         but shifted left

       2 units. The graph of                    5 units. The graph of
                              is the                                   is the

       same as the graph of                     same as the graph of
                      but shift right 2                        but shifted

       units.                                   right 5 units.

9.112                                    9.113                                   9.114
1272 Answer Key                  9.116  9.117

9.115

9.118                            9.119  9.120

9.121                            9.122  9.123

                                                 
                                                 

9.124                            9.125  9.126

         
         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Answer Key 1273

9.127                  9.128        9.129
                                             

                                           

9.130                  9.131        9.132
         

                    

9.133                  9.134         9.135   

9.136  no solution                                      no solution

                                    5.
                                    11.
Section 9.1 Exercises               17.

1.                     3.

7.                     9.

13.                    15.
1274 Answer Key

19.                              21.                     23.
                                                         29.
25.                              27.                     35.
                                                         41.
31.                              33.                     47.
                                                         53.
37.                              39.                     59.
                                                         65.
43.                              45.
                                                         75.
49.                              51.
                                                         81.
55.                              57.                     87.
                                                         93.
61.                              63.                     99.
                                                         105.
67.                              69. Answers will vary.  111. Answers will vary.

Section 9.2 Exercises                                    117.
                                                         123.
71.                              73.                     129.
                                                         135.
                                       

77.                              79.

83.                              85.

89.                              91.

95.                              97.

101.                             103.

107.                             109.

Section 9.3 Exercises

113.                             115.

119.                             121.

125.                             127.

131.                             133.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            Answer Key 1275

137.                                139.                                141.
                                                                        147.  
143.                                145.                     
                                                                                
149.                                                                    153. Answers will vary.
        
                                    151.                                159.
                                                                        165.
                                                                        171.
                                                                        177.
                                                                        183.
                                                                        189.
Section 9.4 Exercises

155.                                157.

161.                                163.

167.                                169.

173.                                175.

179.                                181.

185.                                187.

191.                                193. Answers will vary.

Section 9.5 Exercises               197. The first and second           199. Two consecutive odd
                                            consecutive odd numbers             numbers whose product
195. Two consecutive odd                    are 24 and 26, and -26              is 483 are 21 and 23, and
        numbers whose product               and -24.                            -21 and -23.
        is 255 are 15 and 17, and
        -15 and -17.

201. The width of the triangle      203. The base is 24 feet and        205. The length of the
        is 5 inches and the height          the height of the triangle          driveway is 15.0 feet and
        is 18 inches.                       is 10 feet.                         the width is 3.3 feet.

207. The length of table is 8       209. The lengths of the three       211. The length of the
        feet and the width is 3             sides of the triangle are           diagonal fencing is 7.3
        feet.                               1.7, 3, and 3.5 ft.                 yards.

213. The ladder will reach 24.5     215. The rocket will reach 1200     217. The bullet will take 70
        feet on the side of the             feet on its way up at 1.97          seconds to hit the ground.
        house.                              seconds and on its way
                                            down at 38.03 seconds.

219. The speed of the wind          221. The speed of the current       223. The less experienced
        was 49 mph.                         was 4.3 mph.                        painter takes 6 hours and
                                                                                the experienced painter
                                                                                takes 3 hours to do the
                                                                                job alone.
1276 Answer Key

225. Machine #1 takes 3.6          227. Answers will vary.
        hours and Machine #2
        takes 4.6 hours to do the
        job alone.

Section 9.6 Exercises

229.                               231.                     233.  down  up

235.  down  up                     237.   ;                 239.   ;

241. y-intercept:                  243. y-intercept:        245. y-intercept:
       x-intercept                        x-intercept              x-intercept: none

247. y-intercept:                  249. y-intercept:        251. y-intercept:
       x-intercept: none                  x-intercept              x-intercept

253.                               255.                     257.

259.                               261.                     263.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         Answer Key 1277

265.                               267.                                 269.

271. The minimum value is          273. The minimum value is 6          275. The maximum value is 16
        when                              when x = 3.                          when x = 0.

277. In 5.3 sec the arrow will     279. In 3.4 seconds the ball will    281. A selling price of $20 per
        reach maximum height of            reach its maximum height             computer will give the
        486 ft.                            of 185.6 feet.                       maximum revenue of
                                                                                $400.

283. A selling price of $35 per    285. The length of one side          287. The maximum area of the
        pair of boots will give a          along the river is 120 feet          patio is 800 feet.
        maximum revenue of                 and the maximum are is
        $1,225.                            7,200 square feet.

289. Answers will vary.            291. Answers will vary.

Section 9.7 Exercises

293.                               295.                                 297.

      

       The graph of

                     is the same

      as the graph of

      but shifted up 4 units. The

      graph of             is

      the same as the graph of

                but shift down

      4 units.
1278 Answer Key                  301.                                   303.
                                         
299.

                                        The graph of
                                                              is the

                                       same as the graph of
                                                      but shifted

                                       right 3 units. The graph of
                                                              is the

                                       same as the graph of
                                                      but shifted left

                                       3 units.

305.                             307.                                   309.

311.                             313.                                   315.

317.                             319.                                   321.

Access for free at openstax.org
                              Answer Key 1279

323.      325.      327.

329.      331.      333. 
                            

335.      337.      339. 
                            
1280 Answer Key                  343.                     345. 
                                                                  
341. 
        

347.                             349.                     351. 
        

353.                             355.                     357.
359.
                                 361. Answers will vary.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1281

Section 9.8 Exercises      365.                    367.
                                                           
363.
        

                           

369.                                           
        
                                                                            

                           371.                    373.



375.                       377.                    379.                       
                           383.
381.                                               385.  
                           389.  
387. no solution                                   391. Answers will vary.
393. Answers will vary.    397.

Review Exercises                                   399.

395.
1282 Answer Key                  403.                              405.
                                 409.
401.                             415.                              411.
407.                             421.
413.                             427.                              417.
419.                             433.
425.                             439.                              423.
431.                             445.
437.                             451.  1  2  2  0                  429.
443.
449.                             457.                              435.
                                 463.
455.                                                               441.
461.
                                                                   447.
467. The height is 14 inches     469. The length of the
        and the width is 10              diagonal is 3.6 feet.     453.  factor  Quadratic
        inches.                                                            Formula  square root

                                                                   459.

                                                                   465. Two consecutive even
                                                                           numbers whose product
                                                                           is 624 are 24 and 26, and
                                                                           -24 and -26.

                                                                   471. The width of the serving
                                                                           table is 4.7 feet and the
                                                                           length is 16.1 feet.

473. The speed of the wind       475. One man takes 3 hours        477.
        was 30 mph.
                                       and the other man 6

                                       hours to finish the repair

                                       alone.

479.  up  down                   481.                              483.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       Answer Key 1283

485.                                487.  489.

491.                                493.  495. The maximum value is 2

                                                when x = 2.

497. The length adjacent to the 499.      501.

      building is 90 feet giving a

      maximum area of 4,050

      square feet.

503.                                505.  507.
1284 Answer Key                  511.      513. 
                                                   
509.

515.                             517.      519.
                                                   
      

                                                     

521.                             523.      525.

      

        
527. no solution

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 1285

Practice Test

529.                            531.                            533.

535. 2 complex                  537.                            539.  down 

                                                                          

                                                                       maximum value of
                                                                      when

541.                            543.                            545.         

547. The diagonal is 4.4 units
        long.

Chapter 10

Be Prepared

10.1       ;                    10.2                            10.3
                                10.5  ;                         10.6  ; 
10.4                            10.8                            10.9

10.7                            10.11                           10.12
                                10.14                           10.15
10.10  ; 
10.13

Try It

10.1                            10.2                            10.3  -8  5  40

                                                                10.6  Not a function
                                                                         Function; not one-to-
10.4  65  10  5                 10.5  One-to-one function               one
                                         Function; not one-to-
                                        one
1286 Answer Key

10.7  Not a function  One-               10.8  Function; not one-to-      10.9 Inverse function:
        to-one function                          one  One-to-one                  Domain:
                                                 function
                                                                                                  Range:

10.10 Inverse function:                         10.11                            10.12
         Domain:
                                 Range:

10.13               and                  10.14               and          10.15
         inverses.  so they are                   inverses.  so they are

10.16                                    10.17                            10.18

10.19                                    10.20                            10.21

10.22                                    10.23                            10.24

10.25                                    10.26                            10.27

10.28                                    10.29                            10.30

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          Answer Key 1287

10.31                             10.32  $21,071.81                  10.33 She will find 166
                                           $21,137.04                         bacteria.
             
                                            $21,170.00

10.34 They will find 1,102        10.35                              10.36 
         viruses.
                                                                                   

10.37                             10.38                              10.39

                                                                                              

10.40                             10.41                              10.42  2  
                                           2 
       

               

10.43                             10.44                              10.45

10.46                             10.47                              10.48
                                                                              

                                                                              

10.49                             10.50                              10.51 The quiet dishwashers
                                                                              have a decibel level of 50
                                                                              dB.
                                           
10.52 The decibel level of
         heavy traffic is 90 dB.  10.53  The intensity of the 1906   10.54  The intensity of the
                                         earthquake was about 8             earthquake in Chile was
10.55  0  1                              times the intensity of the         about 1,259 times the
10.58  8  15                             1989 earthquake.                   intensity of the
                                                                            earthquake in Los
                                                                            Angeles.

                                  10.56  0  1                        10.57  15  4

                                  10.59                              10.60 
                                                                              
1288 Answer Key

10.61                            10.62                            10.63            

10.64                            10.65                            10.66

10.67                                      10.68

10.69                            10.70                            10.71
                                                                  10.74
10.72                            10.73                            10.77
10.75                            10.76                            10.80
10.78                            10.79                            10.83
10.81                            10.82
                                                                  10.86
10.84                            10.85                            10.89 There will be 6.44 mg

10.87 There will be 62,500       10.88 There will be 47,700                left.
         bacteria.                        bacteria.

10.90 There will be 31.5 mg
         left.

Section 10.1 Exercises

1.                               3.                               5.               

                                                                  

7.                               9.  245  104  53                 11.  250  14  77



13. Function; not one-to-one     15. One-to-one function          17.  Not a function 
                                                                        Function; not one-to-one

19.  One-to-one function         21. Inverse function:            23. Inverse function:
       Function; not one-to-one        Domain:

                                                          Range:       Domain:                    Range:

25. Inverse function:                      27.                           29.

Domain:                          Range:

31.                and           33.                and           35.                and
      inverses.    so they are         inverses.    so they are         inverses.    so they are

Access for free at openstax.org
37.  and                        39.                     41.                          Answer Key 1289

     so they are                                             ,

     inverses (for nonnegative

43.                             45.                     47.

49.                             51.                     53.

55.       ,                     57.                     59.

61.                             63. Answers will vary.

Section 10.2 Exercises

65.                             67.                     69.

71.                             73.                     75.

77.                             79.                     81.

83.                             85.                     87.
1290 Answer Key

89.                              91.                 93.

95.                              97.                 99.
101.                                                 105.
107.                             103.                111. 
113.                                                 117.
                                 109.                123. Answers will vary.
119. 162 bacteria
125. Answers will vary.          115.                131.
                                                     137.
                                                     143.
                                                     149.
                                 121. 288,929,825    155.
                                                     161.
Section 10.3 Exercises                               167. 2
                                                     173.
127.                             129.                179.

133.                             135.

139.                             141.

145.                             147.

151.                             153.

157.                             159.

163.                             165.

169. 0                           171.

175.                             177.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 1291

181.                            183.                              185.

187.                            189.                              191.

193.                            195.                              197.
199.
205.                            201.                              203.

211. The sound of a garbage     207.                              209. A whisper has a decibel
        disposal has a decibel
        level of 100 dB.                                                level of 20 dB.

217. Answers will vary.         213. The intensity of the 1994    215. Answers will vary.
                                        Northridge earthquake in
                                        the Los Angeles area was
                                        about 40 times the
                                        intensity of the 2014
                                        earthquake.

Section 10.4 Exercises          221.  10  10                      223.  15 
                                                                  229.
219.  0  1                                                        235.
                                                                  241.
225.                            227.  3  7                        247.
                                                                  253.
231.                            233.                              259.

237.                            239.

243.                            245.

249.                            251.

255.                            257.
1292 Answer Key                  263. 2                           265. 2

261.

267.                             269.                             271.

273. 0                           275.                             277.

279.                             281.                             283.

285. Answers will vary.          287. Answers will vary.

Section 10.5 Exercises

289.                             291.                             293.

295.                             297.                             299.

301.                             303.                             305.

307.                             309.                             311.

313.                             315.                             317.

319.                             321.                             323.

325.                             327.                             329.

331.                             333.                             335.

337.                             339.                             341.

343.                             345.                             347. 13.9 years
349. 122,070 bacteria                                             353. 0.03 ml
                                 351. 8 times as large as the
355. Answers will vary.                  original population

Review Exercises

357.                             359.     356  41                 361. Function; not one-to-one

                 

363.  Function; not one-to-      365. Inverse function:                   367.               and
        one  Not a function              Domain:                                  inverses.  so they are

                                                          Range:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            Answer Key 1293

369.        371.              373.

375.        377.              379.

381.        383.              385.

387.        389. 330,259,000  391.

393.        395.              397.

399.        401. 0            403.

405.        407.              409.

411. 90 dB  413.  13          415.  8  5
417.        419.              421.
423.        425.
                                      427.
429.        431. 5.047
                              433.
1294 Answer Key

435.                             437.                        439.
                                 443. 11.6 years             445. 12.7 months
441.

Practice Test

447.                             449.  Not a function  One-  451.
                                         to-one function     457.
                                                             463. 40 dB

453.                             455.               

                                                  

459. 0                           461.

465.                             467.                                469.
                                 473.                        475. 1,921 bacteria
471.
                                 11.2                        11.3
Chapter 11                         11.5                        11.6

Be Prepared

11.1
11.4

Access for free at openstax.org
                           Answer Key 1295

11.7    11.8    11.9

11.10   11.11   11.12

11.13   11.14   11.15

Try It  11.2    11.3
        11.5    11.6
11.1
11.4      11.8       11.9
11.7

11.10   11.11   11.12
1296 Answer Key                        11.14                                    11.15  The circle is centered at
                                                                                                    with a radius of 2.
11.13
                                                                                         

11.16  The circle is centered at       11.17  The circle is centered at         11.18  The circle is centered at
                  with a radius of 4.                    with a radius of 3.                      with a radius of 5.

                                                                                         

11.19  The circle is centered at       11.20  The circle is centered at         11.21  The circle is centered at
                  with a radius of 4.                      with a radius of 3.                    with a radius of 2.

                                                                                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         Answer Key 1297

11.22  The circle is centered at       11.23      11.24
                  with a radius of 5.

         

11.25                                  11.26      11.27
                                                

11.28                                  11.29      11.30

11.31                                  11.32      11.33
1298 Answer Key                  11.35             11.36 
                                                            
11.34

11.37                            11.38      11.39

11.40                            11.41             11.42

11.43                            11.44      11.45

Access for free at openstax.org
                             Answer Key 1299

11.46      11.47      11.48

11.49      11.50      11.51
                    

11.52      11.53      11.54

11.55      11.56      11.57
1300 Answer Key                  11.59                         11.60

11.58

11.61                            11.62                         11.63  circle  ellipse 
                                                                        parabola  hyperbola

11.64  ellipse  parabola         11.65                         11.66
         circle  hyperbola

11.67                            11.68                         11.69 No solution

11.70                            11.71 No solution             11.72
11.73                                                   11.74           11.77 4 and 6
11.75
                                          11.76

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                Answer Key 1301

11.78  and 17           11.79  If the length is 12 inches,  11.80  If the length is 12 inches,
                               the width is 16 inches. If          the width is 9 inches. If
                               the length is 16 inches,            the length is 9 inches,
                               the width is 12 inches.             the width is 12 inches.

Section 11.1 Exercises

1.                      3. 13                               5. 5

7. 13                   9.                                  11.

13.  Midpoint:          15.  Midpoint:                      17.

                             

19.                     21.                                 23.

25.                     27.                                 29.  The circle is centered at

                                                                   with a radius of 1.

                                                                 
1302 Answer Key

31.  The circle is centered at       33.  The circle is centered at       35.  The circle is centered at
                with a radius of 4.                  with a radius of 5.                        with a radius of

                                                                                

37.  The circle is centered at       39.  The circle is centered at       41.  Center:  radius:
              with a radius of 8.                  with a radius of 2.          1

                                                                                

43.  Center:            radius: 6    45.  Center:            radius: 2    47.  Center:  radius: 2
                                                                                

49. Answers will vary.               51. Answers will vary.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     Answer Key 1303

Section 11.2 Exercises

53.                     55.  57. 
                                   

59.                     61.  63.

     

65.                     67.  69.

71.                     73.  75.
1304 Answer Key

77.                              79.                     81. 
                                                               

83.                              85.                     87. 
      

89.                              91.                     93.
95. Answers will vary.           97. Answers will vary.     103.

Section 11.3 Exercises

99.                              101.

Access for free at openstax.org
                      Answer Key 1305

105.    107.    109.

111.    113.    115.

117.    119.    121.

123.    125.    127.

              
1306 Answer Key                  131.                     133.

129.

135.                             137.                     139.

141.                             143. Answers will vary.  145. Answers will vary.
                                                               151.
Section 11.4 Exercises

147.                             149.

153.                             155.                     157.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                Answer Key 1307

159.      161.      163.

165.      167.      169. 

                          

171.      173.      175.  parabola  circle 
                            hyperbola  ellipse

177.      179.      181.
1308 Answer Key                  185. Answers will vary.   187. Answers will vary.

183.

Section 11.5 Exercises

189.                             191.                      193.

195.                             197.                      199.

201.                             203.                      205.
207. No solution                 209.                      211.
213.
219.                                215.                          217.
225.
231. and or 8 and 7              221.                      223.

                                 227.                                   229. and 14

                                 233. and or and 4 or      235. If the length is 11 cm, the
                                         6 and or 6 and 4          width is 15 cm. If the
                                                                   length is 15 cm, the width
                                                                   is 11 cm.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     Answer Key 1309

237. If the length is 10 inches,    239. The length is 40 inches         241. Answers will vary.
        the width is 24 inches. If          and the width is 30
        the length is 24 inches,            inches. The TV will not fit
        the width is 10 inches.             Donnette's entertainment
                                            center.
243. Answers will vary.

Review Exercises                    247.                                 249.

245.                                253.                                 255.
251.
257.                                259.  radius: 12, center:              261.  radius: 7, center:
                                                                                   

263.  radius: 8, center:            265.                                 267.



269.                                271.                                 273.

                                          
1310 Answer Key                  277.      279. 
                                                   
275.

281.                             283.      285.

287.                             289.      291.

293.                             295.      297.

                                       

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             Answer Key 1311

299.                          301.                                303.

305.                          307.                                309.  hyperbola  circle 
                                                                          parabola  ellipse

311.                          313.                                315.

317. No solution              319.                                321.
323. and or 4 and 3
                              325. If the length is 14 inches,
Practice Test                         the width is 15 inches. If
                                      the length is 15 inches,
327. distance: 10, midpoint:          the width is 14 inches.

                              329.                                331.
1312 Answer Key                  335.  circle  337.  ellipse
                                                       
333.  ellipse
        

339.  hyperbola                  341.  circle  343.  hyperbola
                                                       
                                                       

345. No solution                 347.          349.

351. The length is 44 inches
        and the width is 33
        inches. The TV will fit
        Olive's entertainment
        center.

Chapter 12

Be Prepared

12.1 5, 7, 9, 11                 12.2          12.3 20
                                               12.6 654
12.4 3, 7, 11, 15                12.5

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        Answer Key 1313

12.7                            12.8  81;                       12.9  12;  36;  108
12.10 35                        12.11                           12.12

Try It                          12.2                            12.3
                                12.5                            12.6
12.1                            12.8                            12.9
12.4                            12.11                           12.12
12.7                            12.14                           12.15
12.10                           12.17 45                        12.18 60
12.13                           12.20 8                         12.21
12.16

12.19

12.22                           12.23                           12.24

12.25   The sequence is         12.26   The sequence is not     12.27
                                       arithmetic as all the
       arithmetic with common          differences between the
                                       consecutive terms are
       difference       .  The         not the same.  The
                                       sequence is arithmetic
       sequence is arithmetic          with common difference

       with common difference

                .

        The sequence is not

       arithmetic as all the

       differences between the          The sequence is
                                       arithmetic with common
       consecutive terms are
                                       difference
       not the same.

12.28                           12.29 241                       12.30

12.31              The general  12.32             The general   12.33        The
                                         term is
       term is                                                         general term is

12.34                   The     12.35 1,890                     12.36 1,515

       general term is

12.37 2,300                     12.38 5,250                     12.39 2,670
1314 Answer Key                  12.41   The sequence is         12.42   The sequence is not
                                        geometric with common           geometric. There is no
12.40 3,045                                                             common ratio.  The
                                        ratio       The                 sequence is geometric
12.43                                                                   with common ratio
12.46                                   sequence is geometric
12.49                                                                             The sequence is
12.52                                   with common ratio               geometric with common
12.55
12.58                                            The sequence           ratio
12.61
                                        is not geometric. There

                                        is no common ratio.

                                 12.44                           12.45

                                 12.47             The           12.48         The

                                        general term is                 general term is

                                 12.50                           12.51
                                 12.53 96                        12.54
                                 12.56                           12.57
                                 12.59                           12.60

                                         12.62

12.63                                12.64

12.65                                       12.66

12.67  6  1  1  35               12.68  2  1  1  6               12.69

12.70                                   12.71

12.72                                   12.73                           12.74

12.75                            12.76                           12.77 3,584
12.78 280                                                        5.

Section 12.1 Exercises

1.                               3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               Answer Key 1315

7.                              9.                             11.

13.                             15.                            17.

19.                             21.                            23.

25.                             27.                            29.

31.                             33.                            35.

37.                             39.                            41.

43.                             45.                            47.

49.                             51.                                 53.

55.                             57.                            59.

61.                             63.                            65.

67.                             69.                            71.

73. Answers will vary.          75. Answers will vary.

Section 12.2 Exercises          79. The sequence is not        81. The sequence is arithmetic
                                      arithmetic.                    with common difference
77. The sequence is arithmetic
      with common difference

83.                             85.                            87.

89.                             91.                            93.

95.            The general      97.          The general term  99.            The general
      term is                         is                             term is

101.                   The      103.                    The    105.                   The

      general term is                 general term is                general term is

107. 1,635                      109.                           111. 360
113. 6,325                      115. -3,575                    117. 6,280
119. 4,125                      121.                           123. Answers will vary.
125. Answers will vary.
1316 Answer Key

Section 12.3 Exercises           129. The sequence is            131. The sequence is
                                         geometric with common           geometric with a common
127. The sequence is                     ratio                           ratio
        geometric with common
        ratio

133. The sequence is             135. The sequence is            137. The sequence is
        geometric with common            arithmetic with common          geometric with common
        ratio                            difference                      ratio

139.                             141.                            143.

145.                             147. 3,072                      149.

151.             The general     153.                   The      155.                     The
        term is
                                       general term is                 general term is

157.                             159.                            161.
163.                                                             167.
169.                             165.                            173. no sum as
175. 2,048                                                       179.
181.                             171.                            185.
                                 177.                            191. Answers will vary.
187.
                                 183.                                         197.

                                             

                                 189. Answers will vary.

Section 12.4 Exercises

193.                             195.

199.                             201.                                  203.

205.                                   207.

209.                                    211.  7  1  1  45              213.  4  1  1  55

215.                                   217.                                  219.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  Answer Key 1317

221.                           223.                                 225.

227.                           229.                                 231. 112
233. 324                       235. 30,618                          237. Answers will vary.
239. Answers will vary.
                               243.                                 245.
Review Exercises               249.                                 251.
                               255.                                 257.
241.
247.

253.

259.                           261. The sequence is                 263.

                                            arithmetic with common

                                            difference

265.                           267.                                 269.             The general
                                                                            term is
271.             The general 273.
        term is                       279.                          275.

277.                                                                281. The sequence is not
                                                                            geometric.
283. The sequence is           285.
        geometric with common  291. -43,692                         287.
        ratio

289.                     The                                        293.

      general term is

295.                           297.                                 299.

301.                           303.                                       305.

307.  11  1  1  56             309.  1  1  1  55                    311.

313.                           315.                                 317. 135
1318 Answer Key

319. 280

Practice Test

321.                             323.  325.
                                       331.
327.           The general       329.  337.

      term is                          343.  8  1  1  210

333. The sequence is             335.

      geometric with common

      ratio

339.                             341.

Access for free at openstax.org
Index                            D                                                                               Index 1319

A                                degree of a constant 478             horizontal line 234
                                 degree of a polynomial 478           horizontal line test 964
absolute value 27, 197, 727      degree of the polynomial             hyperbola 1038, 1086
absolute value equation 198      equation 597
absolute value inequality 201    degree one 598                       I
additive identity 75             degree two 598
additive inverse 75              denominator 44                       identity 101
amount of discount 123           determinant 436                      Identity Property of Addition 75
annuity 1156                     difference of squares 817            Identity Property of Multiplication
area 135                         discount rate 123                    75
arithmetic sequence 1137         discriminant 869, 903                imaginary unit 810
Associative Property 74          Distributive Property 80, 770, 814   inconsistent system of equations
asymptote 977                    divisible 8                          364
augmented matrix 428             domain 306, 804, 806                 infinite geometric series 1153
axis of symmetry 897, 932        double inequality 191                infinite sequence 1126
                                                                      integers 29
B                                E                                    intercepts of a line 237
                                                                      interest 124
base 15                          earthquake intensity 1001            interval notation 192
binomial coefficient 1165        ellipse 1038, 1070, 1072, 1074       inverse function 970
Binomial Theorem 1167, 1170      equal 13                             Inverse Property of Addition 75
boundary line 291                equal sign 99                        Inverse Property of Multiplication
break-even point 405             equation 14                          75
                                 equivalent fractions 44              irrational number 68
C                                evaluate an expression 18
                                 exponent 15                          L
Change-of-Base Formula 1012      exponential decay 986, 1020
circle 1038, 1043, 1045, 1047    exponential function 975             leading coefficient 856
coefficient 19, 99               exponential growth 986               least common denominator 48,
coincident 363                   expression 14                        104, 108
common difference 1137           extraneous solution 793              least common multiple 12
common logarithmic function 998  extraneous solution to a rational    like radicals 765
common ratio 1147                equation 661                         like terms 19
Commutative Property 73                                               linear equation 97, 226, 411
complementary angles 382         F                                    linear inequality 289
completing the square 846, 850,                                       list price 123
855                              factorial notation 1130, 1165
complex conjugate pair 816       factoring 552                        M
complex fraction 47              factoring by substitution 573
complex number 812               factors 10, 10                       mapping 307
complex number system 812        finite sequence 1126                 mark-up 123
complex rational expression 649  FOIL 559, 562, 814                   matrix 424
composition 960, 1006            fraction 44                          maximum 914
compound inequality 187, 192,    function 309, 962                    minimum 914
193                                                                   minor of an entry 438
compound interest 984            G                                    monomial 478
conditional equation 101                                              multiple 8
conjugate pair 521               GCF 556, 565, 580                    multiplicative identity 75
consecutive even integers 117    General Strategy for Solving Linear  multiplicative inverse 75
consecutive integers 116         Equations 98, 105
consecutive odd integers 117     general term 1126                    N
consistent system of equations   geometric sequence 1147
363                              gravity 798                          natural base 981
constant 13                      greatest common factor 552           natural exponential function 981
contradiction 102                grouping symbols 720                 natural logarithmic function 998
cost function 405                                                     negative number 26
critical point 699               H                                    number line 13
critical points 943                                                   numerator 44
                                 half-life 1022
1320 Index

O                                   Q                                    solutions of the system of three
                                                                         linear equations with three
one-to-one 963                      quadratic equation 598, 598, 600,    variables 414
One-to-One Property of Logarithmic  836, 850, 857, 861, 939              speed 799
Equations 1015                      quadratic form 875                   square 720
opposite 26                         Quadratic Formula 861, 864, 868,     square matrix 436
order of operations 16, 740         884, 912                             square of a number 66
ordered pair 224                    quadratic function 894               square root 720
ordered triple 414                  quadratic inequality 939             square root of a number 66
origin 224                          Quotient Property 492, 493, 743,     Square Root Property 836, 837,
original cost 123                   747, 761                             841, 846, 850
                                    Quotient Property of Logarithms      standard form 599, 600
P                                   1007                                 standard form of a linear equation
                                    Quotient Property of Radical         227
parabola 894, 1038, 1051, 1055,     Expressions 776                      standard form of a polynomial
1057                                Quotient to a Negative Power 496     479
parallel lines 264                  Quotient to a Power Property 501,    summation notation 1131
partial sum 1132                    744                                  supplementary angles 382
Pascal's Triangle 1162, 1168                                             surface area 133
percent 65                          R                                    system of linear equations 356
percent change 122                                                       system of linear inequalities 450
perfect square 579, 724             radical 864                          system of nonlinear equations
perimeter 139, 140                  radical equation 788                 1098
perpendicular lines 268             radical expression 734, 779          systems of equations 411
point-slope form 276                radical function 802
polynomial 478, 553                 radicand 865                         T
polynomial equation 597             range 804
polynomial function 483             rate of interest 124                 temperature 133
Power Property 499, 760             rational equation 660                term 19
Power Property for Exponents 751    rational expression 622, 631         trinomial 478, 560, 577, 665, 868
Power Property of Logarithms        rational function 631
1008                                rational inequality 698              U
prime 556, 564, 577, 589            rational number 67
prime factorization 10              rationalize the denominator 784,     uniform motion 155
prime number 10                     840                                  union symbol 192
principal 124                       rationalizing the denominator 779
principal square root 66, 720       real number 68                       V
product 552                         reciprocal 46
Product of Binomial Squares         relation 306                         variable 13, 99
Pattern 772, 814                    revenue 405                          vertex 898, 914
Product of Conjugates Pattern       right triangle 136                   vertical line 233
784, 817                            row-echelon form 428                 vertical line test 964
Product Property 490, 497, 761                                           volume 132
Product Property of Logarithms      S
1006                                                                     X
Product Property of Roots 734,      scientific notation 505
768                                 sequence 1126                        x-intercept 604
Product to a Power 500              similar figures 676
Product to a Power Property 760     simple interest 125                  Z
Properties of Exponents 509         simplified rational expression 623
Properties of Negative Exponents    simplify an expression 15            Zero Exponent Property 494
495                                 solution 96, 227                     zero of the function 603
proportion 673                      solution to a linear inequality 289  Zero Product Property 598, 601,
Pythagorean Theorem 137, 885        solutions of a system of equations   602, 603, 603, 854, 868
                                    356

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 1321
