Math in Society

2nd Edition: Tools for decision making

Portland Community College

Edition 2.0
Math in Society, 2nd Edition

          Tools for decision making

Portland Community College Math Department

                      July 20, 2024
Project Lead: Cara Lee
Chapter Authors: Jess Brooks, Cara Lee, Sonya Redmond, Cindy Rochester-Gefre
Contributing Authors: Jess Brooks, Carlos Cantos, Teela Foxworth, Kandace Kling, Jeff Lacks, Cara
Lee, Sonya Redmond, Cindy Rochester-Gefre, Thomas Songer, Eric Zupunski
Technology Editors: Emiliano Vega, Cara Lee
Attribution: Many sections of this book are derivatives of Math in Society1, by David Lippman et al.,
used under CC-BY-SA 4.02. See the Attributions page for details.

Edition: 2.0
Website: pcc.edu/math-in-society
©2018-2024 Portland Community College Math Instructors
CC BY-SA 4.0

   1opentextbookstore.com/mathinsociety
   2creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0
We dedicate this book to our students. May you have greater ease in paying
         for college and grow your proficiency and confidence in math.
Attributions

This book is Licensed by the Portland Community College Math Department under CC BY-SA 4.03. Except
for the following:

   · Figure 2.5.5: Tax Buckets4 by John Chesbrough, trailfp.com, used under CC-BY-ND-NC 4.05, not
       modified, used with permission.

   · Photo of Dr. Jonathan Farley: ©Jonathan Farley, All rights reserved, used with permission.
   · Photo of Dr. Graciela Chichilnisky: ©Michael Timmons, All rights reserved, used with permission.
   · Spreadsheet screenshots use Microsoft Excel under fair use. If you plan to redistribute this book, please

       consider whether your use is also fair use.
   · GeoGebra screenshots are used for non-commercial use under geogebra.org/license#NonCommercialLice

        nseAgreement

How to cite this book. "Math In Society, 2nd Edition: Tools for decision making"6 by Lee et al., Portland
Community College Math Department is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.07

Attributions.

   · Cover Image and Thumbnail: Good Morning Portland!!8, by Ian Sane, used under CC BY-SA 2.09,
       cropped.

   · Chapter 1 is a derivative of Math in Society: Logic by David Lippman and Morgan Chase, Sets, and
       Problem Solving by David Lippman, opentextbookstore.com/mathinsociety, used under CC-BY-SA-4.0.

   · Section 2.2, Section 2.3, and Section 2.4 are a derivative of Math in Society: Finance by David Lippman,
       opentextbookstore.com/mathinsociety, used under CC-BY-SA-4.0.

   · Chapter 3 is a derivative of Math in Society: Describing Data and Statisitcs by David Lippman and
       Jeff Eldridge, opentextbookstore.com/mathinsociety, and Online Statistics Education: An Interactive
       Multimedia Courese of Study by David M. Lane, et al, onlinestatbook.com, used under CC-BY-SA-4.0.

   3creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0
   4trailfp.com/financial-planning/how-about-them-tax-apples
   5creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
   6pcc.edu/math-in-society
   7creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0
   8https://www.flickr.com/photos/31246066@N04/15209144551
   9https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0

                                                                     vii
viii

   · Section 4.2 and Section 4.3 are a derivative of Math in Society: Probability by David Lippman, open
       textbookstore.com/mathinsociety, used under CC-BY-SA 4.0.

   · Section 5.1 is a derivative of Math in Society: Apportionment and Section 5.2 is a derivative of Math
       in Society: Voting Theory by David Lippman, opentextbookstore.com/mathinsociety, used under
       CC-BY-SA 4.0.

   · Section 2.1, Section 2.5, Section 3.6 (online only), Section 4.1, Section 5.3, Section 5.4 and Section 5.6
       (online only) are original to the Portland Community College Math Department.

   · All chapter reviews are original to the Portland Community College Math Department.

   · Images in the chapters that were not in the original OER or created by the PCC authors have attribu-
       tions in footnotes.
Project Notes

Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Amy Hofer and grant support from Open Oregon Educa-
tional Resources, openoregon.org, and the PCC librarians and OER steering committee. Thanks also to
Kaela Parks and Michael Cantino of Accessible Education and Disability Resources for their expertise on
accessibility. Extended thanks to Alex Jordan for continued support with PreTeXt, pretextbook.org.

Antiracist and Culturally Responsive Elements. Our goal is for our students to see themselves in
this book. We have added stories of mathematicians and economists with identities that have traditionally
been underrepresented in textbooks. We use local places and culturally diverse names in the examples and
exercises. We have examples with they/them/their pronouns and same-sex couples.
In the democracy chapter we have included the Native American genocide and slavery which are often left
out of math texts. We have also emphasized the names of civil rights leaders and African Americans killed
by the police in our examples. We recognize there is more to do in this area and welcome contributions and
feedback. Please email Cara Lee at cara.lee@pcc.edu or use the Google Form link below.

Philosophy. Our goal is for the content of this book to be relevant and accessible to our readers. We
emphasize technology, conceptual understanding and communication over rote calculation. However, some
manual calculation is important to understand what the technology is doing. We emphasize readily available
spreadsheets and GeoGebra, geogebra.com throughout the text.

Web and Print Versions. This book is available for free in html and pdf form at pcc.edu/math-in-society.
The 2nd Edition, Chapters 1-5 are available at the PCC bookstore printed by the PCC Print Center.

Additional Topics. Your course may include one or more instructor choice topics which are available
online only from the website above, or from David Lippman's original book at opentextbookstore.com/mathin
society.

Accessibility. The html version of this book is intended to meet or exceed web accessibility standards. If
you find anything that can improve the accessibility of this book, please email Cara Lee at cara.lee@pcc.edu
or use the Google Form link below.

Online Homework. Online homework problems are available for free at myopenmath.com.

Typos and Other Feedback. Please notify us of typos and other feedback using this Google Form,
forms.gle/s14kNGd7anRmVgCD6.

                                                                      ix
Resources

This Google folder10 contains the following resources for the course:
   · A printable pdf of the entire book.
   · Video notes for the lecture videos in pdf and Word form. The videos in each section can be assigned
       or used as an extra resource.
   · A pdf of the answers to odd exercises.

A MyOpenMath shell is available for instructors to use in their courses. Additional resources are available
for instructors by emailing Cara Lee at cara.lee@pcc.edu. Instructor status will be verified.

  10drive.google.com/drive/folders/1XDdf7gX4ZWtipz_gISV2H9F2Y9enjHc6
                                                                      xi
Introduction to this Book

Many important decisions in life can be made more effectively using quantitative information and logic. The
goal of this book and course is for you to feel more comfortable and confident with mathematical tools
that are applicable to your life now and in the future. We will work with proportions for scaling, rates
for comparing quantities, and financial tools for managing money and taxes. We will learn about statistics
for decisions that involve data, probability for decisions with uncertain events, and methods for fair group
decision-making like apportionment and voting systems. By practicing with these methods, we hope you'll
feel more empowered to use math to help you make the best decisions for yourself in college and beyond.

                                                                     xiii
Contents

Attributions                             vii

Project Notes                            ix

Resources                                xi

Introduction to this Book                xiii

1 Logical Reasoning and Problem Solving  1

1.1 Logic in Everyday Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Sets and Venn Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.3 Percents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.4 Rates and Proportions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
1.5 Problem Solving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
1.6 Chapter 1 Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

2 Financial Math                         59

2.1 Introduction to Spreadsheets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
2.2 Simple and Compound Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
2.3 Savings Plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
2.4 Loan Payments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
2.5 Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
2.6 Chapter 2 Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108

                           xv
xvi            CONTENTS

3 Statistics   111

     3.1 Overview of the Statistical Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
     3.2 Describing Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
     3.3 Summary Statistics: Measures of Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
     3.4 Summary Statistics: Measures of Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
     3.5 Chapter 3 Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175

4 Probability  181

     4.1 Contingency Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
     4.2 Theoretical Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
     4.3 Expected Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
     4.4 Chapter 4 Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211

5 Democracy    215

     5.1 Apportionment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
     5.2 Voting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
     5.3 The Popular Vote, Electoral College and Electoral Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
     5.4 Gerrymandering and How to Measure It . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 253
     5.5 Chapter 5 Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266

Back Matter

References     271
Chapter 1

Logical Reasoning and Problem Solv-
ing

Dr. Jonathan Farley and Partially Ordered Sets.
Dr. Jonathan Farley1 grew up near Rochester, New York and got
his mathematics degree from Harvard University. He then went
to Oxford University in the United Kingdom. (Later he would
return as a Fulbright Distinguished Scholar.) He was awarded
Oxford's highest mathematics awards for graduate students, the
Senior Mathematical Prize and the Johnson Prize, and earned his
doctorate a year later (MIT, 2005). He had a two-year visit to the
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute from 1995 to 1997. He
is currently an Associate Professor at Morgan State University, a
historically Black college.

Dr. Farley solved decades-old unsolved problems in the theory of ordered sets. Now he uses his expertise
to help with counterterrorism. Dr. Farley applies lattice theory, a branch of mathematics that deals with
ordered sets, to determine the probability that a terrorist cell has been disrupted after some of its members
have been captured (Stafford, 2006). A group at Los Alamos National Laboratory used lattice theory for
counterterrorism in the following way: A concept lattice can be drawn so that people who share many of
the same characteristics are grouped together as one node, and links between nodes indicate that all the
members of a subset with certain attributes must also have other attributes. Dr. Farley's work has been
recognized both nationally and internationally and used by the Ministry of National Security in Jamaica
(Hermoza, 2015).
Dr. Farley is also interested in making math more accessible and mentoring women in mathematics. He
conceived of and co-organized a symposium on women and mathematics at Stanford University's Institute
for Research on Women and Gender, called "Proof and Prejudice." He has co-founded Girls Equal Math,
Equations of Peace, and an enterprise that creates math-themed fashion to encourage girls to go into math,
Peren Linn Fashion (Brown, 2015).
Dr. Farley has also been a mathematics consultant for the hit TV shows Numb3rs, Medium, and Elementary.
Dr. Farley's projects and applications of math continue to make it more interesting and relatable to a wider
audience. You can read more on his website, Lattice Theory2.

    1Photo: ©Jonathan Farley. All rights reserved, used with permission.
   2http://www.latticetheory.net/

                                                                      1
2                   CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.1 Logic in Everyday Life

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Identify propositions

   · Compose and interpret the negation of a statement

   · Use logical connectors (and/or) and conditional statements (if, then) in context

   · Evaluate the truth value of compound statements in context

   · Determine whether statements are logically equivalent
Chapter 1 Introduction. In this chapter we'll learn several different tools for decision making. We'll look
at logic, sets, Venn diagrams, percentages, rates and proportions. Then we'll work with a problem solving
process that can be applied to many types of situations.

1.1.1 Logic

Logic is the study of reasoning. Our goal in this section is to look at propositions, logical connectors and
statements that are used in everyday life and examine their meaning.

1.1.2 Propositions

A proposition is a complete sentence that is either true or false. Opinions can be propositions, but questions
or phrases cannot.
Example 1.1.2 Which of the following are propositions?

    a I am reading a math book.
    b Math is fun!
    c Do you like turtles?
    d My cat

Solution. The first and second items are propositions. The third one is a question and the fourth is a

phrase, so they are not. We are not concerned right now about whether a statement is true or false. We will

come back to that later when we look at compound statements.  

Arguments are made of one or more propositions (called premises), along with a conclusion. Propositions
may be negated, or combined with connectors like "and", and "or". Let's take a closer look at how these
negations and logical connectors are used to create more complex statements.

1.1.3 Negation (not)

One way to change a proposition is to use its negation, or opposite meaning. We often use the word "not"
to negate a statement.
Example 1.1.3 Write the negation of the following propositions.

    a I am reading a math book.
1.1. LOGIC IN EVERYDAY LIFE  3

b Math is fun!
c The sky is not green.
d Cars have wheels.

Solution.
    a Negation: I am not reading a math book.
    b Negation: Math is not fun!
    c Negation: The sky is green (or not not green).
    d Negation: Cars do not have wheels.
                                                                                                                                            

1.1.4 Negation of All and None

It is worth mentioning these qualifiers and how to negate them. If we were to make the statement, "All
students read this book," we could negate it by saying "Not all students read this book." or "Some students
don't read this book." Notice how this is very different from "No students read this book."
If we were to negate, "No students read this book," we could say, "A student is reading this book," or even,
"Some students do read this book." It only takes one counterexample to negate an all or nothing statement
and the phrases some do and some don't are often used for this purpose. The same concept applies to
similar words like everyone, nobody, always and never.
Example 1.1.4 Write two different negations of each statement.

    a All college students take psychology.

    b Dogs are never brown.

Solution.

    a Negations: Not all college students take psychology, or, Some college students don't take psychology.

    b Negations: There are brown dogs, or, Some dogs are brown.

                                                                                                                                            

1.1.5 Multiple Negations

It is possible to use more than one negation in a statement. If you've ever said something like, "I can't not
go," you are saying you will go. In fact, it's often used for emphasis or a slightly different meaning, that
you really must go. If someone says, "I don't disagree," they may be saying they don't exactly agree but
the person has a point. A double negative is similar to multiplying two negative numbers which gives a
positive result. Using a third negation would then be equivalent to a single negation.

Note that in some instances a negation word like "no," "nobody," or "nothing" is used to emphasize rather
than negate and this is called negative concord. For example, "I ain't got no money," is not a double
negative but rather an emphasis of not having any money. This is common across many varieties of English
and other languages. You can read more about negative concord at this site1. In general, use your judgment
and context cues to distinguish between a double negative and negative concord. We will use multiple
negations but not negative concord in this book.

   1ygdp.yale.edu/phenomena/negative-concord
4                                   CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

In the media and in ballot measures we often see multiple negations and it can be confusing to figure out
what a statement means.

Example 1.1.5 Read the statement and determine the outcome of a yes vote.
"Vote for this measure to repeal the ban on plastic bags."

Solution. If you said that a yes vote would enable plastic bag usage, you are correct. The ban stopped

plastic bag usage, so to repeal the ban would allow it again. This measure has a double negation and is also

not very good for the environment.                                                           

Example 1.1.6 Read the statement and determine the outcome on mandatory minimum sentencing.
"The bill that overturned the ban on mandatory minimum sentencing was vetoed."

Solution. In this case mandatory minimum sentencing would not be allowed. The ban would stop it, and

the bill to overturn it was vetoed. This is an example of a triple negation.                 

1.1.6 Logical Connectors: and and or

When we use the word "and" between two propositions, it connects them to create a new statement that is
also a proposition. For example, if you said "To finish this project, I need a screwdriver and a wrench," then
you are expressing the need for both tools. For an "and" statement to be true, the connected propositions
must both be true. If even one proposition is false (for instance, you didn't need a wrench) then the entire
connected statement is false.
The word "or" between two propositions similarly connects the propositions to create a new statement. In
this case, if you said "To finish this project, I need a screwdriver or a wrench," then you are expressing the
need for one of the tools (but probably not both). For an "or" statement to be true, at least one of the
propositions must be true (or both could be true).
Example 1.1.7 Determine whether each compound statement is true or false.

    a Six is an even number and Salem is the capital of Oregon.

    b Six is an even number or Salem is the capital of Oregon.

    c Guitars have strings and cats do not have whiskers.

    d Guitars have strings or cats do not have whiskers.

    e Whales are not mammals and spiders have ten legs.

     f Whales are not mammals or spiders have ten legs.

Solution.

    a True. Six is even and Salem is the capital of Oregon. Since both parts are true, the "and" statement
       is true.

    b True. Since both parts are true, the "or" statement is true.

    c False. Guitars have strings but cats do have whiskers. Both statements must be true for an "and"
       statement to be true.

    d True. Since the first part is true, the "or" statement is true.

    e False. Whales are mammals and spiders have eight legs, so both parts are false, making the "and"
       statement false.

     f False. Neither of the parts are true, so the "or" statement is false.

                                                                                                                                            
1.1. LOGIC IN EVERYDAY LIFE               5

1.1.7 Exclusive vs. Inclusive Or

In English we often mean for or to be exclusive: one or the other, but not both. In math, however, or is
usually inclusive: one or the other, or both. The thing we are including, or excluding is the "both" option.
Example 1.1.8 Determine whether each or statement is inclusive or exclusive.

    a Would you like a chicken or vegan meal?
    b We want to hire someone who speaks Spanish or Chinese.
    c Are you going to wear sandals or tennis shoes?
    d Are you going to visit Thailand or Vietnam on your trip?

Solution. The first or statement is a choice of one or the other, but not both, so it is exclusive. The second

statement is inclusive because they could find a candidate who speaks both languages. The third statement

is exclusive because you can't wear both at the same time. The fourth statement is inclusive because you

could visit both countries on your trip.  

1.1.8 Conditional Statements: if, then

A conditional statement connects two propositions with if, then. An example of a conditional statement
would be "If it is raining, then we'll go to the mall." The first part (the "if " part) is called the hypothesis
and the second part (the "then" part) is called the conclusion.

The statement, "It is raining," may be true or false for any given day. If the hypothesis is true, then we will
follow the course of action and go to the mall. If the hypothesis is false, though, we haven't said anything
about what we will or won't do.

To understand the truth values for a conditional statement it is helpful to look at an example. Let's say a
friend tells you, "If you post that photo on social media, you'll lose your job." Under what conditions can
you say that your friend was wrong?

There are four possible outcomes:

   1. You post the photo and lose your job

   2. You post the photo and don't lose your job

   3. You don't post the photo and lose your job

   4. You don't post the photo and don't lose your job

The only case where you can say your friend was wrong is the second case, in which you post the photo but
still keep your job. This is the only time when a conditional statement is false.

Your friend didn't say anything about what would happen if you didn't post the photo, so you can't say
the last two statements are wrong. Even if you didn't post the photo and lost your job anyway, your friend
never said that you were guaranteed to keep your job if you didn't post it.

In this case it can be useful to outline the possibilities and outcomes in a table. The four cases above
correspond to the four rows of a truth table. If your class is using truth tables they are covered in a later
section. For this table we will use P for "posting the photo," and L for "losing your job."
6                      CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

     Posting the Photo (P)         Losing Your Job (L)        If P, then L
      You post the photo (T)        You lose your job (T)           True
      You post the photo (T)     You don't lose your job (F)       False
   You don't post the photo (F)     You lose your job (T)           True
   You don't post the photo (F)  You don't lose your job (F)        True

If the hypothesis (the "if" part) is false, we cannot say that the statement is a lie, so the result of the third
and fourth rows is true. Notice that we are using a double negation in this explanation.
Example 1.1.9 Determine whether each conditional statement is true or false.

    a If tricycles have three wheels, then bicycles have two wheels.

    b If tricycles have three wheels, then tricycles can fly.

    c If pigs can fly, then birds can fly.

    d If pigs can fly, then the sky is yellow.

Solution.

    a True. Tricycles have three wheels and bicycles have two wheels. The hypothesis and conclusion are
       both true, so the statement is true.

    b False. Tricycles have three wheels, but they cannot fly. The hypothesis is true but the conclusion is
       false, making the statement false.

    c True. Pigs cannot fly (on their own) but birds can. Since the hypothesis is false, the statement is true
       regardless of whether the conclusion is true or false.

    d True. Since the hypothesis is false, the statement is true regardless of whether the conclusion is true
       or false.

                                                                                                                                            

1.1.9 Evaluating Compound Statements

Some situations combine many "if, then", "and" or "or" statements that may be inclusive or exclusive. Here's
an example where we need to evaluate a complex statement.
Example 1.1.10 Determine which set(s) of qualificaitons meet the requirement: "To apply for this job,
applicants must have a bachelor's degree, an associate's degree and 3 years of relevant experience, or a high
school diploma or GED and 6 years of relevant experience."

    a Lyssa has a bachelor's degree and 2 years of relevant experience.

    b Jordan has a high school diploma and 3 years of relevant experience.

    c Ayan has an associate's degree and 6 years of relevant experience.

    d Sylvia has a GED and 6 years of relevant experience.

Solution. There are many combinations that work here. Lyssa, Ayan and Sylvia all meet the requirements

or go beyond what is needed. Jordan does not have enough years of experience to go with a high school

diploma for this job.                                                       

We are using the words and, or, not and if then in this book, but if you look up other resources on logic you
are likely to see these symbols.
1.1. LOGIC IN EVERYDAY LIFE                                                7

                                         Symbols used in other resources.

A and B is written A  B
A or B is written A  B
not A may be written as ~A or ¬A
If A, then B is written A  B

1.1.10 Logical Equivalence

And and or statments can have their propositions reversed without affecting the truth value of the statement.
If you need to buy bacon and eggs, that's the same as buying eggs and bacon. The order does matter for
a conditional statement, though. Sometimes during an argument, an if, then statement will be reversed or
combined with not in different ways. There are names for the combinations and it is helpful to look at which
statements are equivalent to each other. Here are the names for the different combinations of if, then and
not statements.

   · Original Conditional: if p, then q

   · Converse: if q, then p

   · Inverse: if not p, then not q

   · Contrapositive: if not q, then not p

Let's look at all of the possibilities in an example.
Example 1.1.11 Assume this original conditional statement is true: "If you take your dog to the park, they
will be happy." Write the converse, inverse and contrapositive of the original statement and determine which
are equivalent to each other.
Solution.

   · Original Statement: p is, "You take your dog to the park," and q is, "Your dog is happy."

   · Converse: "If your dog is happy, then you took them to the park." Notice we needed to change the
       tense to keep the order of events the same. If your dog is happy does that mean you took them to the
       park? Not necessarily, because there are other reasons your dog could be happy like getting a treat or
       taking a walk. So this is false.

   · Inverse: "If you don't take your dog to the park, they will not be happy." This is similar to the converse.
       Even if you don't take your dog to the park, they could be unhappy for another reason. This is false.
       The inverse is logically equivalent to the converse.

   · Contrapositive: "If your dog is not happy, then you did not take them to the park." Since the original
       statement is true, then this is also true. Taking your dog to the park would result in them being happy,
       so if they are not happy we can say that they did not go to the park. The contrapositive is logically
       equivalent to the original statement.

                                                                                                                                            
Let's summarize the results in this box.

                                                        Logical Equivalence.

    A conditional statement and its contrapositive are equivalent.
    The converse and inverse of a conditional statement are equivalent.
8                 CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.1.11 Exercises

1. Which of the following are propositions?

           a Pigs can fly.
           b What?
           c I don't know.
           d I like tofu.
2. Which of the following are propositions?

           a How far?
           b Portland is not in Oregon.
           c Portland Community College.
           d It is raining.
3. Write the negation of each proposition.

           a I ride my bike to campus.
           b Portland is not in Oregon.
4. Write the negation of each proposition.

           a You should see this movie.
           b Lashonda is wearing blue.
5. Write the negation of each proposition.

           a Nobody rides their bike to campus.
           b All cities named Portland are in Oregon.
6. Write the negation of each proposition.

           a Everyone should see this movie.
           b Lashonda never wears blue.
7. Write a proposition that contains a double negative.
8. Write a proposition that contains a triple negative.
9. For each situation, decide whether the "or" is most likely exclusive or inclusive.

           a An entrée at a restaurant includes soup or salad.
           b You should bring an umbrella or a raincoat with you.
10. For each situation, decide whether the "or" is most likely exclusive or inclusive.

           a We can keep driving on I-5 or get on I-405 at the next exit.
           b You should save this document on your computer or a flash drive.
11. For each situation, decide whether the "or" is most likely exclusive or inclusive.

          a. I will wear a sweater or a jacket.
          b. My next vacation will be on the Oregon Coast or Mount Hood.
1.1. LOGIC IN EVERYDAY LIFE  9

12. For each situation, decide whether the "or" is most likely exclusive or inclusive.

          a. While in California I will go to the beach or Disneyland.
          b. The insurance agent offers car or boat insurance.
13. Rewrite the statement in the conditional form if p, then q.

          a. Whenever it is sunny, I go swimming.
          b. I go see a movie on Fridays.
14. Rewrite the statement in the conditional form if p, then q.

          a. I always carry an umbrella when it rains.
          b. On the weekend I like to hang out with friends.
15. Determine whether the compound statement is true or false.

           a An apple is a vegetable or an apple is a fruit.
           b Portland is not a city in Oregon.
           c Fish can walk and birds can swim.
           d If 2 + 5 = 10, then 2 + 7 = 12.
16. Determine whether the compound statement is true or false.

           a A horse is not a mammal.
           b If a horse is a mammal, then fish are mammals.
           c A triangle has three sides or four angles.
           d The Eiffel Tower is in London and the Taj Mahal is in India.
17. Determine whether the compound statement is true or false.

          a. A square has four sides and all sides are equal.
          b. A square is not a triangle.
          c. Six is an odd number or a multiple of 5.
          d. If dogs have wings, then seven is an even number.
18. Determine whether the compound statement is true or false.

          a. An octogon has 8 sides or a rectangle has 5 sides.
          b. An octogon does not have 8 sides.
          c. If an octogon has 8 sides, then a triangle has three angles.
          d. Whales are not mammals and cats are mammals.
19. Write the converse, inverse and contrapositive of the statement: "If you go to the store, then you will
      have food for dinner."
20. Write the converse, inverse and contrapositive of the statement: "If you do your homework, then you
      will do well on the test."
21. Identify which pairs of statements are logically equivalent.

           i If you do not use your credit well, then you will not have a good credit rating.
           ii If you use your credit well, then you will have a good credit rating.
10  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

          iii If you have a good credit rating, then you use your credit well.
          iv If you do not have a good credit rating then you do not use your credit well.
22. Identify which pairs of statements are logically equivalent.

           i If you are not wearing shorts, then it is not hot outside.
           ii If you are wearing shorts, then it is hot outside.
          iii If it is not hot ouside, then you are not wearing shorts.
          iv If it is hot outside, then you will wear shorts.
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS                                                                            11

1.2 Sets and Venn Diagrams

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Use set notation and understand the null set
   · Determine the universal set for a given context
   · Use Venn diagrams and set notation to illustrate the intersection, union and complements of sets
   · Illustrate disjoint sets, subsets and overlapping sets with diagrams
   · Use Venn diagrams and problem-solving strategies to solve logic problems

1.2.1 Sets

It is natural for us to classify items into groups, or sets, and consider how they interact with each other.
In this section, we will use sets and Venn diagrams to visualize relationships between groups and represent
survey data.
A set is a collection of items or things. Each item in a set is called a member or an element.
Example 1.2.2

   a. The numbers 2 and 42 are elements of the set of all even numbers.

   b. MTH 105 is a member of the set of all courses you are taking.

                                                                                                                                            
A set consisting entirely of elements of another set is called a subset. For instance, the set of numbers 2, 6,
and 10 is a subset of the set of all even numbers.
Some sets, like the set of even numbers, can be defined by simply describing their contents. We can also
define a set by listing its elements using set notation.

1.2.2 Set Notation

Set notation is used to define the contents of a set. Sets are usually named using a capital letter, and its
elements are listed once inside a set of curly brackets.

For example, to write the set of primary colors using set notation, we could name the set C for colors, and
list the names of the primary colors in brackets: C = {red, yellow, blue}. In this case, the set C is a subset of
all colors. If we wanted to write the list of our favorite foods using set notation, we could write F = {cheese,
raspberries, wine}. And yes, wine is definitely an element of some food group!

Example 1.2.3 Julia, Keenan, Jae and Colin took a test. They got the following scores: 70, 95, 85 and
70. Let P be the set of test takers and S be the set of test scores. List the elements of each set using set
notation.

Solution. In this example, the set of people taking the test is P = {Julia, Keenan, Jae, Colin}, and the

set of test scores is S = {70, 85, 95}. Notice in this example that even though two people scored a 70 on the

test, the score of 70 is only listed once.                                                             
12                      CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

It is important to note that when we write the elements of a set in set notation, there is no order implied.
For example, the set {1, 2, 3} is equivalent to the set {3, 1, 2}. It is conventional, however, to list the
elements in order if there is one.

1.2.3 Universal Set

The universal set is the set containing every possible element of the described context. Every set is therefore
a subset of the universal set. The universal set is often illustrated by a rectangle labeled with a capital letter
U. Subsets of the universal set are usually illustrated with circles for simplicity, but other shapes can be used.
Example 1.2.4

        If you are searching for books for a re-

        search project, the universal set might be

    a.  all the books in the library, and the books

        in the library that are relevant to your re-

        search project would be a subset of the

        universal set.

        If you are wanting to create a group of

    b.  your Facebook friends that are coworkers,

        the universal set would be all your Face-

        book friends and the group of coworkers

        would be a subset of the universal set.

        If you are working with sets of numbers,

    c.  the universal set might be all whole num-

        bers, and all prime numbers would be a

        subset of the universal set.

                                                                                                                                            

1.2.4 The Null Set

It is possible to have a set with nothing in it. This set called the null set or empty set. It's like going to
the grocery store to buy your favorite foods and realizing you left your wallet at home. You walk away with
an empty bag. The set of items that you bought at the grocery store would written in set notation as G =
{ }, or G = Ø.
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS  13

1.2.5 Intersection, Union, and Complement (And, Or, Not)

Suppose you and your roommate decide to have a house party, and you each invite your circle, or set, of
friends. When you combine your two sets of friends, you discover that you have some friends in common.

The set of friends that you have in common is called the intersection. The intersection of two sets contains
only the elements that are in both sets. To be in the intersection of set A and B, an element needs to be in
both set A and set B.

The set of all friends that you and your roommate have invited is called the union. The union of two sets
contains all the elements contained in either set (or both). To be in the union of set A and set B, an element
must to be contained in just set A, just set B, or in the intersection of sets A and B. Notice that in this
case that the "or" is inclusive.

What about the people who were not invited to the party and showed up anyway? They are not elements
of your set of invited friends. Nor are they an element of your roommate's set of invited friends. These
uninvited party crashers are the complement to your set of invited friends. The complement of a set A
contains everything that is not in the set A. To be in the complement of set A, an element cannot be in set
A, but it will be an element of the universal set.

Example 1.2.5 Consider the sets: A = {red, green, blue}, B = {red, yellow, orange}, and C = {red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, purple}

   a. Determine the set A intersect B, and write it in set notation.

   b. Determine the set A union B, and write it in set notation.

    c. Determine the intersection of A complement and C and write it in set notation.

Solution.

   a. The intersection contains the elements in both sets: A intersect B = {red}

   b. The union contains all the elements in either set: A union B = {red, green, blue, yellow, orange}.
       Notice we only list red once.

    c. Here we are looking for all the elements that are not in set A and are in set C: A complement intersect
       C = {orange, yellow, purple}

                                                                                                                                            

1.2.6 Venn Diagrams

Venn diagrams are used to illustrate the relationships between two or more sets. To create a Venn
diagram, start by drawing a rectangle to represent the universal set. Next draw and label overlapping circles
to represent each of your sets. Most often there will be two or three sets illustrated in a Venn diagram.
Finally, if you are given elements, fill in each region with its corresponding elements. Venn diagrams are also
a great way to illustrate intersections, unions and complements of sets as shown below.
14  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Figure 1.2.6 The intersection is     Figure 1.2.7 The union in-          Figure 1.2.8 The complement
where the shading of the two sets    cludes all elements of A or B or    of set A includes all the elements
overlaps in the center. It contains  both. It contains all three of the  not in A. It is the shaded region
the elements of A and B.             shaded regions.                     outside the set of A, but within
                                                                         the universal set.

Here is an example of how to draw a Venn Diagram.

Example 1.2.9 Let J be the set of books Julio read this summer and let R be the set of books Rose read
this summer. Draw a Venn diagram to show the sets of books they read if Julio read Game of Thrones,
Animal Farm and 1984, and Rose read The Hobbit, 1984, The Tipping Point, and Greek Love.
To create a Venn diagram showing the relationship between the set of books Julio read and the set of books
Rose read, first draw a rectangle to illustrate the universal set of all books.
Next draw two overlapping circles, one for the set of books Julio read and one for the set of books Rose read.
Since both Rose and Julio read 1984, we place it in the overlapping region (the intersection).
All the books that Rose read will lie in her circle, in one of the two regions that make up her set. Likewise
for the books Julio read. Since we have already filled in the overlapping region, we put the books that only
Rose read in her circle's "cresent moon" section, and we put the books that only Julio read in his circle's
"cresent moon" section. The resulting diagram is shown below.

                                                                                                                                             
Example 1.2.10 In the last section we discussed the difference between inclusive "or" and exclusive
"or." In common language, "or" is usually exclusive, meaning the set A or B includes just A or just B
but not both. In logic, however, "or" is inclusive, so the set A or B includes just A, just B, or both. The
difference between the inclusive and exclusive "or" can be illustrated in a Venn, as shown below.

                                                                         
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS  15

1.2.7 Illustrating Data

We can also use Venn diagrams to illustrate quantities, data, or frequencies.

Example 1.2.11 A survey asks 200 people, "What beverage(s) do you drink in the morning?" and offers
three choices: tea only, coffee only, and both coffee and tea. Thirty report drinking only tea in the morning,
80 report drinking only coffee in the morning, and 40 report drinking both. How many people drink tea in
the morning? How many people drink neither tea nor coffee?
Solution. To answer this question, let's first create a Venn diagram representing the survey results. Placing
the given values, we have the following:

The universal set should include all 200 people surveyed, but we only have 150 placed so far. The difference
between what we have placed so far, and the 200 total is the number of people who drink neither coffee nor
tea. These 200 - 150 = 50 people are placed outside of the circles but within the rectangle since they are
still included in the universal set.
The number of people who drink tea in the morning includes everyone in the tea circle. This includes those
who only drink tea and those who drink both tea and coffee. Thus, the number of people who drink tea is
40 + 30 = 70.

                                                                                                                                            
Here is an example of a Venn diagram with three sets.
Example 1.2.12 In a survey, adults were asked how they travel to work. Below is the recorded data on
how many people took the bus, biked, and/or drove to work. Draw and label a Venn diagram using the
information in the table.
16  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

    Travel Options             Frequency
    Just Car                   157
    Just Bike                  20
    Just Bus                   35
    Car and Bike only          35
    Car and Bus only           10
    Bus and Bike only          8
    Car, Bus and Bike          12
    Neither Car, Bus nor Bike  15
    Total                      292

Solution. To fill in the Venn diagram, we will place the 157 people who only drive a car in the car set
where it does not overlap with any other modes of transportation. We can fill in the numbers 20 and 35 in
a similar way.
Then we have the overlap of two modes of transportation only. There are 35 people who use their car and
bike only, so they go in the overlap of those two sets, but they do not take the bus, so they are outside of
the bus set. Similarly, we can enter the 10 and 8. There are 12 people who use all three modes, so they are
in the intersection of all three sets. There are 15 people who do not use any of the three modes, so they are
placed outside the circles but inside the universal set of all modes of transportation. Here is the completed
Venn diagram.

                                                                                                                                            
Example 1.2.13 One hundred fifty people were surveyed and asked if they believed in UFOs, ghosts, and
Bigfoot. The following results were recorded.

   · 43 believed in UFOs

   · 44 believed in ghosts

   · 25 believed in Bigfoot

   · 10 believed in UFOs and ghosts

   · 8 believed in ghosts and Bigfoot

   · 5 believed in UFOs and Bigfoot

   · 2 believed in all three

Draw and label a Venn diagram to determine how many people believed in at least two of these things.
Solution. Starting with the intersection of all three circles, we work our way out. The number in the center
is 2, since two people believe in UFO's, ghosts and Bigfoot. Since 10 people believe in UFOs and Ghosts,
and that includes the 2 that believe in all three, that leaves 8 that believe in only UFOs and Ghosts.
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS                               17

We work our way out, filling in all the regions. Once we have, we can add up all those regions, getting 91
people in the union of all three sets. This leaves 150 - 91 = 59 who believe in none.

Then to answer the question of how many people believed in at least two (two or more), we add up the

numbers in the intersections, 8 + 2 + 3 + 6 = 19 people.  

1.2.8 Qualified Propositions

A qualified proposition is a statement that asserts a relationship between two sets. The three relationships
we will be looking at in this section are "some" (some elements are shared between the two sets), "none"
(none of the elements are shared between the two sets), and "all" (all elements of one set are contained in
the other set). These relationships are especially important in evaluating arguments.

1.2.9 Overlapping Sets

Sets overlap if they have members in common. The Venn diagram examples we have looked at in this section
are overlapping sets.
Example 1.2.14

          The set of students living in SE
          Portland and the set of students
          taking MTH 105.
          Qualified Proposition: "Some
          students who live in SE Portland
          take MTH 105."

                                                                                                                                            

1.2.10 Disjoint Sets

Sets are disjoint if they have no members in common.
Example 1.2.15
18  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

   The set of Cats and the set of Dogs.
   Qualified Proposition: "No cats are Dogs."

                                                                                                                                            

1.2.11 Subsets

If a set is completely contained in another set, it is called a subset.
Example 1.2.16

   The set of all Trees and the set of Maples Trees.
   Qualified Proposition: "All Maples are Trees."

                                                                                                                                            

1.2.12 Exercises

1. List the elements of the set "The letters of the word Mississippi."
2. List the elements of the set "Months of the year."
3. Write a verbal description of the set {3, 6, 9}.
4. Write a verbal description of the set {a, i, e, o, u}.
5. Is {1, 3, 5} a subset of the set of odd numbers?
6. Is {A, B, C} a subset of the set of letters of the alphabet?

Exercise Group. Create a Venn diagram to illustrate each of the following:
     7. A survey was given asking whether people watch movies at home from Netflix, Redbox, or Disney+.
           Use the results to determine how many people use Redbox.
               · 70 only use Netflix, 30 only use Redbox
               · 5 only use Disney+, 6 use only Disney+ and Redbox
               · 14 use only Netflix and Redbox, 20 use only Disney+ and Netflix
               · 7 use all three, 25 use none of these
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS  19

8. A survey asked buyers whether color, size, or brand influenced their choice of cell phone. The results
      are below. How many people were influenced by brand?

          · 5 said only color, 8 said only size

          · 16 said only brand, 20 said only color and size

          · 42 said only color and brand, 53 said only size and brand

          · 102 said all three, 20 said none of these
9. Use the given information to complete a Venn diagram, then determine: a) how many students have

      seen exactly one of these movies, and b) how many have seen only Star Wars Episode IX.

          · 25 have seen Inception (I), 45 have seen Star Wars Episode IX (SW)

          · 19 have seen Vanilla Sky (VS), 18 have seen I and SW

          · 17 have seen VS and SW, 11 have seen I and VS

          · 9 have seen all three

          · 2 have seen none of these
10. A survey asked 100 people what alternative transportation modes they use. Use the data to complete

      a Venn diagram, then determine: a) what percentage of people only ride the bus, and b) how many
      people don't use any alternate transportation.

          · 40 use the bus, 25 ride a bicycle, and 33 walk

          · 7 use the bus and ride a bicycle

          · 15 ride a bicycle and walk, 20 use the bus and walk

          · 5 use all three modes of alternate transportation

Exercise Group. Given the qualified propositions:

   a. Determine the two sets being described.

   b. Determine if the sets described are Subsets, Overlapping Sets or Disjoint sets.

    c. illustrate the situation using sets.

     11. All Terriers are dogs.
     12. Some Mammals Swim. (The second set is not clearly defined but is implied)
     13. No pigs can fly.
     14. All children are young.
     15. Some friends remember your birthday.
     16. No lies are truths.
17. Suppose someone wants to conduct a study to learn how teenage employment rates differ among gender
      identities and honor roll status. For each teenager in the study, they will need to record the answers to
      these three questions:

          · How does the teenager identify their gender?

          · Is the teenager an honor student or not?

          · Is the teenager employed or not?
      Explain what each of the regions in the following Venn Diagram represent.
20  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

                                                                                     · Region A:
                                                                                     · Region B:
                                                                                     · Region C:
                                                                                     · Region D:
                                                                                     · Region E:
                                                                                     · Region F:
                                                                                     · Region G:
                                                                                     · Region H:

18. Students were surveyed to see if they used smart phones, tablets, or both.
          · 85 students said they used smart phones
          · 50 students said they used tablets
          · 10 students said they use both
          · 5 students said they used neither

      Draw a Venn Diagram to help you answer the following. Show your calculations.
      How many students were surveyed?
19. The Venn Diagram below shows the numbers of students in grade 5 at an elementary school who have
      enrolled for keyboard (K), guitar (G), and drum classes. Fill in the blanks

                                                                · Students enrolled for keyboard class:
                                                                · Students enrolled for keyboard class only:
                                                                · Students didn't enroll at all:
                                                                · Students took all three classes:
                                                                · Students enrolled for guitar and drum:
                                                                · Students enrolled for guitar and drum only:

20. A poll asked 100 coffee drinkers whether they like cream or sugar in their coffee. The information was
      organized in the following Venn Diagram.

    a How many coffee drinkers like cream?
1.2. SETS AND VENN DIAGRAMS                                                         21

           b How many coffee drinkers like sugar?
           c How many coffee drinkers like sugar but not cream?
           d How many coffee drinkers like cream but not sugar?
           e How many coffee drinkers like cream and sugar?
           f How many coffee drinkers like cream or sugar?
           g How many coffee drinkers like neither cream nor sugar?
21. 110 dogs were asked "Why do you like to eat garbage?"
          · 89 said "It tastes great!"
          · 87 said "It's more filling!"
          · 68 said "It tastes great!" and "It's more filling!"
          a. Draw a Venn diagram to represent this information
          b. How many said "It's more filling!" but didn't say "It tastes great!"?
          c. How many said neither of those things?
          d. How many said "It's more filling!" or said "It tastes great"
22                     CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.3 Percents

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Convert between fractions, decimals and percents

   · Calculate percents, parts and ending amounts

   · Identify the difference between absolute and relative change

   · Calculate absolute and relative changes

   · Calculate multiple percent changes
Another uesful tool in decision making is comparison by division. This section may be review for you, and it
may present math in a different light that is more concrete and applied than math you have had previously.
Our goal is to examine math problems that are relevant to your life where you can apply your lived experience.
In this section we will look at situations that use percents, absolute change and relative change.

1.3.1 Percents

If you went shopping and one shirt was $20 off and another shirt was $30 off it might be hard to tell which
is the better value. What if they were 20% off and 30% off? Percentages can make quantities easier to
compare.

Percent, denoted by %, means "per 100," or "parts per hundred." In Spanish it's literally por ciento. When
we write 30% off, that means you save 30 out of every 100 dollars. We can write this percentage as the
fraction 100 30 . When we divide 30 by 100, we get

                                                                 30 = 0.30
                                                                100

We can also say you would save 30 cents out of every dollar. Many equivalent fractions can be written that
equal 30%. Notice that 60 out of 200 and 15 out of 50 are also 30%, since

                       60 = 15 = 30 = 0.30
                       200 50 100

Example 1.3.2 As an example, let's compare two shirts on sale and add some prices:

Shirt 1:               Shirt 2:

· Original Price: $80  · Original Price: $100

· Sale: $20 off        · Sale: 30% off

What is the sale price and sale percentage for each shirt? Which is the better buy?
1.3. PERCENTS                                                                                                                     23

   Shirt 1:                                                              Shirt 2:

   For this shirt we have the dollar amount of                           For this shirt we know the percentage off so

   the sale so we will subtract it from the orig-                        we need to find 30% of $100. We used a

   inal price.                                                           base of 100 so $30 off per $100 is $30.

                                                                         30% off of $100 is $30

                   $80 - $20 = $60                                       Then we subtract the sale amount from the

   Now we will divide to find the percentage of                          original price to get:

   the sale:       $20 = 0.25                                                              $100 - 30 = $70
                   $80                                                   This shirt is 30% off and the sale price is

   This shirt is 25% off and the sale price is                           $70.

   $60.

Which shirt do you think is the better deal? You would save more with shirt 2, but shirt 1 is cheaper. 

1.3.2 Converting Between Percents and Decimals

To convert a percent to decimal form, we use the definition of "per 100." For example, 82% means "82 per
100" so we divide by 100. Notice this is the same as moving the decimal two places to the left and removing
the % symbol.

                                                           82% = 82 = 0.82
                                                                     100

To go the other way, if we have 0.10, we can multiply it by 100% or move the decimal two places to the right
and add the % symbol.

                                                      0.10 = 0.10(100%) = 10%
Example 1.3.3 Change each percent to decimal form.

    a 65%

    b 200%

    c 5.2%

    d 0.1%

Solution.

a  65% =     65    = 0.65.  Notice      this  is  the  same  as  moving  the   decimal  to  the  left  two  places.
             100

b  200% =     200  = 2.0    or  just  2.
              100

c  5.2% =     5.2  = 0.052.     If  we  use   the  method    of  moving  the   decimal  two  places    to  the  left  we  use  a  zero
              100
   to hold the place value and we get 0.052.

d  0.1% =     0.1  = 0.001.
              100

                                                                                                                                            
Example 1.3.4 Change each fraction or decimal into percent form.

a4
   5

b 1.25

c 0.06

d 0.003
24                                          CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Solution.

    a  First  we  divide  4  to  get  0.80  and  then  multiply  by  100%.  0.80(100%) = 80%.
                          5

    b 1.25(100%) or moving the decimal two places to the right gives 125%.

    c 0.06(100%) or moving the decimal two places to the right gives 6%.

    d 0.003(100%) or moving the decimal two places to the right gives 0.3%. Note this is less than one
       percent.

                                                                                                        

1.3.3 Calculating Percents

When calculating percents, we divide the part by the whole amount. The whole amount is also called the
base of the percentage. First we will look at how to calculate percents and then how to calculate a part.

                                                       Calculating Percents.
                                                            Percent = part
                                                                          whole

                                                        Part = percent · whole

We can also think of these formulas as sentences. The word is means equals, per means divide, and of often
means multiplication. So we can also say, "Percent is part per whole," and, "Part is percent of whole."

Example 1.3.5 In a survey of 1,031 randomly chosen adults, 577 said they would feel better if they got
more sleep (source1). What percent is this?

Solution. First, we need to identify the part and the whole. The whole is the total number of adults

surveyed. The part is the 577 adults who said they would feel better if they got more sleep.

Using the formula                                      Percent = part
                                                                     whole

we can calculate                            Percent = 577  0.570 or 57%
                                                          1013

About 57% of the adults surveyed said they would feel better if they got more sleep.                    

Example 1.3.6 First estimate which quantity is the larger percentage. Then calculate both percentages.

    a A quiz score of 8 out of 10 or 11 out of 15.

    b A cereal with 2 grams of sugar in a 28 gram serving size or 3 grams of sugar in a 32 gram serving size.

Solution.

    a We are estimating that 8 out of 10 seems larger compared to 11 out of 15 because missing 2 out of 10
       seems like less than 4 out of 15.

                                                                 8 = 0.80 or 80%
                                                                10

                                                              11  0.733 or 73.3%
                                                              15
        The score of 8 out of 10 is a higher percentage.
    1news.gallup.com/poll/642704/americans-sleeping-less-stressed
1.3. PERCENTS                                                                                25

b We are estimating that 3 out of 32 is a higher percentage than 2 out of 28 because the added gram of
   sugar seems high compared with only a 4 gram increase in serving size.

                                                           2 g  0.07 or about 7%
                                                          28 g

                                                           3 g  0.09 or about 9%
                                                          32 g

       The cereal with 3 grams of sugar out of 32 grams has a higher percentage of sugar.

                                                                                                                                            
Another useful tool is finding the part when we know the percent and the whole amount.

Example 1.3.7 For example, say you have a high yield online savings account that pays an annual interest
rate of 4.5%. If you have $3000 in the account for your emergency fund, how much interest will you earn in
a year? What would your total balance be with the interest?
Solution. To perform calculations with percents, we change them into decimal form first. So we divide 4.5
by 100 or move the decimal two places to the left and we get 0.045.
Then, using the formula

                                                        Part = percent · whole

we have

                                                     Part = 0.045($3000) = $135
You would earn $135 in interest. Interest is added to your account so we will add to find the total balance.

                                              $3000 + 135 = $3,135

Your total balance is $3,135 after one year.                                                 

Note, most interest is compounded daily or monthly so we simplified the example above. We will come back
to this and learn how to calculate compound interest in the financial math chapter.

Example 1.3.8 Find each part described and the total or ending amount.

    a A smartphone's battery life of 12 hours lost 20% after a year of use. Find the amount it decreased by
       and the current battery life.

b The sales tax in Vancouver, Washington is currently 8.7%. How much tax would you pay on TV that
   costs $399 and what is the total price?

Solution 1.
    a First we will find 20% of 12 hours by multiplying by the decimal form of the percent:

                                              12(0.20) = 2.4 hours

Then we will subtract since the battery life went down.

                                              12 - 2.4 = 9.6 hours

The phone battery life went down by 2.4 hours to 9.6 hours.

b We will find 8.7% of $399 by multiplying the amount by the decimal form of the percent

                                              $399(0.087) = $34.71

We rounded to the nearest cent. Then we will add since the tax is an additional cost.

                                              $399 + 34.71 = $433.71

The tax on the TV is $34.71, which gives a total price of $433.71.
26                        CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Solution 2. There is an optional shorter way to go about this type of problem if you are interested.

    a If we look at a 20% decrease as the battery retaining 80% of its life (100-20=80)%, we can calculate
       the new battery life directly using the decimal form

                                                        12(1.00 - 0.20) = 12(0.80)
                                                                             = 9.6 hours.

    b We can also do this with the TV price using addition for an increase (100+8.7=108.7)%

                                                    $399(1.00 + 0.087) = $399(1.087)
                                                                              = $433.71.

                                                                                             

1.3.4 Percents over 100%

In many situations the part must be less than the whole so the percent cannot be more than 100%. In the
shirt sale example, a store can't take off more than the cost of the shirt. If they took off 100% of the price
the shirt would be free. In other situations, going over 100% does make sense. So it's important to use the
context and your number sense to make sure your answer is reasonable.

Example 1.3.9 A company set a goal of $50,000 in profit and actually made $120,000 in their first year.
What percent of their goal is this?
Here we can see the "part" is higher than the whole or base amount so this answer should be over 100%.

Solution.                  part = $120,000 = 2.4 or 240%
                          whole $50,000

The company's profit was 2.4 times or 240% of their goal.                                    

1.3.5 Absolute and Relative Change

As we saw in the shirt sale prices, we can talk about a difference in absolute terms or relative terms. Absolute
change is the actual amount of the change in dollars, people, etc. The change is positive if the value goes
up and negative if it goes down. Relative change is the amount of change as a percentage of the starting
amount. The relative change would have the same sign as the absolute change. Often we use words like
increase or decrease to represent the sign.

                                               Absolute and Relative Change.

           Absolute Change = Ending Amount - Starting Amount

           Relative Change = Ending Amount - Starting Amount = Absolute Change
                          Starting Amount                     Starting Amount

For example, Portland Community College recently increased its tution from $128 to $133 per credit hour.
Find the absolute and relative change. First we will subtract to find out how much the tuition went up.

                                                    $133 - $128 = $5 per credit
1.3. PERCENTS                                                                                   27

The absolute change is an increase of $5 per credit. Now we will divide that by the original tuition of $128.

                                                                $5  0.039
                                                              $128

The relative change is a tuition increase of about 3.9%.
The base of a percent is very important and relative change is calculated as a percentage of the original
amount because that was the amount before the change.
Example 1.3.10 Maria has been thinking about selling her car. The value went from $7400 to $6800 over
the last year. What is the absolute and relative change in the car's value?
Solution. First we will subtract to calculate the absolute change:

                                  Absolute Change = Ending Amount - Starting Amount
                                                         = $6800 - $7400
                                                         = -$600

The absolute change is a decrease of $600 in the car's value.
Now we can calculate the relative change:

                                           Relative Change = Absolute Change
                                                                     Starting Amount

                                                                 = -$600
                                                                     $7400

                                                                  -0.081

The relative change in the price of the car was a decrease of about 8.1% of it's value.         

Notice in the last example we either used the negative sign or the word decrease to show the direction of the
change. We could say the car's value changed by -8.1% or decreased by 8.1%. We wouldn't use both at the
same time because that would be a double negative. Let's look at another example.

Example 1.3.11 After raises, Iryna's wage went from $22 to $25 per hour. Sundar's hourly wage went from
$19 to $21.85. Calculate their absolute and relative raises. Who got a larger raise?

Solution. First we will calculate the absolute raises:

     Iryna:                                                 Sundar:
     $25 - $22 = $3                                         $21.85 - $19 = $2.85

Iryna got a larger absolute raise of $3 per hour compared with $2.85 for Sundar. Now we will calculate the
relative raises.

     $3       0.136   or  13.6%                             $2.85 $19 = 0.15 or 15%
     $22                                                    Sundar's raise was 15% of his pay.
     Iryna's raise was about 13.6% of her pay.

Sundar had a relative raise of 15% of his pay and Iryna's raise was about 13.6% of her pay. Iryna had the

larger absolute raise but Sundar had the larger raise relative to their starting wages.

Notice that instead of subtracting first, we could have divided the new pay by the base pay. For Sundar's

pay  we  get  $21.85  =   1.15  or  115%.
                $19
This is another way to see that Sundar had a raise of 15%.                                      

Notice in the last example that Sundar's new pay was 1.15 times his old pay or an increase of 15%. He is
getting 100% of his original salary plus an additional 15%.
28  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.3.6 Doubling, Tripling, Etc.

Now let's say the company that made $120,000 in profit the first year made $240,000 in profit in their second
year. We can say their profit doubled or was two times the previous year. This is a 100% increase because
they matched their original profit for 100%, and they also had an increase of 100%.

In order to triple their first year's profit they would need to make $360,000 in profit. Be precise with your
wording when describing percent changes because tripling their profit is an increase of 200%.

1.3.7 Multiple Percent Changes

We can also calculate values with multiple percent increases and decreases. We must be careful here because
the base changes each time. For example, if a stock price drops by 60% in one week and increases by 75%
the next week, this is not the same as an increase of 15%. The base for the drop is the original price and
the base for the increase is the lower price. Let's look at this more closely in the next example.
Example 1.3.12 A stock valued at $100 dropped in value by 60% one week, then increased in value the
next week by 75%. Is the value higher or lower than where it started? What is the ending value and what
is the combined relative change?
Solution. After one week, the value dropped by 60% so we have

                                                  $100 - $100(0.60) = $100 - $60
                                                                          = $40

In the next week, the starting value of the stock is $40, so that is the new base. Computing the 75% increase
we get

                                                    $40 + $40(0.75) = $40 + $30
                                                                          = $70

In the end, the stock is $70, which is $30 lower, or 30% lower than it started.
If you enjoyed the shorter method we showed before, it is really useful for multiple percent changes.

                                          $100(1 - 0.60)(1 + 0.75) = $100(0.40)(1.75)
                                                                           = $70

                                                                                                                                            

1.3.8 Exercises

1. Convert each percent into decimal form.

           a 15.6%

           b 9.1%

           c 0.07%

           d 135.6%
2. Convert each percent into decimal form.

           a 1.25%
           b 230%
           c 7%
1.3. PERCENTS                                             29

           d 0.1%
3. Change each fraction or decimal into percentage form.

           a 0.89

           b 0.043
           c3

              4
           d 1.05
4. Change each fraction or decimal into percentage form.

           a 0.029
           b5

              6
           c 1.804

           d 0.72

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, calculate the percent and/or part.

    5. Out of 230 racers who started a marathon, 212 completed the race. What percentage is that?
           Round your percentage to 1 decimal place if needed.

    6. Out of 501 adults surveyed, 390 had a pet. What percentage is that? Round your percentage to 1
           decimal place if needed.

    7. A customer left a tip of $9 on a $50 restaurant bill. What percent tip is that?

    8. A customer left a tip of $15 on a $72 restaurant bill. What percent tip is that?

    9. To help aleviate homelessness, voters in the Portland Metro area approved a personal income tax
           for individuals who make over $125,000 in taxable income. Miguel has a taxable income of $180,000
           and the rate for that level of income is 1.5%. How much will Miguel owe for this tax?

    10. Employees pay 7.65% of their gross earning towards Social Security tax (FICA) and employers pay
           the same amount. James earns $5,100 per month. How much will be deducted from his monthly
           paycheck for FICA tax?

    11. A project on Kickstarter.com had a goal of $400 to fund the creation of enamel bird pins. They
           have 21 backers wo raised $1,119. What percentage of their goal is this?

    12. A project on Kickstarter.com had a goal of $11,000 to fund a new chai maker. They have 3,658
           backers wo raised $367,273. What percentage of their goal is this?

    13. A project on Gofundme.com was aiming to raise $5,000 to produce the worlds smallest foldable
           charger. They have 880 donations raising about 1,637% of their goal. How much did they raise?

    14. A project on Gofundme.com was aiming to raise $50,000 to fund a food truck. They have 1,251
           donations raising about 253% of their goal. How much did they raise?

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, calculate the percent or part and the ending amount.

    15. Vancouver, Washington has a sales tax of 8.7% Find the tax amount on a clothing purchase of $120.
           What is the total cost of the purchase?

    16. Safa managed a company to reduce it's carbon emissions by 18.3%. The company originally emitted
           920 tons of carbon dioxide anually. How much was the reduction and what are the new emmissions?

    17. A company wants to decrease their energy use by 15%. If their electric bill is currently $2,200 per
           month, what will their bill be if they are successful?
30  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

    18. A company starts a social media campaign with a goal of increasing the number of customers by
          30%. They currently have about 80 customers a day. How many customers will they have if the
          campaign is successful?

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, calculate the absolute change and relative change. Include the
direction of the change in words or symbols.

    19. Portland State University enrollment was 16,423 undergraduate students in Fall, 2023 and 16,864
           undergraduate students in Fall, 2022.

    20. A town's population went from 25,300 residents in 2023 to 24,590 residents in 2024.

    21. Franklin High School enrollment was 1,876 students during the 2022-23 school year and 1,966
           students in the 2021-22 school year.

    22. The cost of a restaurant menu item was $19.99 in 2023 and $20.50 in 2024.

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, describe the relative change.  Include the direction of the
change in words or symbols.

    23. A puppy's weight doubles from 5 pounds to 10 pounds.
    24. A baby's weight triples from 8 pounds to 24 pounds.
    25. A stock's value goes from $50 to $40.
    26. A car's value goes from $15,000 to $10,000.

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, calculate the ending amount and the combined relative change.

    27. A company's sales were $2 million in 2021. They decreased by 9.5% in 2022, then increased by 10%
           in 2023. How much did they have in sales in 2023? What was the combined relative change?

    28. A new car worth $50,000 dropped in value by 20% in the first year and 15% the second year. What
           was it worth after the second drop and what was the combined relative change?

    29. A store has clearance items that have been marked down by 60%. They are having a sale, advertising
           an additional 30% off clearance items. What percent of the original price do you end up paying?

    30. A stock goes up by 20% one day and then down by 18%. What percent of the original price is the
           stock now?
1.4. RATES AND PROPORTIONS  31

1.4 Rates and Proportions

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Identify rates, unit rates and proportions
   · Determine whether quantities are proportional
   · Calculate unit rates to compare options
   · Solve proportion problems with visual scaling, unit rates and/or proportion equations

Percents are a specific type of comparison by division using a denominator of 100. In this section we will
expand our problem solving tools to more general ratios, rates, and proportions.

1.4.1 Ratios, Rates and Unit Rates

When comparing two like quantities with division, we use a ratio. An example of this is a teacher to student
ratio of 1 to 28. There are no units on the 1 or 28 because they are both people. When comparing two
unlike quantities, we use a rate. If you traveled 15 miles to class and it took half an hour, that's a rate of
15 miles per half hour. We usually refer to speed in miles per hour or mph, so we can also transform that
rate into 30 miles per hour and that is called a unit rate.

                                                          Ratios and Rates.

    A ratio is a comparison between two like quantities using division. We use the word "to" or a colon
    without units.
    A rate is a comparison of two unlike quantities using division. We use the word "per" or a division
    bar in the units.
    A unit rate is a rate where the denominator is one unit.

Example 1.4.2 Identify each quantity as a ratio, rate, or unit rate:

    a 2:5

    b $3.98 per gallon
    c 20 text messages

              2 hours

Solution.

    a 2:5 is a ratio. Notice this is not the same as the fraction 2/5 because in a ratio of 2 parts to 5 parts
       there are 7 parts in total.

    b $3.98 per gallon is a unit rate.
    c 2 hours 20 text messages is a rate, but not a unit rate.

                                                                                                                                            
32                      CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.4.2 Calculating Unit Rates to Compare Items

You may have calculated unit rates while grocery shopping or seen them on store tags. This is an important
way to compare different brands or sizes and save money. Let's look at an example.

Example 1.4.3 A 12-pack of sparkling water is on sale for $8.99. An 8-pack is selling for $6.49. If the cans
are the same size, which is the better value?

Solution. Using the units to guide us, we are interested in dollars per can. This means we will divide the

price by the number of cans.

For the 12-pack we have
                                                        $8.99 = $0.749 per can
                                                      12 cans

For the 8-pack we have

                                       $6.49 = $0.811 per can
                                       8 cans

In this case the 12-pack has the cheaper unit price. Often the larger size is a better value but that's not

always the case. We could also compare using different units like the cost per ounce. Look for the unit prices

next time you are in a grocery store or shopping online.                                           

1.4.3 Proportional Quantities

In problem solving it is useful to know whether quantities are proportional or not. That is, do the quantities
have the same size relative to each other? In a proportional relationship, there is a constant rate or
ratio. One quantity is always a constant multiple of the other. This is also called a scaling factor.

For example, would you expect to drive through downtown Portland at the same rate as from Portland to
Eugene? No, because you can't drive as fast through the city as on the freeway. Would you expect your
Social Security tax deducted to be proportional to the amount of your paycheck? Yes, this should be a
constant rate, at least up to a certain point of income.

Example 1.4.4 Determine whether the following quantities are proportional.

    a Pairs of socks are on sale for 2 pair for $8 or 5 pair for $20.

    b The distance from Portland to San Francisco is about 536 miles and the airfare on Alaska Airlines is
       $207. The distance from Portland to New York City is about 2,439 miles and the airfare on Alaska
       Airlines is $554.

Solution.

    a Let's see if the unit price for one pair is the same for each price.

           Two pair:                                      Five pair:

             $8 = $4.00 per pair                                             $20 = $4.00 per pair
           2 pair                                                           5 pair

    These sock prices are proportional because they have the same price per pair.

    b At a glance the airfares do not look proportional because it's a lot further to New York City and the
       price didn't go up as much as the distance. We will calculate the two rates to be sure:

           Portland to San Francisco:                     Portland to New York City:

              $207 = $0.386 per mile                               $554 = $0.227 per mile
           536 miles                                           2,439 miles

    These flight costs are not proportional because they have different rates per mile.

                                                                                                   
1.4. RATES AND PROPORTIONS                                                33

There are many situations where we know a rate and we want to scale another quantity to match that rate.
These are called proportion problems. There are many ways to solve them and we will show you three
ways. Some methods may work better in particular situations and according to your preference. We will
solve proportion problems visually, using a rate and with a proportion equation.

1.4.4 Solving Proportion Problems Visually

If you like visuals, you may want to use a visual scaling method to solve proportion problems whenever
practical.

Example 1.4.5 A map scale indicates that a half inch on the map corresponds to a distance of 3 miles. You
measure the route of a hike and it is 2 ¼ inches. How long is the hike?
First we will draw a long rectangle and mark a small part with ½ inch on the top corresponding with 3 miles
along the bottom.

Then we will mark additional segments until we get to 2 ¼ inches along the top. We will write 3 miles along
the bottom for every half inch and calculate any partial segments. A quarter is half of a segment, so that
corresponds to 1.5 miles.

Now we can add up the distance along the bottom and we have 13.5 miles.

This method works well with reasonably nice numbers. For this problem we were scaling up, but this method

could also be used to scale down. In that case we would mark a large segment on the rectangle and then

divide that into pieces.                                                  

1.4.5 Solving Proportion Problems with a Unit Rate

Since we know there is a constant rate for proportional quantities, we can calculate that unit rate to solve
a proportion problem. Here is an example using a unit rate.

Example 1.4.6 You want to estimate how much you will spend for gas on a vacation. Your car can drive
about 300 miles on a tank of 12 gallons of gas. If you are planning a roadtrip that is 1,300 miles, how many
gallons of gas will you need?

Solution. We can divide either way to get our unit rate so we will choose miles per gallon. Dividing this

way we get                  300 miles = 25 miles per gallon
                            12 gallons

Now we can divide the trip length by the rate

                          1,300 miles ÷ 25 miles per gallon = 52 gallons

You will need about 52 gallons for the trip.
34                                     CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Use your number and operation sense to know when to multiply and divide. The number of gallons is going

to be smaller than the number of miles so that's how we knew to divide in this case.

If we had chosen, instead, to calculate the unit rate by dividing 12 gallons by 300 miles, we would have

gotten                                 12 gallons = 0.04 gallons per mile
                                       300 miles

Then we would multiply the trip length by the rate

                               1,300 miles · 0.04 gallons per mile = 52 gallons

Using either rate you will need about 52 gallons of gas for this trip. To estimate the cost you could multiply

that by the price per gallon.                                                          

1.4.6 Solving Proportion Problems with an Algebraic Equation

You may be familiar with solving proportion equations using algebra. Because a proportional relationship
means two things have a constant rate or ratio, we can set up an equation with two fractions equal to each
other. We will use a variable for the unknown quantity and solve the equation. We will do the previous two
examples again to show you this method.

There are multiple ways to write the initial proportion equation. It will be equivalent if flipped from left to
right or top to bottom. To make the equation easier to solve we will set up the equation to our advantage.
We will put the variable in the upper left position and then we just need to align the units on each side of
the equation.

Example 1.4.7 A map scale indicates that a half inch on the map corresponds to a distance of 3 miles. You
measure the route of a hike and it is 2 ¼ inches. How long is the hike?

Solution. First, we write our equation and we will purposely organize it to put the variable in the numerator
on the left side. Our unknown quantity, x miles, goes with the map distance of 2 ¼ inches so we put that
in the denominator on the left side. Then we match up our two known quantities to match the units on the
left side.

                                        x miles 3 miles
                                       2 41 inches 2 = 1 inch

By setting it up this way, there is only one algebraic step. We need to undo the division on the left side by
multiplying by 2 ¼ inches on both sides. That will maintain equality and isolate the variable.

                               1 ¨¨¨ x miles        1                3 miles
                               2 ¨inches · 1 $$$ = 2 inches · 1
                               ¨4      $2 4$inches 4                  2 inch

After canceling the 2 ¼ inches on the left side of the equation, the variable is isolated and we can calculate
the result. Notice that the units of inches cancel out on the right side leaving us with miles. This is a great
check that we have set the equation up correctly.

                                       x=  2 14 $inc$h$es · 3 miles
                                                    1$
                                                    2 $inch

We can use the fraction feature on a calculator or the division bar with parentheses.

                                       x = (2 + 1/4) · 3/(1/2) miles
                                         = 13.5 miles

The length of the hike is 13.5 miles.                                                  

We purposely set up the last equation with the variable on the upper left side to make solving easier. If
1.4. RATES AND PROPORTIONS                                                                              35

you'd like a more general method that works for every proportion we'll show you that in the next example.

Example 1.4.8 You want to estimate how much you will spend for gas on a vacation. Your car can drive
about 300 miles on a tank of 12 gallons of gas. If you are planning a roadtrip that is 1,300 miles, how many
gallons of gas will you need?

Solution. For this equation we will start with the given information and write the 300 miles per 12 gallons
as a rate on the left side. For the right side, we know the trip is 1,300 miles so we line that up with the 300
miles in the numerator. We will use a variable, x, for the unknown quantity of gallons. We are looking for
an answer in gallons so we will use that as a double check.

                              300 miles = 1,300 miles
                              12 gallons x gallons

Now we can maintain this equal relationship and solve for x by doing the same operation on both sides of
the equation. To undo division, we will multiply by one of the denominators first. To simplify the process
we will remove the units for now and check them at the end.

                                  x · 300 = x · 1,300
                                  12        x

                                  x · 300 = &x · 1,300
                                  12        &x

                                  300x = 1,300
                                   12

After canceling the x's on the right side and simplifying the left side, we will multiply by the other denomi-
nator. You could do these at the same time if you prefer.

                                                         12 · 300x = 12 · 1,300
                                                                12

                                                        &1&2 · 300x = 12 · 1,300
                                                                &1&2

After canceling the 12's we see that we have 300x on the left side but we want to know what x is. We will
isolate the variable by using division to undo the multiplication operation.

                                  300x = 12 · 1,300

                                  300x = 12 · 1,300
                                  300       300
                                  ¨30¨0x 12 · 1,300
                                  ¨30¨0 = 300

                                  x = 12 · 1,300
                                           300

                                       = 52 gallons

We can double check our units by putting them back in the last step to make sure they cancel properly.

                              x=  12 gallons · 1,300$mi$l$es
                                       300$mi$l$es

                              = 52 gallons

The miles cancel out and we are left with gallons so this is a good double check. You will need about 52

gallons of gas for the trip.                                                                            
36               CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.4.7 Exercises

1. Identify each as a ratio, rate or unit rate.

           a Painting 2 walls in 8 hours

           b 5 children to 2 adults

           c 24.9 miles per gallon
2. Identify each as a ratio, rate or unit rate.

           a 65 miles per hour

           b 25 advisors to 7500 students

           c Doing 5 math homework problems in 30 minutes
3. Find the unit rate: You bought 10 pounds of potatoes for $5.
4. Find the unit rate: You bought 6 pairs of socks for $27.
5. Find the unit rate for each size and determine which is more cost effective? A 9.6-ounce cannister of

      coffee for $5.42 or a 40.3-ounce cannister of coffee for $14.87.
6. Find the unit rate for each brand. Which is more cost effective? A 16-ounce jar of peanut butter for

      $4.88 or a A 28-ounce jar of peanut butter for $6.97.
7. The population of the U.S. is about 309,975,000 people, covering a land area of 3,717,000 square miles.

      The population of India is about 1,184,639,000 people, covering a land area of 1,269,000 square miles.
      Compare the population densities of the two countries.
8. The GDP (Gross Domestic Product) of China was $5,739 billion in 2010, and the GDP of Sweden was
      $435 billion. The population of China is about 1,347 million, while the population of Sweden is about
      9.5 million. Compare the GDP per capita of the two countries.

Exercise Group. For this set of questions, determine whether the quantities are proportional to each
other.

    9. One brand of printer can print 45 pages in 5 minutes, and another can print 96 pages in 8 minutes.
    10. A backpacker hikes 11 miles in 2 days and then 16.5 miles in the next 3 days.
    11. You read 56 pages in 2 hours and then 140 pages in 5 hours.
    12. A runner runs a 50 m race in 6.8 sec and a 400 m race in 50.5 seconds.

Exercise Group. Solve these proportion problems.

    13. A crepe recipe calls for 2 eggs, 1 cup of flour, and 1 cup of milk. How much flour would you need
           if you use 5 eggs?

    14. A smoothie recipe uses one and a half cups of yogurt, a banana, and other ingredients to make 4
           cups. How many cups of yogurt are needed for 6 cups of smoothies?

    15. An 8-ft length of 4-inch-wide crown molding costs $14. How much will it cost to buy 40 feet of
           crown molding?

    16. If a car travels 160 miles in 3 hours, how long will it take to travel 250 miles at the same speed?

    17. Four 3-megawatt wind turbines can supply enough electricity to power 3,000 homes. How many
           turbines would be required to power 55,000 homes?

    18. A highway had a landslide, where 3,000 cubic yards of material fell on the road, requiring 200 dump
           truck loads to clear. On another highway, a slide left 40,000 cubic yards on the road. How many
           dump truck loads would be needed to clear this slide?
1.4. RATES AND PROPORTIONS  37

19. If your working on a farm and 4 packets of seeds are enough for 25 square meters, how many packets
      are needed for 60 square meters?

20. Two bundles of shingles cover 50 square feet. How many bundles are needed to cover a roof of 660
      square feet?

21. If one US dollar is equivalent to 0.91 euros(EUR), how many dollars will you get back for 170 EUR?

22. If one US dollar is equivalent to 17.13 Mexican Pesos (MXN), how many dollars will you get back
      for 2,000 MXN?

Exercise Group. For each situation determine how to compensate and keep the quantities proportional.

    23. Your chocolate milk mix says to use 4 scoops of mix for 2 cups of milk. After pouring in the milk,
           you start adding the mix, but get distracted and accidentally put in 5 scoops of mix. How can you
           adjust the milk?

    24. A recipe for sabayon calls for 2 egg yolks, 3 tablespoons of sugar, and ¼ cup of white wine. After
           cracking the eggs, you start measuring the sugar, but accidentally put in 4 tablespoons of sugar.
           How can you compensate?
38                   CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.5 Problem Solving

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Use a problem solving process to solve a variety of real-world problems with trade-offs or more than
       one right answer
   · Identify which operation(s) to use in a problem and check for a reasonable answer
   · Estimate reasonable answers and give reasonable estimates for quantities needed to solve a problem
   · Solve problems that involve a combination of the four basic operations
   · Solve problems that involve percents, rates and/or proportions
   · Solve problems that involve unit conversions
   · Solve problems that involve geometry

1.5.1 A Problem Solving Process

In this section we will outline a problem solving process and see how number sense and operation sense tie
into the process. As in real life, we focus on problems that have a trade-off or more than one right answer
as much as possible.

There are many ways to write a problem solving process, and this is just one example. Some of the important
elements are breaking down complex issues into manageable parts, following a logical reasoning process, and
using creativity to consider all the possibilities. In real life, problem solving is often an iterative process so
evaluation and refinement are important elements as well.

                                                  A Problem Solving Process.

         1 Identify the question(s) you're trying to answer. Do any research needed to understand the
            context.

         2 Identify the information you have and any information you may need. Look up or estimate any
            missing information. Estimate the range of reasonable answers.

         3 Brainstorm and try out different mathematical tools to see what might be helpful. Use ma-
            nipulatives, visuals or tables whenever possible. All ideas are useful, even if they don't work
            out.

         4 Choose one method to continue and get a potential solution.

         5 Check whether your solution makes sense. Is it reasonable? Can you get there a different way to
            confirm your answer? Return to Steps 1-5 as needed. When finished, explain your conclusion.

Let's illustrate this process using an example of a decision you may need to make.

Example 1.5.2 You're comparing two healthcare plans to select one of them for the next year. Plan A has
a $200 monthly premium and a $1000 deductible, and plan B has a $150 monthly premium and a $2400
deductible. Which plan is more cost effective and why?
There are many ways to approach a problem like this, so this is one example. Please feel free to try it on
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                                      39

your own first before you click on or read our solution. In the online version we have a solution link for each
step to reveal one step at a time. You'll see that we go through the steps more than once.
Solution 1 (Step 1: The question and context). The question we need to answer is which plan is cheaper
overall. We also need to make sure we understand all the insurance vocabulary used here.

   · A premium is the amount paid for the health insurance plan (usually monthly) and does not go
       toward any healthcare used.

· A deductible is the amount that a customer must pay of their healthcare used before the insurance
   company will start paying.

Solution 2 (Step 2: The information and estimation). We are given the monthly premiums and deductibles
for each plan. We will assume this is for one person. Most plans have a separate deductible for each person
so making this decision for a family could be an extension of this problem. You might also need to know
how much you usually spend on healthcare per year. We will proceed without this for now and return to
this step if it becomes relevant. Let's restate the information we have:

Plan A:                                      Plan B:

· Premium: $200 per month                    · Premium: $150 per month

· Deductible: $1000 per year                 · Deductible: $2400 per year

We estimate the yearly cost to be in the thousands for each plan. If we got an amount less than a thousand
or more then $6,000 we would be surprised and double check our work.

Solution 3 (Step 3: Consider possible methods). We could compare the two plans on a yearly basis,
monthly basis, or make a table.

Solution 4 (Step 4: Choose a method to continue). Let's try calculating the cost of each plan per year.

Plan A:                                      Plan B:
$200 · 12 months = $2400 per year for pre-   $150 · 12 months = $1800 per year for pre-
miums                                        miums
Then add $1000 for the deductible            Then add $2400 for the deductible
The total cost is $2400 + $1000 = $3400 per  The total cost is $1800 + $2400 = $4200 per
year.                                        year.

So Plan A is cheaper, right? Well, we bet you are thinking it depends.

Solution 5 (Step 5: Check for a reasonable answer). We double checked our math and total amount for
each plan is within our original estimate. The totals are not too large or too small to make sense. However,
there is another factor to consider. What if you don't use your whole deductible in a year? We noticed that
the premiums alone are cheaper for Plan B, so if no healthcare is used during a year then Plan B would be
cheaper.

Solution 6 (Step 2 Again: Estimate missing information). You could look back at your records and
determine how much you usually spend on healthcare each year (the amount billed to insurance). You would
also want to consider whether anything might be different in the coming year.

Solution 7 (Step 3 Again: Consider possible methods). We could try some values to see which plan was
cheaper, and even find the billed amount that switches from Plan B being cheaper to Plan A being cheaper.
In order to do this in a systematic way, we will make a table. It might be very useful to get a sense of the
range of values where each plan is more cost effective.

Solution 8 (Step 4 Again: Choose a method to continue). To make a table, we will start with $0 in billed
healthcare and go up from there. To be more efficient, we will start with increments of $200 and go smaller
if needed. A spreadsheet would also be a great tool for this. We will learn about and use spreadsheets in
the financial math chapter.
To fill in our table we will use the same calculation we did before and combine the two steps into one. For
$0 in billed healthcare we have this calculation for each plan.

Plan A:                                      Plan B:
$200 · 12 + 0 = $2400                        $150 · 12 + 0 = $1800
40                                     CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Continuing that for each healthcare amount, we fill in this table:

                               Healthcare  Billed  Plan A           Plan B
                               $0                  $2400            $1800
                               $200                $2600            $2000
                               $400                $2800            $2200
                               $600                $3000            $2400
                               $800                $3200            $2600
                               $1000               $3400            $2800
                               $1200               $3400            $3000
                               $1400               $3400            $3200
                               $1600               $3400            $3400
                               $1800               $3400            $3600
                               $2000               $3400            $3800

Solution 9 (Step 5 Again: Check for a reasonable answer and explain the conclusion). We completed the

table and noticed some patterns that help us verify that our values are correct. Each value goes up by $200

per row, until the deductible is met. We also marked the cheaper option in each row in bold and found the

row where both plans have the same cost.

Now we can see that Plan B starts out cheaper from $0 to $1600 in healthcare cost. The plans are equal at

$1600 and Plan A saves you money after $1600. Having this full picture can help you choose what is best

for you in the coming year. If you estimate you will have less than $1600 in billed healthcare, then it would

be cheaper to select Plan B. If you think it is more likely you will have more than $1600 in the coming year,

then Plan A would be cheaper.

Some plans have copays and/or co-insurance amounts so adding those in could also be an extension of this

situation. This decision also has an element of risk or uncertainty and we will learn additional tools to work

with that in the probability chapter.                                       

1.5.2 Operation Sense

In the problem we just did, notice what came intuitively to you. Did you have a sense for which plan would
be cheaper? Did you intuitively know that we would use multiplication and addition? These operations
are common in totalling values. They also make positive values larger. Operation sense is understanding
what mathematical operations do and when to use them. There are many words and phrases that translate
to certain operations and results in math. In this class you'll be using and practicing your operation sense
to determine what steps to take.

In this table we list some words and phrases that can indicate each operation, and what will happen as
a result. Here we focus on operations with positive numbers, but some of our problems may use negative
quantities as well. As an extension, see if you can explain why we get the results from each operation
(especially multiplication and division) and what would happen with negative numbers.
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                                            41

Operation       Key phrases                               Result
Addition        Add, total, sum, increased by,
Subtraction     together, altogether, all together,       When adding positive numbers, the
Multiplication  how many in all, plus, combined, and,     answer is larger than the numbers
                both                                      being added.
Division        Minus, subtract, difference, change
                in, decreased by, fewer than, lost,       Subtracting a positive number from
                reduced by, spent, remain, take away,     another gives a smaller result.
                how many are left, need, less
                                                          Multiplying positive numbers larger
                Times, double, triple, each group,        than one makes the result larger.
                every, multiply by, area, volume,         Multiplying a positive number by a
                factor of, product of, of, by, total for  positive number less than one makes
                repeated patterns with per                it smaller.
                                                          Dividing a positive number by a
                Per, percent, rate, divide, out of,       positive number larger than one
                over, average, ratio of, quotient, how    makes the result smaller. Dividing a
                many in each, half, quarter, other        positive number by a positive number
                fraction words                            less than one makes it bigger.

Example 1.5.3 Determine which operation(s) you would use for each situation. There may be more than
one correct answer.

    a How many dollars of your paycheck you have left to spend.

    b The amount of sugar you need if you are cutting a recipe in half.

    c The number of tables you need for a large event.

    d How much you've spent on streaming services in the last two years.

Solution.

    a To calculate what you have left, you would subtract what you've already spent from your paycheck
       amount. You may need to use addition to total what you've already spent.

    b To cut a recipe in half, we would either divide by 2 or multiply by one half.

    c To calculate the number of tables, we would divide the number of guests by the number of seats at
       each table.

    d To calculate the total spent on streaming services, we would likely multiply the monthly amount by
       the number of months. For multiple services we would add them together.

                                                                                                                                            

1.5.3 Number Sense and Estimation

Another skill you have or are building is number sense. This has to do with understanding the size or
magnitude of numbers, and patterns or relationships between numbers. A very useful tool when problem
solving is using your number sense to estimate the result.

Before you start, how large or small do you expect the answer to be? Would it be positive or negative? Do
you expect a number less than one, a number in the hundreds, or in the millions? It is very important to
come back at the end of a problem and use your number sense to make sure your answer seems reasonable.
42  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

Example 1.5.4 Estimate a reasonable range of values for each situation.
    a The weight of a stack of paving stones in the back of an SUV.
    b The number of people who can fit in a standard elevator.
    c The total revenue for one showing of a movie at a theater.
    d The number of scales on a fish.

Solution. We haven't given many details here, so there is a wide range of possible answers. Sometimes it
is more useful to think of answers that would not make sense.

    a The weight would be positive and we think it would have to be less than a couple thousand pounds.

    b The number of people would be 0 to maybe 20, depending on the size of the elevator.

    c The movie revenue would be between 0 and a few thousand dollars. Of course this depends on the size
       of the theater.

    d Without looking it up, we think it would be in the thousands or maybe ten-thousands. Of course it
       depends on the type and size of the fish, but we don't think it would be in the hundred-thousands or
       millions.

                                                                                                                                            
Now that we have gone through an example using the problem solving process and talked about operations
and number sense, we will continue with more mathematical tools to use in making decisions. We will talk
about unit conversions and geometry and add in percents and proportions from previous sections.

1.5.4 Solving Problems with Unit Conversions

Many situations also require unit conversions. Here are some common conversion rates used.

                                         Unit Conversions for Length.

    1 foot (ft) = 12 inches (in)         1 yard (yd) = 3 feet (ft)
    1 mile (mi) = 5,280 feet (ft)        2.54 centimeters (cm) = 1 inch (in)
    1000 millimeters (mm) = 1 meter (m)  100 centimeters (cm) = 1 meter (m)
    1000 meters (m) = 1 kilometer (km)

    Unit Conversions for Weight and Mass.

    1 pound (lb) = 16 ounces (oz)        1 US ton = 2000 pounds (lbs)
    1000 millgrams (mg) = 1 gram (g)     1000 grams (g) = 1 kilogram (kg)

    1 kilogram (kg)  2.2 pounds (lbs) in Earth's gravity

    Unit Conversions for Volume and Capacity.

    1 gallon (gal) = 4 quarts (qt)       1 cup (c) = 8 fluid ounces (fl oz)
    1 quart (qt) = 2 pints (pt)          1 cup (c) = 16 Tablespoons (T)
    1 pint (pt) = 2 cups (c)             1 Tablespoon (T) = 3 Teaspoons (t)
    1000 milliliters (ml) = 1 liter (L)

    Note: Fluid ounces are a capacity measurement for liquids. 1 fluid ounce weighs about 1 ounce for
    water only.
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                                   43

Unit conversions use rates so we will be multiplying or dividing. We can use our number sense to determine
which operation to use, or we can line up the units to help us. Here we will line up the units to show you
how. This is called dimensional analysis. Each conversion factor can be written two ways. For example,
since 1 pint is equal to 2 cups, both of these fractions are equal to 1.

                                    1 pint = 2 cups = 1
                                    2 cups 1 pint

We can multiply by either one of these by lining up the units we want to cancel out. Because the rate is
equal to 1, the value stays equivalent in the new units. Let's look at an example.

Example 1.5.5 Your dog was stung by a bee and your veterinarian recommended you give them Benedryl.
The dosage is 2 milligrams per kilogram of body weight and you want to double check the dose. Your dog
weighs 54 pounds and the tablets are 25 mg each. How many tablets should you give your dog?

Solution. First we will convert the pounds to kilograms by setting up the pounds to cancel out.

                                    $$ 1 kilogram
                           54$po$unds ·        $$  24.55 kilograms
                                         2.2$po$unds

Then we multiply that by the dosage, setting up the kilograms to cancel.

                                    $$$ 2 milligrams
                      24.55$kil$ograms ·       $$  49.1 milligrams
                                          1$kil$ogram

Or we can also do this in one step

                           $$ 1$kil$og$ra$m 2 milligrams
           54$po$unds ·                  $$ ·         $$  49.1 milligrams
                                    2.2$po$unds 1$kil$ogram

You should give your dog about 49.1 milligrams. Since the tablets are 25 mg each, we will divide 49.1 mg

by 25 mg.                           49.1¨m¨g  1.96 tablets
                                     25¨m¨g

Check with your vet to make sure it's within an acceptable range, but it looks like you should give your dog

2 tablets. There are also liquid forms of medication to avoid giving partial tablets.  

1.5.5 Solving Problems with Geometry

If there are geometric shapes in a problem we may need to look up some formulas. Here are a few of the
most common.

                                    Perimeter and Area.

Rectangle                                      Circle

Perimeter = 2L + 2W units                      Circumference = 2r units
Area = L · W units2                            Area = r2 units2
44                             CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

    Rectangular Box                            Volume.
    Volume = L · W · H units3                        Cylinder
                                                     Volume = r2H units3

Example 1.5.6 You need to replace the boards on your deck and you'd like to do it yourself to save money.
You want to estimate how much you will need to save up for the wood.

Solution. Step 1: We want to know how much the wood for the deck will cost. In building and construc-
tion, estimates usually add 10% for parts of boards that don't get used so we will do that as well.
Step 2: We need to know the size and shape of the deck, the type of boards and cost per board. You measure
your deck and it's a 16-foot by 24-foot rectangle. Looking up prices online, you find 5/4-inch by 4-inch by
8-foot cedar deck boards for $11.99 each. We will estimate the cost of the wood to be in the thousands of
dollars, possibly about $1000-3000.
Step 3: There are a few approaches we could take to this problem: 1) Go out to your deck and count the
boards, 2) calculate the number of boards you will need using the area of the deck, or 3) calculate the area
of the deck and find the approximate cost per square foot for deck boards.
Step 4: Option 3 seems like the most efficient approach so we will try that. The area of the deck is

                                          16 feet · 24 feet = 384 feet2

To find the cost per square foot for decking boards, we could compute the area of the top of a single board,

and then divide the cost by the area. Since the width of a board is 4 inches we also need to convert that

into feet. So the area of a single board is

                                          (  $$ 1 foot  )

                               8 feet · 4$inches · $$ = 2.667 ft         2

                                             12$inches

The cost per square foot of one board is

                                                2.667 ft2 $11.99  $4.4957 per square foot
This will allow us to estimate the material cost for the whole deck by multiplying

                                                          ¨¨2 $4.4957
                                                   384¨feet · ¨¨2  $1,726.35

                                                                  ¨feet
Then we will add 10% to the cost. We can calculate the 10% and then add, or multiply by 1.10.

                               $1,726.35(1.10)  $1,898.99

Step 5: This answer is reasonable and fits with our original estimate. You should save up or set aside about
$1900 for this project. This is just the cost of the wood and doesn't include nails, screws or any foundation
materials.
For confirmation with a second method, we could use option 2. If we divide the deck area by the board area
that should tell us approximately how many boards we need. This calculation would also be necessary when
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                                                45

you go to make the purchase. We divide
                                                      384¨fee¨¨t2
                                                               ¨¨2 = 143.98 boards
                                                     2.667¨feet

Then adding 10% to that will tell us how many boards to buy.

                      143.98(1.10)  158.389 boards

If you round up to 159 boards the cost will be

                      159($11.99)  $1,906.41

This cost is very close to our other method but slightly higher because we are taking full boards into
consideration. Using two methods we can say you should save about $1,900-2,000 for the wood decking. 

Example 1.5.7 You are making many pizzas for a large party. Your favorite recipe makes 20 ounces of
dough for two 12-inch diameter pizzas. You want the pizzas to be larger for the party so you plan to make
six 16-inch pizzas. How much dough do you need and by what factor should you multiply or scale the recipe?

Solution. Step 1: We want to find out how much dough is needed in total and how to scale the recipe.

For this context we need to consider how the weight of the dough will scale. The weight is based on the

volume of the dough, but the size is based on just the top or bottom of the pizza. Since this is your favorite

dough, we assume the thickness of the crust should be the same.

Step 2: To estimate a reasonable answer we will switch to pounds because we have more number sense with

pounds.               $ 1 pound

                      20$ou$nces ·              $ = 1.25 pounds
                                                16$ou$nces

Twenty ounces is 1.25 pounds, so with three times as many pizzas that are larger in diameter, we will estimate

around 4-6 pounds of pizza dough. Converting back, we multiply by 16 and that would be 64 to 96 ounces.

Step 3: We will try finding the area of each size pizza and see if that helps us scale the recipe.

Step 4: The formula for the area of a circle uses the radius, so we need to divide each diameter by 2 to get

the radius. Using the formula for the area of a circle we have

                      Area of a 12-inch pizza = (6)2  113 inches2

                                        Area of a 16-inch pizza = (8)2  201 inches2

Since the pizzas will have the same thickness, we can scale based on the areas and divide to get the scaling
factor.

                                                       201$inc$he$$s2
                                                               $$$2 = 1.78 times

                                                       113$inches
The area of the larger pizza is 1.78 times the smaller pizza and we need three times as many pizzas, so we
would scale the recipe by

                                                 1.78 · 3 = 5.34 or about 5 1 times
                                                                                   3

Then to find out how much dough that will make, we need to multiply that by 20 ounces.

                                                  5 1 (20 ounces)  106.67 ounces
                                                    3

Step 5: We got a scale factor of 5 1/3 times for our recipe which would make 106.67 ounces of dough. This
is a little higher than our estimate, but we didn't take into account that we are scaling the length and width
of a pizza, so our answer seems reasonable.
To verify our solution by using another method, we can set up a proportion to scale the dough. For the
original recipe for 2 pizzas we have

                      x ounces                  20 ounces
                      201 inches2 = 113 inches2
46  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

    @@@@2 x ounces                                      2 20 ounces
    @201 inches · @@@2 = 201 inches ·
    @20@1 inches                                        113 inches                  2

                    x=                                  201$inc$he$$s2 · 20 ounces
                                                        $$$2
                                                        113$inches

                                                         35.575 ounces

We need about 35.575 ounces of dough for two 16-inch pizzas. Now we multipy that by 3 to get the amount
needed for six 16-inch pizzas.

                                                      35.575(3) = 106.73 ounces

This is very close to what we got for our first method. To scale the recipe we would use the ratio

    106.73$ou$nc$es $  5.34 times
      20$ou$nces

It is interesting to note that while the diameter is 1.33 times as large, the dough required, which scales with

area, is (1.33)2 = 1.78 times as large for each pizza.                                              

1.5.6 Exercises

1. Determine which operation(s) you would use for each situation. There may be more than one correct
      answer.

          a. The number of buses needed for a field trip.

          b. How much you spend on groceries in a year.
2. Determine which operation(s) you would use for each situation. There may be more than one correct

      answer.

          a. The number of college credits you have left to take before transferring.

          b. The number of months it will take to pay off a credit card.
3. Estimate a reasonable range of values for each situation.

          a. The number of steps to walk around a city block.

          b. The number of soda cans that will fit in a large garbage bag.
4. Estimate a reasonable range of values for each situation.

          a. The distance from Portland, Oregon to New York City in miles.

          b. The number of servings in a standard cereal box.

Exercise Group. Use a combination of operations to solve these problems. Document your steps and
thinking.

     5. You earn a weekly salary of $550 and $10 for each item after you sell 20 items in a week. How much
           will you earn if you sell 41 items this week?

     6. You earn a monthly salary of $2100 and $12 for each item after you sell 50 items in a month. How
           much will you earn if you sell 130 items this month?

     7. You are selling sandwiches for $10 each and your cost is $45 per dozen sandwiches. Find the profit
           on 120 sandwiches.

     8. You are selling lemonade for $3 each and your cost is $12.50 for 10 servings. Find the profit on 80
           servings of lemonade.
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING  47

9. You ordered 50 shirts that you plan to sell for $18 each at an event. The cost was $9 per shirt. You
      sold 43 shirts and returned the rest but had to pay a $2 restocking fee on each shirt returned. What
      is your profit?

10. You ordered 70 hats that you plan to sell for $20 each at an event. The cost was $8 per hat. You
      sold 65 of them and returned the rest but had to pay a $3 restocking fee on each hat returned.
      What is your profit?

11. The grocery store has bulk pecans on sale, which is great since you're planning on making 10 pecan
      pies for a wedding. Your recipe calls for 1 ¾ cups of pecans per pie. However, in the bulk section
      there's only a scale available, not a measuring cup. You run over to the baking aisle and find a bag
      of pecans, and look at the nutrition label to gather some info. How many pounds of pecans should
      you buy?

12. Soda is often sold in 20-ounce bottles. The nutrition label for one of these bottles is shown below. A
      packet of sugar (the kind they have at restaurants for your coffee or tea) typically contain 4 grams
      of sugar in the U.S. Drinking a 20-oz soda is equivalent to eating how many packets of sugar?

Exercise Group. Use the problem solving process to decide between the two options. Document your
steps and thinking.

    13. You have two job offers. One pays a salary of $60,000 per year. The other job pays $28 per hour
           for 40 hours a week with a $500 signing bonus. If the jobs and benefits are similar, which job would
           you choose?

    14. You have two job offers. One pays a salary of $85,000 per year with a $2,000 yearly bonus that has
           the possiblity to increase. The other job pays $42.50 per hour for 40 hours a week. If the jobs and
           benefits are similar, which job would you choose?

    15. In Exercise 1.5.6.13, if the hourly job had overtime pay at time and a half, how many hours of
           overtime per year would you need to work in a year to get paid as much as the salaried job?
48  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

    16. In Exercise 1.5.6.14, how much would the yearly bonus in the salaried job need to be for you to get
          paid as much as the hourly job?

    17. You are organizing a large dinner event. One venue charges $155 per person and you have a prior
          credit of $4,600. Another venue charges $500 per table of 8 people. Which venue is more cost
          effective?

    18. You are organizing a large dinner event. One venue charges $950 per table of 12. Another venue
          charges a setup fee of $1500 and $40 per person. Which venue is more cost effective?

Exercise Group. Use unit coversions and/or geometric formulas to solve these problems as needed.
Document your steps and thinking.

    19. You are in charge of drinks for a neighborhood block party. You need at least 100 cups of beverages.
           So far, you have received enough mix to make 3 gallons of lemonade and 6 bottles of fruit juice that
           each contain are 32 fl. oz. How many cups of beverage do you have so far? Is this enough for the
           block party?

    20. You are in charge of drinks for a community barbecue. You need at least 150 cups of beverages.
           So far, you have received enough mix to make 20 quarts of punch and 9 2-L bottles of soda. How
           many cups of beverage do you have so far? Is this enough for the block party?

    21. A pediatrician prescribes 0.5 mg/kg/day of a medication. If the child weights 33 pounds, how many
           milligrams do they need? If the chewable tablets come in 2.5 or 3.5 mg, which ones should be
           purchased and how many tablets should be given?

    22. A doctor prescribes 5 mg of medication per kilogram of body weight. If a patient weighs 154 pounds,
           how much medication should they receive in milligrams? If tablets are 50 mg each, how many tablets
           should they take?

    23. Parvina wants to fill her 2 rectangular raised garden beds, which are 6 feet long, 3 feet wide, and
           1.5 feet deep. If bags of soil contain 2 cubic feet, how many bags does she need to buy?

    24. Sidiki wants to fill a circular sandbox with a diameter of 5 feet and a depth of 1.5 feet. If bags of
           sand contain 3 cubic feet each, how many bags does he need to buy?

Exercise Group. Use the problem solving process to solve these problems. For this set of questions, after
you identify the information you need, click on the link in the question or go to Subsubsection 1.5.6.1 to find
that information. The details may be imprecise; answer the question the best you can with the provided
information. Document your steps and thinking.

     25. You're planning on making 6 meatloafs for a party. You go to the store to buy breadcrumbs, and
           see they are sold by the canister. How many canisters do you need to buy? Information: List 1.5.8

     26. Your friend wants to cover their car in bottle caps, like in this picture. How many bottle caps are
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                        49

you going to need? Information: List 1.5.9

     27. You need to buy some chicken for dinner tonight. You found an ad showing that the store across
           town has it on sale for $2.99 a pound, which is cheaper than your usual neighborhood store, which
           sells it for $3.79 a pound. Is it worth the extra drive? Information: List 1.5.10

     28. I have an old gas furnace, and am considering replacing it with a new, high efficiency model. Is
           upgrading worth it? Information: List 1.5.11

     29. Janine is considering buying a water filter and a reusable water bottle rather than buying bottled
           water. Will doing so save her money? Information: List 1.5.12

     30. Marcus is considering going car-free to save money and be more environmentally friendly. Is this
           financially a good decision? Information: List 1.5.13

Exercise Group. Use the problem solving process to solve these problems. For this set of questions,
research or make educated estimates for any unknown information needed to answer the question. Document
your steps and thinking.

     31. You want to travel from Portland, OR to San Francisco, CA for a wedding. Compare the costs and
           time involved with driving, flying, and taking a train. Assume that if you fly or take the train you'll
           need to rent a car while you're there. Which option is best?

     32. You want to paint the walls of a 6ft by 9ft storage room that has one door and one window. You
           want to put on two coats of paint. How many gallons and/or quarts of paint should you buy to
           paint the room as cheaply as possible?

     33. A restaurant in New York tiled their floor with pennies. Just for the materials, is this more expensive
           than using a more traditional material like ceramic tiles? If each penny has to be laid by hand,
           estimate how long it would take to lay the pennies for a 12ft by 10ft room. Considering material
           and labor costs, are pennies a cost-effective replacement for ceramic tiles?

     34. You are considering taking up part of your back yard and turning it into a vegetable garden, to
           grow broccoli, tomatoes, and zucchini. Will doing so save you money, or cost you more than buying
           vegetables from the store?

     35. Barry is trying to decide whether to keep his 1993 Honda Civic with 140,000 miles, or trade it in
           for a used 2008 Honda Civic. Consider gas, maintenance, and insurance costs in helping him make
           a decision.

     36. Some people claim it costs more to eat vegetarian, while some claim it costs less. Examine your own
           grocery habits, and compare your current costs to the costs of switching your diet (from omnivore
           to vegetarian or vice versa as appropriate). Which diet is more cost effective based on your eating
           habits?
50  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

1.5.6.1 Information for Problem Solving Problems

Here is the information for the specified exercises.
    List 1.5.8 Breadcrumb Information
        · How much breadcrumbs does the recipe call for?
                It calls for 1 and a half cups of breadcrumbs.
        · How many meatloafs does the recipe make?
                It makes 1 meatloaf.
        · How many servings does that recipe make?
                It says it serves 8.
        · How big is the canister?
                It is cylindrical, 3.5 inches across and 7 inches tall.
        · What is the net weight of the contents of 1 canister?
                15 ounces.
        · How much does a canister cost?
                $2.39.
        · How much does a cup of breadcrumbs weigh?

    List 1.5.9 Car and Bottle Cap Information

       · What kind of car is that?
                A 1993 Honda Accord.

       · How big is the car or what are the dimensions?
                Weight: 2800lb
                Length: 185.2 in
                Width: 67.1 in
                Height: 55.2 in

       · How much of the car was covered with caps?
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                              51

            Everything but the windows, lights and the underside.
   · How big is a bottle cap?

            Caps are 1 inch in diameter.

List 1.5.10 Chicken Information
   · How much chicken is needed?
            Four pounds.
   · How far are the two stores?
            The neighborhood store is 2.2 miles away, and takes about 7 minutes.
            The store across town is 8.9 miles away, and takes about 25 minutes.
   · What kind of mileage does the car get?
            It averages about 24 miles/gallon in the city.
   · How many gallons does the car hold?
            About 14 gallons.
   · How much does gas cost?
            About $3.69/gallon right now.

List 1.5.11 Furnace Information
   · How efficient is the current furnace?
            It is a 60% efficient furnace.
   · How efficient is the new furnace?
            It is 94% efficient.
   · What is your gas bill?
            Here is the history for 2 years:
52  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

       · How much do you pay for gas?
                There is $10.34 base charge, plus $0.39097 per Therm for a delivery charge, and $0.65195
                  per Therm for cost of gas.

       · How much does the new furnace cost?
                It will cost $7,450.

       · How long do you plan to live in the house?
                Probably at least 15 years.

    List 1.5.12 Water Filter Information
       · How much water does Janine drink in a day?
1.5. PROBLEM SOLVING                                                                                    53

        She normally drinks 3 bottles a day, each 16.9 ounces.

· How much does a bottle of water cost?

        She buys 24-packs of 16.9 ounce bottles for $3.99.

· How much does a reusable water bottle cost?

        About $10.

· How long does a reusable water bottle last?

        Basically forever (or until you lose it).

· How much does a water filter cost? How much water will they filter?

        A faucet-mounted filter costs about $28. Refill filters cost about $33 for a 3-pack. The
          box says each filter will filter up to 100 gallons (378 liters)

        A water filter pitcher costs about $22. Refill filters cost about $20 for a 4-pack. The box
          says each filter lasts for 40 gallons or 2 months

        An under-sink filter costs $130. Refill filters cost about $60 each. The filter lasts for 500
          gallons.

List 1.5.13 Car Information
   · Where does Marcus currently drive?

            He drives to work 5 days a week, located 4 miles from his house.
            He drives to the store twice a week, located 7 miles from his house.
            He drives to other locations on average 5 days a week, with locations ranging from 1 mile

              to 20 miles.
            He drives to his parent's house 80 miles away once a month.

   · How will he get to these locations without a car?

            For work, he can walk when it's sunny and he gets up early enough. Otherwise he can
              take a bus, which takes about 20 minutes.

            For the store, he can take a bus, which takes about 35 minutes.
            Some of the other locations he can bus to. Sometimes he'll be able to get a friend to pick

              him up. A few locations he is able to walk to. A couple locations are hard to get to by
              bus, but there is a ZipCar (short term car rental) location within a few blocks.
            He'll need to get a ZipCar to visit his parents.

   · How much does gas cost?

            About $3.70/gallon.

   · How much does he pay for insurance and maintenance?

            He pays $95/month for insurance.
            He pays $30 every 3 months for an oil change, and has averaged about $300/year for other

              maintenance costs.

   · How much is he paying for the car?
54  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

            He's paying $220/month on his car loan right now, and has 3 years left on the loan.
            If he sold the car, he'd be able to make enough to pay off the loan.
            If he keeps the car, he's planning on trading the car in for a newer model in a couple years.

    · What mileage does his car get?

            About 26 miles per gallon on average.

    · How much does a bus ride cost?

            $2.50 per trip, or $90 for an unlimited monthly pass.

    · How much does a ZipCar rental cost?

            The "occasional driving plan": $25 application fee and $60 annual fee, with no monthly
              commitment. Monday-Thursday the cost is $8/hour, or $72 per day. Friday-Sunday the
              cost is $8/hour or $78/day. Gas, insurance, and 180 miles are included in the cost. Addi-
              tional miles are $0.45/mile.

            The "extra value plan": Same as above, but with a $50 monthly commitment, getting you
              a 10% discount on the usage costs.
1.6. CHAPTER 1 REVIEW                                                                  55

1.6 Chapter 1 Review

1. Identify whether each of the following is a proposition.

          a. Airplanes are the safest form of travel.
          b. Portland is a city in Oregon and Maine.
          c. Is it raining outside?
          d. Say what?
          e. I'm going on vacation on Monday.
           f. Everyone is addicted to technology.
2. Write the negation of each proposition.

          a. I take public transportation to get to class.
          b. I went to a movie on Friday.
          c. I don't want to go golfing today.
          d. I love watching basketball.
          e. Breylynn's favorite color is green
           f. Mirriam is a theater major.
3. For each situation, decide whether the "or" is most likely exclusive or inclusive.

          a. I like watching soccer or basketball.
          b. You should pack shorts or capris for our vacation.
          c. We should take the train or bus to Portland to Eugene.
          d. I would like to paint the room grey or blue.
          e. The best reality TV show is Amazing Race or Big Brother.
4. Express in the form of if p, then q.

          a. Doing homework helps increase your grade in class.
          b. Riding public transportation will help you save money.
          c. Squirrels, bury their food.
          d. You will get sick if you eat too much candy.
          e. Go to the doctor if you think you have the flu.
5. Determine whether the compound statement is true or false.
          a. A rectangle has four sides or 5 is an even number.
          b. If a square has five sides then a rabbit is a mammal.
          c. A rabbit is not a mammal.
          d. Rabbits can fly and a rectangle has four sides.
          e. If rabbits are mammals, then squares have 3 sides.
56  CHAPTER 1. LOGICAL REASONING AND PROBLEM SOLVING

6. Write the converse, inverse and contrapositive of the statement: "If it is raining outside, then I will take
      an umbrella." Identify which statements are logically equivalent.

7. The following Venn Diagram shows how 70 customers at the local coffee shop like their coffee.

    a. How many people only like cream in their coffee?
    b. How many people put sugar in their coffee?

          c. How many people put sugar or cream in their coffee?

          d. How many people don't like cream in their coffee?
8. In a group of 30 students at PCC, 21 have Biology this term, 12 have Math 105 and 7 are studying

      both Biology and Math 105.

    a. Create a two-circle Venn diagram that summarizes the results of the survey.

          b. How many students are not taking either course?

9. The following data was collected at a local coffee shop. 120 customers were asked if they like coffee and
      chocolate. The results are in the table below.

     Liked chocolate    Liked coffee                     Disliked coffee  Total
    Disliked chocolate         23                                 37        60
                               42                                 18        60

      Create a two-circle Venn diagram that summarizes the results of the survey.
10. A 120 people were surveyed and it reveals the following results about how people learn about news

      events happening around the world.
          · Twitter 35
          · Websites 55
          · Newspapers 10
          · Newspaper and Website 5
          · Newspaper and Twitte 4
          · Website and Twitter 25
          · All three sources 3
          a. Create a three-circle Venn diagram that summarizes the results of the survey.
          b. How many people get their news from Twitter or a Website?
          c. How many people do not get their news from any of the three sources?
          d. How many people use only Twitter?
          e. How many people use Twitter or a Website but not a Newspaper?
1.6. CHAPTER 1 REVIEW  57

11. Calculate the percent or part.
      A nutrition label states that a serving of cereal contains 25% of the recommended daily value of iron.
      If the daily recommended intake of iron is 18 mg, how much is in one serving of cereal.

12. Calculate the absolute and relative change. Include the direction of the change in words or symbols.
      The population of the city of Astoria, Oregon was 10,169 in 2022 and 9,986 in 2023.

13. A line of coats were marked up by 250% and then placed on sale for 30% off. If the owner of the store
      purchased the jackets wholesale for $70 each, find the sale price and the combined relative change from
      the wholesale price.

14. Find the unit rate for each and determine which is more cost effective.
      One brand of toothpaste comes in a 6-ounce package for $5.99. Another brand comes in a 4.3-ounce
      package for $4.99

Exercise Group. Solve each proportion problem.

    15. If you like your coffee strong with 3 ounces of ground coffee to make 4 cups, how much would you
           need to make a pot of 10 cups?

    16. A 5-gallon container of paint says it will cover 1,750 square feet in one coat. How many gallons of
           paint would you need to cover 3,200 square feet per coat?

Exercise Group. Use the problem solving process with a combination of operations, unit conversions
and/or geometric formulas to solve the problem. Document your steps and thinking.

    17. You are planning to have your bathroom floor tiled with 8 inch by 8 inch tiles, that cost $17.54 per
           box of 12 tiles. The tiled area is approximately 8 feet by 10 feet and the tiler charges a base fee of
           $100 and $12 per square foot. The grout and other materials are estimated at $10 per square foot.
           About how much will the project cost? Add 10% to the number of tiles for partial tiles needed.

    18. One stick of butter is 8 tablespoons or half a cup. Your cookie recipe calls for one cup of butter to
           make 3 dozen cookies. You want to make 10 dozen cookies for a cookie exchange party. In your
           fridge you have 1 ½ sticks of butter. Butter is sold for $4.29 per pound which is 4 sticks. How many
           sticks of butter do you need? How many pounds of butter should you buy and how much will it
           cost? How much will you have left over?

    19. A pediatrician prescribes 15 mg/kg/day of a liquid medication to be given in three equal doses. If
           the child weighs 44 pounds and the medication concentration is 10 mg/mL, how many milliliters
           should be given per dose? If the parent lost the dropper and only has a set of teaspoons, how much
           should they give in each dose? (1T=15ml)

    20. You just got a circular above ground pool with a 15-foot diameter and a height of 48 inches. You
           want to know the cost of the water to fill it up to 6 inches from the top and how much chlorine to
           put in. The package says to use two 3-inch tablets per 10,000 gallons of water. City of Portland
           water is measured and billed at a rate of $7.559 per 100 cubic feet(ccf). One ccf is 748 gallons.
Chapter 2

Financial Math

Dr. Muhammad Yunus and Microlending.

Muhammad Yunus1 was born in 1940 in the village of Bathua
to a Bengali Muslim family. He went to primary school in
the city of Chittagong, Bangladesh and studied at Chittagong
Collegiate School. In 1960 and 1961, Dr. Yunus completed
his B.A. and M.A. in economics at Dhaka University. In 1965,
he received a Fulbright scholarship to study in the United
States and earned his Ph.D. in economics from Vanderbilt
University. Then he taught economics at Middle Tennessee
State University (Wikipedia Contributors, 2019).
After returning to Bangladesh he was appointed to the gov-
ernment's Planning Commission and then led the Chittagong
Economics Department. In 1974, during a visit to the village
of Jobra, Dr. Yunus met a woman who wove bamboo stools
and was struggling to make ends meet. He loaned a total of
US$27 of his own money to her and several women in the
village. They repaid it in full and on time and were able to
make a profit for themselves (Giridharas & Bradsher, 2006).

Dr. Yunus discovered that making very small loans could make a really big difference and empower people
in poverty. He saw credit as a human right and invented the concept of microlending (Renton, 2008).
Traditional banks did not want to risk making tiny loans to the poor and local lenders had excessive or
abusive interest rates.

In December 1976, Yunus secured a loan from Janata Bank for a larger pilot program to lend money to
villagers in Jobra and by 1983, the project became a full-fledged bank called Grameen Bank ("Village
Bank"). In the late 1980s, Grameen started to diversify into fisheries, irrigation and other equity projects.
From 1997 to 2007, the Village Phone project had brought cell phone ownership to 260,000 rural people in
over 50,000 villages.

More than 94% of Grameen loans have gone to women, who are disproportionately affected by poverty. The
model developed by Dr. Yunus inspired similar efforts in about 100 developing countries and in the United
States, however, some businesses started taking advantage of people.

Dr. Yunus was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2006, along with Grameen Bank, for their efforts in social
business models and alleviating poverty. By July 2007, Grameen had issued US$6.38 billion to 7.4 million
borrowers. To help ensure repayment, the bank uses a system of "solidarity groups" which are five women

    1Photo: "Muhammad Yunus (Cropped),"University of Salford Press Office is licensed under CC BY 2.0.

                                                                     59
60  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

who apply together and act as co-guarantors and support each other (Wikipedia Contributors, 2019).

Dr. Yunus and Grameen bank faced some accusations in 2011, which may have been politically motivated.
He was cleared of any misconduct. Dr. Yunus currently chairs The Yunus Centre2 in Dhaka, Bangladesh, a
think tank for ideas related to social entrepreneurism, poverty alleviation and sustainability.

2.1 Introduction to Spreadsheets

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Perform basic calculations on a spreadsheet

   · Use cell references and the fill-down feature
A spreadsheet such as Google Sheets or Microsoft Excel, is a very useful tool for doing calculations and
making complex tables. You can type in your own custom calculations or use the built-in formulas.
The rectangles within a spreadsheet are called cells, and they can be referenced by their column letter and
row number. The first cell in the upper left side highlighted below is A1. If we wanted to talk about the
third column and the fifth row, that cell would be C5.

A spreadsheet file can contain many sheets. Look along the bottom to see if there is more than one sheet
and make sure you are on the right sheet.

2.1.1 Basic Calculations

To do a calculation on a spreadsheet, type an equal sign before the operation. This lets the program know
that you want it to calculate the result. When you press enter, you will see the result.
Example 2.1.1

          1. To add 3 + 4, enter =3+4
          2. To subtract 100-76, enter =100-76
          3. To multiply 4 times 18, enter =4*18
          4. To divide 0.05 by 12, enter =0.05/12
          5. To calculate 525, enter =5^25

   2https://www.muhammadyunus.org/
2.1. INTRODUCTION TO SPREADSHEETS                                                        61

                                                                                                                                            

Note that the asterisk () is used for multiplication. Spreadsheets don't recognize parentheses as indicators
of multiplication like calculators do, so even if you have parentheses for the order of operations, the asterisk
is also needed.

You can make more complicated mathematical expressions using parentheses and other operations. To edit
a cell click on the editing box at the top, or double click on the cell to edit it directly.

Example 2.1.2 Your bill at a restaurant is $35.75 and you want to leave an 18% tip. How much would you
add to the bill?

Solution. To work with a percentage, we need to convert it into a decimal first, and then multiply it by
the base amount.
In a spreadsheet we would type

=0.18*35.75

and get a result of $6.44, rounded to the nearest cent. You would leave a tip of $6.44.  

2.1.2 Cell References

One of the powerful things about spreadsheets is using a cell reference, such as C5 in a calculation. When
you use a cell reference, the values will automatically update if any of the referenced values change.

Let's make a spreadsheet for the percentage tip example above. We calculated an 18% tip on a bill of
$35.75. We might want to tip 18% in general, but our bill will change values. We labeled the first column
Bill Amount and the second column Tip. The amount of $35.75 is entered in cell A2. Then when we write
our formula in B2, we want to calculate 18% of A2. That way if the number in A2 changes, our tip will
automatically update.

The formula
     =0.18*A2

is entered in B2 which gives a result of $6.44 when you hit enter.

When the bill amount is changed, the tip is recalculated.

2.1.3 Cell Formatting

We can also format cells A1 and B1 to show dollar signs by clicking on the dollar sign in the number
62                CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH
formatting menu.

2.1.4 Fill-Down Feature

The fill-down feature is very useful for making tables. This allows us to copy values or formulas to save
time. Let's make a tipping reference table with values from $10, to$100, in increments of $10. First, we will
enter two values in column A to establish the pattern. Then select those two cells and you will see a small
square in the lower right corner. Drag that square down until you get to $100.

Next, we can drag our formula down and the cell reference will change to each row number automatically.
Here are the formulas with the row numbers updated:
2.1. INTRODUCTION TO SPREADSHEETS                   63

Here is our completed table with the calculations:

2.1.5 Formulas

Spreadsheets have many useful built-in formulas. We will introduce some of the financial formulas in this
chapter. Here are some of the formulas we will use:

   1. =FV to calculate the future values of an investment
   2. =PV to calculate the deposit needed for a desired future balance
   3. =PMT to calculate a loan or savings plan payment
   4. =EFFECT to calculate the effective rate of an account and compare accounts

In the rest of this chapter we will use spreadsheets and formulas to calculate the future values, interest paid
or earned and monthly payments.

2.1.6 Exercises

Use a spreadsheet to compute the following.
1. Convert 4/7 to a decimal
2. Convert 16% to a decimal
3. Add 8 and 19
4. Find the difference of 230 and 78
64  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

5. Multiply 12 and 9
6. Divide 0.09 by 52

7. Calculate 83
8. Your bill at a restaurant is $55.75 and you want to leave a 20% tip. How much would you add to the

      bill?
9. You leave a tip for $7.50 for a bill at a restaurant that is $44.50. What percent tip did you leave?
10. In Column A use the fill down feature to build a spreadsheet starting with $5 and ending at $125, in

      increments of $5. In Column B write a formula with a cell reference to calculate a 15.5% tip on the
      amount in Column A. Use the fill down feature to complete your table.
11. Imagine a certain savings account started out with a balance of $5250.00 on day-one, and today has a
      current balance of $5780.23

          a. Exactly how much more money does the account have today, compared with day-one?

          b. Rounding to the nearest tenth of a percent: By what percentage amount has the account balance
              grown?

          c. If instead, the bank balance today was exactly double the starting balance, then by what exact
              percentage amount would the bank balance have grown?

          d. If the bank balance today had instead grown by 15.5% since day-one, then what would be the
              exact amount of today's balance?

12. Imagine that at the start of a certain month, you will make an opening deposit of $500 into a savings
      account, and you will then leave the account alone (meaning you will make no further deposits or
      withdrawals). Also, for this account: Every month after the opening deposit, the amount in the account
      will grow to be 101% of its previous month's balance.

          a. Use a spreadsheet to enter 500 in cell A1. Using a formula and a cell-reference: Compute in cell
              A2, the amount in the account after one month has passed. Then using the fill down feature,
              continue the pattern for another eleven full months (you should end at cell A13). Format all the
              cells to show dollar signs. What is the amount in the account after one year?

          b. Now continue the pattern in column A of your spreadsheet to extend for a second full year (you
              should end at cell A25). What is the amount in the account after two years?

          c. What overall percentage growth occurred in the account between the opening deposit and one
              year later? (Compute using a formula and cell references)

          d. What overall percentage growth occurred in the account between the end of year one, and the end
              of year two? (Compute using a formula and cell references)

          e. (Challenge) The annual percentage growth that you found in part (d) for the second year, should
              be identical to the annual percentage growth that you found in part (c) for the first year. Can
              you mathematically explain why this is true? Do you think this pattern of identical overall annual
              percentage growth would continue, if you extend the pattern for even more years?

13. Imagine that at the start of a certain year, you will deposit $1000.00 into a savings account, and then
      you will leave the account alone. Each year after the opening deposit, the amount in the account will
      grow to be 103% of its previous year's balance.

          a. After two years, the account balance will have experienced two growth amounts of 103%. You
              can find this account balance amount here, with the spreadsheet computation = 1000 * (103%)
             * (103%). Perform this computation in a spreadsheet and write the balance that you find.

          b. Now enter the spreadsheet computation = 1000 * (103%)^2. Notice that the result here, which
              involves using a power, gives the same answer as you found in part (a). Comparing the two
              spreadsheet computations: Explain why they give the same result.
2.1. INTRODUCTION TO SPREADSHEETS  65

c. Using the pattern in part (b) above, and carefully choosing the power: Compute the balance that
   will be in the account fifteen full years after the account was originally opened. (Round to the
    nearest cent)

d. (Challenge) Make a spreadsheet that shows the account balance each individual year for 30 years.
    From the date of the opening deposit: What minimum number of full years will you have to wait,
    until the balance finally exceeds twice its opening deposit amount? (Use cell references, the fill
    down feature, and dollar formatting)

e. (Challenge) Imagine the opening balance of the account was $5000.00 instead of $1000.00 (and
    everything else about the account stays the same). Make a similar spreadsheet as you did in part
   (d), and using this spreadsheet, find the minimum number of full years you will have to wait this
    time, until the balance finally exceeds twice its opening deposit amount. How does this answer
    compare with your answer in part (d)? Do you think your answer would be the same here, for
    any positive opening balance you may choose for the account?
66                                                                            CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

2.2 Simple and Compound Interest

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Use spreadsheet functions and/or mathematical formulas to calculate simple, compound, and continu-
       ously compounded interest

   · Understand the difference between simple and compound interest

   · Use a spreadsheet to calculate the effective rate and compare accounts

   · Use a spreadsheet and/or formula to calculate the present value needed to reach a desired future value

Note: Spreadsheets are emphasized in this chapter, but the formulas are also presented so you can understand
what the spreadsheet is doing. Be sure to check with your instructor for which method to use.

Working with money is a very important skill for everyday life. While balancing a checkbook or calculating
our monthly expenditures on espresso requires only arithmetic, when we start saving money, planning for
retirement, or need a loan, we need more mathematics and tools. In this section we will calculate and
compare simple and compound interest.

2.2.1 Simple Interest

Calculating interest starts with the principal, P, or the beginning amount in your account. This is also
called the present value. This could be a starting investment, or the starting amount of a loan. The
interest rate, I, in its most simple form, is a percentage of the principal.

For example, if you borrowed $100 from a friend and agree to repay it with 5% interest, then the amount of
interest you would pay would be 5% of 100. It is very important to remember to change the interest rate,
r, of 5% into a decimal by moving the decimal two places to the left.

                                                            (0.05)$100 = $5

The total amount you would repay is called the future value and would be $105, the original principal plus
the interest.

                                                           $100 + $5 = $105
Here are the formulas to represent the calculations we just did.

                                                   Simple One-time Interest.

                                         I = Pr

                    A = P + I or A = P + Pr

I  is the interest

P  is the principal, starting amount or present value

r  is the interest rate in decimal form

A  is the end amount: principal plus interest. This is also called the future value
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST                                                                  67

Example 2.2.2 A friend asks to borrow $300 and agrees to repay it in 30 days with 3% simple interest.
How much interest will you earn?

Solution. P = $300, the principal or present value
r = 0.03, 3% rate
Using the formula,

                              I = Pr
                                = $300(0.03)
                                = $9

To calculate this in a spreadsheet, you would enter

=300*0.03

and get a result of $9. You will earn $9 in interest when your friend pays you back.               

One-time simple interest is only common for extremely short-term or informal loans. For longer term loans
or investments, it is common for interest to be paid on a daily, monthly, quarterly, or annual basis. In that
case, interest would be earned regularly. Bonds are an example of this type of investment. Bonds are issued
by the federal, state or local governments to cover their expenses.

Example 2.2.3 Suppose your city is building a new park, and issues bonds to raise the money to build it.
You buy a $1,000 bond that pays 5% simple interest annually and matures in 5 years. How much interest
will you earn? What is the future value of the bond?

Solution. Each year, you would earn 5% interest so over the course of five years, you would earn:

                                                        $1000(0.05)(5) = $250

When the bond matures, you would receive back the $1,000 you originally paid and the $250 in interest, so
we could also put that into a single calculation:

                                                  $1000 + $1000(0.05)(5) = $1250
Using a spreadsheet, you would enter

=1000+1000*0.05

and get a result of $1,250. The future value of the bond is $1,250.                                

We can generalize this idea of simple interest over time.

                              Simple Interest over Time.

                                   I = Prt

                              A = P + I or A = P + Prt

I          is the interest

P          is the principal, starting amount, or present value

r          is the interest rate in decimal form

t          is time, where the increment of time (years, months, etc.) matches the time period for

           the interest rate

A          is the end amount, principal plus interest, or future value
68                                                                                     CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

2.2.2 APR - Annual Percentage Rate

Interest rates are usually stated as an annual percentage rate (APR) - the total interest that will be paid in
the year. If not stated otherwise, assume that the interest rate is an annual rate or APR. If the interest is
paid in smaller time increments, the APR will be divided by the number of time periods.

Note: The Federal Truth in Lending Act requires that every consumer be given the true APR which includes
the interest and any fees included.

For example, a 6% APR paid monthly, would be divided by 12, because you would get one twelfth of the
rate per month, which is half a percent per month.

                                                               0.06 = 0.005
                                                                12
A 4% annual rate paid quarterly, would be divided by 4 to get 1% per quarter.

                                                 0.04 = 0.01
                                                  4

Here is an example of a semi-annual rate.

Example 2.2.4 Suppose you buy a $1,000 federal bond with a 4% annual simple interest rate, paid semi-
annually, with a maturity in 4 years. How much interest will you earn? What will be the future value of the
bond?

Solution. P = $1000, the principal

r  =  0.04  =  0.02,  interest  is  being  paid  semi-annually  (twice  a  year),  so  the  4%  interest  will  be  divided  into
        2
two 2% payments.

t = 8, 4 years compounded twice a year gives t = 4 · 2 = 8 half-years

                                                           I = PRT
                                                             = $1000(0.02)(8)
                                                             = $160

You will earn $160 in interest over the four years. The future value of the loan is

                                                 A=P+I
                                                    = $1000 + $160
                                                    = $1,160

We could also use a spreadsheet to do this calculation and enter:

      =1000+1000*(0.04/2)*(4*2)

which also gives $1,160. The future value of the bond is $1,160. Remember that spreadsheets don't interpret

parentheses as multiplication. We need the asterisks as well as the parentheses.                                             

2.2.3 Compound Interest

In a standard bank account, any interest we earn is automatically added to our balance, and we earn interest
on that interest. This reinvestment of interest is called compounding. We will develop the mathematical
formula for compound interest and then show the equivalent spreadsheet function.
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST                                                                     69

Suppose that we deposit $1000 in a bank account offering 3% interest, compounded monthly. How will our
money grow?

The 3% interest is an annual percentage rate (APR) - the total interest to be paid during the year. Since

interest  is  being  paid  monthly,  each  month,  we  will  earn  0.03  =  0.0025  per  month.
                                                                    12

In the first month,

                                                   P = $1000
                                                    r = 0.0025
                                                    I = $1000(0.0025) = $2.50
                                                   A = $1000 + $2.50 = $1002.50

In the first month, we will earn $2.50 in interest, raising our account balance to $1002.50.
In the second month,

                                     P = $1002.50
                                      I = $1002.50(0.0025) = $2.51 (rounded)
                                     A = $1002.50 + $2.51 = $1005.01

Notice that in the second month we earned more interest than we did in the first month. This is because
we earned interest not only on the original $1000 we deposited, but we also earned interest on the $2.50 of
interest we earned the first month. This is the key advantage that compounding gives us.

Calculating out a few more months in a table or a spreadsheet we have:

                     Month  Starting       balance     Interest    earned           Ending   Balance
                     1      1000.00                    2.50                         1002.50
                     2      1002.50                    2.51                         1005.01
                     3      1005.01                    2.51                         1007.52
                     4      1007.52                    2.52                         1010.04
                     5      1010.04                    2.53                         1012.57
                     6      1012.57                    2.53                         1015.10
                     7      1015.10                    2.54                         1017.64
                     8      1017.64                    2.54                         1020.18
                     9      1020.18                    2.55                         1022.73
                     10     1022.73                    2.56                         1025.29
                     11     1025.29                    2.56                         1027.85
                     12     1027.85                    2.56                         1030.42

To find an equation to represent this, we will go through a few months to see the pattern:
Initial Amount: P = $1000
1st Month A = 1.0025($1000)
2nd Month A = 1.0025(1.0025($1000)) = 1.00252($1000)
3rd Month A = 1.0025(1.00252($1000)) = 1.00253($1000)
4th Month A = 1.0025(1.00253($1000)) = 1.00254($1000)
Observing a pattern, we could conclude
70                                                               CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

nth Month A = 1.0025n($1000)

Notice that the $1000 in the equation was P, the starting amount. We found 1.0025 by adding one to the
interest rate divided by 12, since we were compounding 12 times per year. Generalizing our result, we could
write

                               Compound Interest.

       ( A = P 1 + r )nt or P = (                   A
                                                       )nt
                                          n 1 + rn

    A  is the future value balance in the account after n years

    P  is the principal or present value

    r  is the annual interest rate in decimal form

    n  is the number of compounding periods in one year

    t  is the number of years

If the compounding is done annually (once a year), n = 1.
If the compounding is done quarterly, n = 4.
If the compounding is done monthly, n = 12.
If the compounding is done weekly, n = 52.
If the compounding is done daily, n = 365.
The most important thing to remember about using this formula is that it assumes that we put money in
the account once and let it sit there earning interest.

2.2.4 The Future Value Spreadsheet Formula

The compound interest formula is built into spreadsheets and is called the future value formula.

                                            Future Value Spreadsheet Formula.

          =FV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, present value)

    rate per period
                    is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

    number of periods
                    is the total number of periods, n  t

    payment amount
                    is the amount of regular payments. If none, enter 0

    present value
                    is the amount deposited or principal, P

We will use the payment amount in a future section, for now that will be 0. There is also an optional input
at the end to specify making payments at the beginning or end of the period, but we will not use it in this
book.

Now let's look at an example and calculate the compound interest using the spreadsheet and the mathematical
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST                           71

formula.
Example 2.2.5 A certificate of deposit (CD) is a savings instrument that many banks offer. It usually gives
a higher interest rate, but you cannot access your investment for a specified length of time. Suppose you
deposit $3000 in a CD paying 6% APR, compounded monthly. How much will you have in the account after
20 years?
Solution. P = $3000, the initial deposit
r = 0.06, 6% annual rate
n = 12, 12 months in 1 year
t = 20, since we're looking for how much we'll have after 20 years
To use a spreadsheet, we will use the formula like this

     =FV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, present value)

     =FV(0.06/12, 12*20, 0, 3000)

and get a result of $9,930.61, rounded to the nearest cent.

Note that the output of the formula gives the answer with the opposite sign as the principal and payments.
A negative number may be denoted with a negative sign or with the color red or parentheses. The signs may
be used in accounting, but we will ignore them in this book.
To use a formula, we are looking for the future value, so we use the formula solved for A:

                                             ( 0.06 )12·20
                                 A = 3000 1 + 12

                                     $9,930.61

To use a calculator, you would enter the formulas including parentheses around any inside operations. You
would enter

3000(1+(0.06/12))^(12*20)

and get an answer of $9,930.61.                             

2.2.5 Comparing Simple and Compound Interest

Let us compare the amount of money earned from compounding in the previous example against the amount
you would earn from simple interest. From the table and graph below we can see that over a long period of
time, compounding makes a large difference in the account balance. You may recognize this as the difference
between linear growth and exponential growth.
72                                                                      CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

Year  Simple Interest  Compound Interest (6% compounded
      ($15 per month)  monthly or 0.5% each month
0     $3,000           $3,000
5     $3,900           $4,046.55
10    $4,800           $5,458.19
15    $5,700           $7,362.28
20    $6,600           $9,930.61
25    $7,500           $13,394.91
30    $8,400           $18,067.73
35    $9,300           $24,370.65

2.2.6 Finding the Principal, or Present Value

When we know the amount of money we want to have in the future, we can use the formula that is solved
for P. It requires a little algebra to divide both sides of the formula by the quantity that was multiplied by
P. There is also a spreadsheet formula which we will introduce now, and then do an example using both
methods.

2.2.7 The Present Value Spreadsheet Formula

The present value spreadsheet formula will calculate how much you need to deposit in the present to get a
specified future value.

                                           Present Value Spreadsheet Formula.
          =PV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, future value)

    rate per period
                   is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

    number of periods
                   is the total number of periods, n  t

    payment amount
                   is the amount of regular payments. If none, enter 0

    future value
                   is the amount desired in the future, A

Example 2.2.6 You know that you will need $40,000 for your child's education in 18 years. If your account
earns 4% APR compounded quarterly, how much would you need to deposit now to reach your goal?
Solution. We are looking for what we need to deposit now so we will use the present value formula. We
type the formula and inputs the same way we used the future value formula.

     =PV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, future value)

     =PV(0.04/4, 4*18, 0, 40000)

which gives a value of $19,539.84. You would need to deposit $19,539.84 now and keep the same interest
rate to have $40,000 in 18 years.
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST                                                             73

Note that we cannot enter commas in numbers in a spreadsheet. Commas are used to separate the input
values, so we would not get the same answer if we put in $40,000 for an input.
To use the mathematical formula, we use the one that is solved for P.
r = 0.04, 4% APR
n = 4, 4 quarters in 1 year
t = 18, since we know the balance in 18 years
A = $40,000, the amount we have in 18 years
In this case, we're going to have to set up the equation, and solve for P.

                           P= (        40000
                                        0.04 )4·18
                                       1+ 4

                            19,539.84

You would need to deposit $19,539.84 now to have $40,000 in 18 years.                         

2.2.8 Continuously Compounded Interest

In many bank accounts your interest is compounded continuously, or at each moment in time. The number
of times per year, n, is infinite. As n approaches infinity the compound interest formula changes to the
continuously compounded interest formula.

                                           Continuously Compounded Interest.

                                                         A = Pert or P = ert A

A  is the future value or desired balance in the account

P  is the principal or present value

r  is the annual interest rate in decimal form

t  is the number of years

e  is an irrational number that is approximately 2.718281828... Find e on your calculator to

   use this formula

To calculate this on a spreadsheet we use the =EXP function. The spreadsheet formulas are

   =Principal*EXP(r*t) or =A/EXP(r*t)

Example 2.2.7 You deposit $4000 in an account that earns 2.75% APR compounded continuously. How
much will you have after 7 years? How much interest did you earn? What percentage of the final balance is
interest?
Solution.

To use a spreadsheet, we look at the formula
solved for A, the future value. We enter

     =4000*EXP(0.0275*7)

and get a result of $4,849.11.

To use the formula, we have:
A = Pert
P = 4000, amount invested
r = 0.0275, interest rate
74                                                            CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH
t = 7, number of years

                                A = 4000e(0.0275·7)
                                    $4,849.11

After 7 years your account would be worth $4,849.11. Next, we will calculate the amount of interest earned

and the percentage.                                                                          

2.2.9 Finding the Amount of Interest Earned and the Percentage

In the previous example we also want to know how much interest was earned and what percentage of the
final balance is from interest. The future value of the investment is $4,849.11. Now to figure out how much
of that was interest, we need to subtract the amount initially deposited.

Example 2.2.8 Continued: To find the total amount of interest earned, we subtract the principal from the
total balance.

                                $4,849.11 - $4,000 = $849.11

The spreadsheet calculation is

     =4849.11-4000

which gives a result of $849.11. You would earn $849.11 in interest.
To find the percentage that is interest, divide the amount of interest by the total amount.

                                                     $849.11  0.1751 or 17.5%
                                                     4,849.11
The spreadsheet calculation is the same:

     =849.11/4849.11
which is 0.1751 or 17.5%. This tells us that after 7 years, 17.5% of the account was earned as interest. 

2.2.10 Effective Rate

If you are shopping around for different investments, you might need to compare different rates that have
different compounding periods. If the rate and period are different, it's hard to know which account will give
the better result. There is a spreadsheet formula called =EFFECT which will allow us to compare accounts.
This is also sometimes called the annual percentage yield, or APY.

                                                     Effective Rate Formula.
          =EFFECT(stated rate, number of compounding periods)

stated rate
               is the interest rate given (APR)

number of compounding periods
               is the number of times the account is compounded per year, n
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST                                                                     75

Example 2.2.9 You are comparing an account that pays 5.25% APR compounded monthly, with an account
that pays 5% APR compounded daily. Which account will earn you more interest?

Solution. It is hard to tell whether the higher interest rate will be better or the higher compounding rate
in this case. We will find the effective rate of both accounts.
For the 5.25% APR account compounded monthly:

     =EFFECT(0.0525,12)
which gives 0.05378 or 5.38%
For the 5% APR account compounded daily:

     =EFFECT(0.05,365)
which gives 0.05127 or 5.13%

Now we can compare the effective rates of 5.38% and 5.13% and see that the account with the higher interest

rate will earn more interest in this case. This is not always true, so we will show another example.  

Example 2.2.10 Find the effective rates to compare an account that earns 6% APR compounded quarterly
with an account that earns 5.975% APR compounded daily. Which one would you choose?

Solution. Using the effective rate formula for each, we have:
For the 6% APR account compounded quarterly:

     =EFFECT(0.06,4)
which gives 0.06136 or 6.14%
For the 5.975% APR account compounded daily:

     =EFFECT(0.05975,365)
which gives 0.06157 or 6.16%

The account that was compounded more often has a slightly higher rate in this case.                   

2.2.11 Exercises

1. A friend lends you $200 for a week, which you agree to repay with 5% one-time interest. How much
      will you have to repay?

2. You loan your friend $100. They agree to pay an annual interest rate of 3%, simple interest. Six months
      later they repay that loan.

          a. How much did they pay you?

          b. How much was interest?
3. Consider a simple interest loan of $200 with an annual interest rate of 6%. If that loan is paid off 1

      year and 3 months later, how much was repaid?
4. You deposit $1,000 in an account that earns simple interest. The annual interest rate is 2.5%.
76  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

          a. How much interest will you earn in 5 years?

          b. How much will you have in the account in 5 years?
5. Consider an investment of $20000 with an annual interest rate of 5%.

          a. If that investment is earning simple interest, how much will the investment be worth in 10 years?

          b. If that investment is getting annually compounding interest, how much will the investment be
              worth in 10 years?

6. Nico invests $4,500 into an account that has an annual interest rate of 8.5%. The interest is compounding
      monthly. Twenty years later what is the account balance?

7. How much will $1,000 deposited in an account earning 7% APR compounded weekly be worth in 20
      years?

8. Suppose you obtain a $3,000 Certificate of Deposit (CD) with a 3% APR, paid quarterly, with maturity
      in 5 years.

          a. What is the future value of the CD in 5 years?

          b. How much interest will you earn?

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
9. You deposit $300 in an account earning 5% APR compounded annually. How much will you have in

      the account in 10 years?

          a. How much will you have in the account in 10 years?

          b. How much interest will you earn?

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
10. You deposit $2,000 in an account earning 3% APR compounded monthly.

          a. How much will you have in the account in 20 years?

          b. How much interest will you earn?

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?

          d. What percent of the balance is the principal?
11. You deposit $10,000 in an account earning 4% APR compounded weekly.

          a. How much will you have in the account in 25 years?

          b. How much interest will you earn?

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?

          d. What percent of the balance is the principal?
12. How much would you need to deposit in an account now in order to have $6,000 in the account in 8

      years? Assume the account earns 6% APR compounded monthly.
13. How much would you need to deposit in an account now in order to have $20,000 in the account in 4

      years? Assume the account earns 5% APR compounded quarterly.
14. Breylan invests $1,200 in an account that earns 4.6% APR compounded quarterly and Angad invests

      the same amount in an account that earns 4.55% APR compounded weekly.

          a. What will their balances be after 15 years?

          b. What will their balances be after 30 years?
2.2. SIMPLE AND COMPOUND INTEREST  77

          c. What is the effective rate for each account?
15. Bill invests $6,700 in a savings account that compounds interest monthly at 3.75% APR. Ted invests

      $6,500 in a savings account that compound interest annually at 3.8% APR.

          a. Find the effective rate for each account.
          b. Who will have the higher accumulated balance after 5 years?
16. Bassel is comparing two accounts where one pays 3.45% APR quarterly and the second pays 3.4% APR
      daily.

          a. What is the effect rate for each?
          b. If he has $5,000 to deposit how much will the balance be in 10 years?
17. You deposit $2,500 into an account earning 4% APR compounded continuously.

          a. How much will you have in the account in 10 years?
          b. How much total interest will you earn?
          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
18. You deposit $1,000 into an account earning 5.75% APR compounded continuously.

          a. How much will you have in the account in 15 years?
          b. How much total interest will you earn?
          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
19. You deposit $5,000 in an account earning 4.5% APR compounded continuously.

          a. How much will you have in the account in 5 years?
          b. How much total interest will you earn?
          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
20. You deposit $10,000 in an account that earns 5.5% APR compounded continuously and your friend
      deposits $10,000 in an account that earns 5.5% APR compounded annually.

          a. How much more will you have in the account in 10 years?
          b. How much more interest did you earn in the 10 years?
78                                                 CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

2.3 Savings Plans

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Use a spreadsheet and/or formula to calculate the future value and interest earned on savings plans

   · Use a spreadsheet and/or formula to calculate payment amounts for savings plans

   · Analyze and compare lump sum and regular payment savings plans

For most of us it is not practical to deposit a large sum of money in the bank. Instead, we save by depositing
smaller amounts of money regularly. We might save in an IRA or 401-K for retirement. We might also save
for a down payment on a car or house, or in a college savings plan for our children.
Just like the last section, we will emphasize spreadsheets but calculate each example with the formulas as
well. Check with your instructor for which way you should do your problems.

2.3.1 Savings Plan Formulas

To make calculations for savings plans using a spreadsheet, we can use the =FV formula we have already used.
This time for regular payments we will use the field for payment amount. If we are not making an initial
deposit, the present value will be zero.
Here is the future value formula again:

                                            Future Value Spreadsheet Formula.

          =FV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, present value)

    rate per period
                    is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

    number of periods
                    is the total number of periods, n  t

    payment amount
                    is the amount of regular payments

    present value
                    is the initial principal. If none, enter 0

The mathematical formulas are shown below. If you want to know how we got the formula, it is derived at
the end of the chapter.

                       Savings Plan Formulas.

                         (( r )nt )             A(r)
                       d 1+ n -1     or d = ((  n              )
                   A=  (r)                      )nt
                                                1 + rn - 1
                       n

A  is the balance in the account after n years (future value)

d  is the regular deposit (or payment amount each month, quarter, year, etc.)
2.3. SAVINGS PLANS                                                                                   79

r  is the annual interest rate in decimal form

n  is the number of compounding periods in one year

t  is the number of years

If the compounding frequency is not explicitly stated, assume there are the same number of compounds in
a year as there are deposits made in a year.

If you make your deposits every year, use yearly compounding, n = 1.

If you make your deposits every quarter, use quarterly compounding, n = 4.

If you make your deposits every month, use monthly compounding, n = 12, etc.

To see how both of these methods work, let's look at an example.

Example 2.3.2 A traditional individual retirement account (IRA) is a special type of retirement account
in which the money you invest is exempt from income taxes until you withdraw it. If you deposit $100 each
month into an IRA earning 6% APR, how much will you have in the account after 20 years? How much will
you have earned in interest? What percentage of the balance is interest?
Solution. To use a spreadsheet, we will use =FV because we want to know the balance in the future. We
enter 100 for the payment amount and 0 for the present value:

     =FV(0.06/12, 12*20, 100, 0)

which gives a result of $46,204.09.

Remember that the output of the formula gives the answer with the opposite sign as the principal and
payments. For our purposes we will ignore the signs. To use the formula, we use the one solved for A, since
we want to know the final amount.
d = $100, the monthly deposit
r = 0.06, 6% annual rate
n = 12, since we're doing monthly deposits, we'll compound monthly
t = 20, we want the amount after 20 years
Putting this into the equation we have:

                               (( 0.06 )12·20 )
                               100 1 + 12         -1
                               ( 0.06 )
                           A=

                                   ( 12 )
                              100 (1.005)240 - 1
                           =

                                       (0.005)

                            $46,204.09

With U.S. dollars we round to the nearest cent. The account will grow to $46,204.09 after 20 years.
To find the amount of interest earned, calculate the total of all your deposits.

                                                        $100(20)(12) = $24,000
The difference between the total amount and the deposits is the interest earned.

                    $46,204.09 - $24,000 = $22,204.09
80                                                               CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

The total amount of interest you earned was $22,204.09.
To find the percentage of the balance that is interest we will divide the interest by the total balance.

                                    $22,204.09  0.4810
                                    $46,204.09

or 48.1%. After 20 years 48.1% of the balance is from interest.  

Now here's an example with an initial deposit and monthly deposits. We can do this with the spreadsheet
formula.

Example 2.3.3 You want to jumpstart your saving by depositing $1500 from your tax return and then
deposit $150 every month into an account that earns 5.5% APR compounded monthly. How much will you
have in the account after 30 years?

Solution. Using the spreadsheet formula, we can enter an initial deposit and a monthly payment. We
enter

    =FV(0.055/12, 12*30, 150,1500)

and get a result of $144,822.87.

                                                                                                                                            

2.3.2 Finding Payment Amounts Usings Spreadsheets and Formulas

Another important thing we can calculate is how much we need to save in each period to have a specified
amount in the future. Say you want to achieve a certain amount for retirement or for your kids' college.
The mathematical formula for this is the one solved for d, the payment amount, above. There is a new
spreadsheet formula to calculate payments, =PMT, that we will introduce now.

                                               Payment Spreadsheet Formula.

          =PMT(rate per period, number of periods, present value, future value)

    rate per period
                    is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

    number of periods
                    is the total number of periods, n  t

    present value
                    is the amount deposited or principal, P

    future value
                    is the amount you want in the future, A

Here is an example of a retirement goal calculated with a spreadsheet and the formula.
Example 2.3.4 You want to have half a million dollars in your account when you retire in 30 years. Your
retirement account earns 8% APR. How much do you need to deposit each month to meet your retirement
goal?
2.3. SAVINGS PLANS                                                                                  81

Solution. To calculate this with a spreadsheet, we will use the =PMT function and enter 0 for the present
value and $500,000 for the future value. We cannot enter commas within the numbers however, because
spreadsheets use commas to separate the inputs. We enter:

     =PMT(0.08/12, 12*30, 0, 500000)

and get a result of $335.49.

To see how this works with the formulas, we use the one solved for d, the regular deposit amount.
r = 0.08, 8% annual rate
n = 12, since we're depositing monthly
t = 30, 30 years
A = $500,000, the amount we want to have in 30 years

                    d = ((  A n ( r )
                              )nt )
                            1 + rn - 1
                            500000 12 ( 0.08 )
                    = (( 0.08 )12·30 )
                            1 + 12      -1

                     $335.49

So, you would need to deposit $335.49 each month to have $500,000 in 30 years if your account earns 8%

interest.                                                                                           

                    A note about rounding.

If you are using the formulas and round during intermediate steps you will probably have some
roundoff error. For this reason, we enter the whole expression into the calculator and do not show
the intermediate steps.

One of the challenges in this chapter is choosing the correct formula or spreadsheet function. Read this next
example and see if you can determine which formula to use.

Example 2.3.5 A more conservative investment account pays 3% APR. If you deposit $5 a day into this
account, how much will you have after 10 years? What amount and percentage are from interest?
Solution. In this example we are given the regular deposit amount and we are looking for the future value.
In a spreadsheet we use the =FV function and enter:

     =FV(0.03/365, 365*10, 5,0)

which gives a result of $21,282.07.

To use a mathematical formula, we choose the one solved for A:
d = $5, the daily deposit
82                                                                                   CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

r = 0.03, 3% annual rate
n = 365, since we're doing daily deposits, we'll compound daily
t = 10, we want the amount after 10 years

                                                       (( 0.03 )365·10 )
                                                5 1 + 365                -1
                                                       ( 0.03 )
                                           A=

                                                                365

                                                 $21,282.07

To find the amount of interest, we will calculate how much was deposited in the account. Since you put in
$5 a day for 10 years we get

                                                $5(365)(10) = $18,250.

The interest earned is $21,282.07 - $18,250 = $3,032.07.

To  find  the  percentage  we  divide  by  the  total  balance  to  get  $3,032.07     0.1425  or  14.25%.
                                                                         $21,282.07
After 10 years, about 14.25% of the account is interest.                                                    

2.3.3 Comparing Lump Sum and Regular Savings Payments

Now let's compare two scenarios to do some multistep problems and get a sense for the value of compounding
over time.
Example 2.3.6 Scenario 1: Suppose you invest $200 a month for 15 years into an account earning 10%
APR compounded monthly. After 15 years, you leave the money, without making additional deposits, in the
account for another 20 years. How much will you have in the end?
Scenario 2: Suppose instead you didn't invest anything for the first 15 years, then deposited $200 a month
for 20 years into an account earning 10% APR compounded monthly. How much will you have in the end?
Solution. Before we calculate the balance for both scenarios, which one do you think will have a higher
balance at the end?
For scenario 1, there are two steps involved. The first part is the monthly payments for 15 years. To calculate
this with a spreadsheet we enter

     =FV(0.10/12, 12*15, 200,0)

which gives $82,894.07.

Now you will stop making payments and let the money sit and earn interest for 20 more years. With a
spreadsheet we enter

     =FV(0.10/12, 12*20, 0, 82894.07)

which gives $607,453.85.

The process is similar with the formulas. For the first step we have:
2.3. SAVINGS PLANS                                                                              83

                                         (( 0.10 )12·15 )
                                         200 1 + 12        -1
                                         ( 0.10 )
                    A=

                                                       12

                                          $82,894.07

And for the second step we use the compound interest formula from Section 2.2.

                                                                      ( 0.10 )12·20
                                                  A = $82,894.07 1 + 12

                                                      $607,453.85

Now for Scenario 2: Since we are not investing anything for the first 15 years there is nothing to calculate.
This is a one-step problem. We will find the future value with the monthly payments of $200 for 20 years.
With a spreadsheet we enter

     =FV(0.10/12, 12*20, 200,0)

which gives $151,873.77.

To check that with the formula we have:

                                         (( 0.10 )12·20 )
                                         200 1 + 12        -1
                                         ( 0.10 )
                    A=

                                                       12

                                          $151,873.77

Were you surprised by these numbers? You would put in less money in scenario 1 and end up with four

times as much. The key to compounding interest is to start early. If you remember the graph of compound

interest in Section 2.2, we can see that as time goes on, the balance increases exponentially.  

2.3.4 Deriving the Savings Plan Formula (Optional)

If you are interested in where the savings plan formula came from, we will explain it here. A savings plan
with regular payments can be described recursively. Recall that basic compound interest follows from the
relationship for each compound period.
A = P (1 + nr )
For a savings plan, we need to add a deposit, d, to the account with each compounding period:
A = P (1 + nr ) + d
Taking this equation from recursive form to explicit form is a bit trickier than with compound interest. It
will be easiest to see by working with an example rather than working in general.

Suppose we will deposit $100 each month into an account paying 6% APR. We assume that the account is
compounded with the same frequency as we make deposits unless stated otherwise.

In this example:
84                                                                       CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

r = 0.06, 6% APR

n = 12, 12 compounds/deposits per year

d = $100, our deposit per month

Writing out the recursive equation gives where A is exchanged with Pm where m is the number of compound-
ing periods.
Pm = (1 + 12 0.06 ) Pm-1 + 100 = (1.005)Pm-1 + 100

Assuming we start with an empty account, we can begin using this relationship:

P0 = 0

P1 = (1.005)P0 + 100 = 100

P2 = (1.005)P1 + 100 = (1.005)(100) + 100 = 100(1.005) + 100
P3 = (1.005)P2 + 100 = (1.005)(100(1.005) + 100) + 100 = 100(1.005)2 + 100(1.005) + 100
Continuing this pattern, after m deposits, we'd have saved:

Pm = 100(1.005)m-1 + 100(1.005)m-2 + ... + 100(1.005) + 100

In other words, after m months, the first deposit will have earned compound interest for m - 1 months. The
second deposit will have earned interest for m - 2 months. Last month's deposit would have earned only
one month worth of interest. The most recent deposit will have earned no interest yet.

This equation leaves a lot to be desired, though - it doesn't make calculating the ending balance any easier!
To simplify things, multiply both sides of the equation by 1.005:

1.005Pm = 1.005[100(1.005)m-1 + 100(1.005)m-2 + ... + 100(1.005) + 100]
Distributing on the right side of the equation gives

1.005Pm = 100(1.005)m + 100(1.005)m-1 + ... + 100(1.005)2 + 100(1.005)
Now we'll line this up with like terms from our original equation, and subtract each side

1.005Pm = 100(1.005)m + 100(1.005)m-1 + ... + 100(1.005)
Pm = 100(1.005)m-1 + ... + 100(1.005) + 100
Almost all the terms cancel on the right side when we subtract, leaving

1.005Pm - Pm = 100(1.005)m - 100

Solving for Pm

0.005Pm = 100((1.005)m - 1)

Pm = 0.005 100(1.005)m-100
Replacing Pm with A (Future Value), m months with 12t, where t is measured in years, gives

A=  100((1.005)12t -1)

        0.005

Recall 0.005 was r/n and 100 was the deposit d. The value 12 as n, the number of deposits each year.
Generalizing this result, we get the savings plan formula solved for A. The second formula uses algebra to
rearrange the formula to be solved for d.
2.3. SAVINGS PLANS                                                                       85

                           Savings Plan Formulas.

                          (( r )nt )                 A(r)
                        d 1+ n -1     or d = ((      n         )
                    A=     (r)                       )nt
                                                 1 + rn - 1
                           n

A  is the balance in the account after n years (future value)

d  is the regular deposit (or payment amount each month, quarter, year, etc.)

r  is the annual interest rate in decimal form

n  is the number of compounding periods in one year

t  is the number of years

If the compounding frequency is not explicitly stated, assume there are the same number
of compounds in a year as there are deposits made in a year

2.3.5 Exercises

1. You set up a savings plan for retirement in 35 years. You will deposit $250 each month for 35 years.
      The account will earn an average of 6.5% APR compounded monthly.

          a. How much will you have in your retirement plan in 35 years?

          b. How much interest did you earn.

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
2. You set up a savings plan for retirement in 40 years. You will deposit $75 each week for 40 years.The

      account will earn an average of 8.5% APR compounded weekly.

          a. How much will you have in your retirement plan in 40 years?

          b. How much interest did you earn.

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
3. You set up a savings plan for retirement in 30 years. You will deposit $750 each quarter for 30 years.

      The account will earn an average of 7.75% APR compounded quarterly.

          a. How much will you have in your retirement plan in 30 years?

          b. How much interest did you earn?

          c. What percent of the balance is interest?
4. You set up a savings plan for retirement in 25 years. You will deposit $20 per day for 25 years. The

      account will earn an average of 2.35% APR compounded daily.

          a. How much will you have in your retirement plan in 25 years?

          b. How much interest did you earn?

          c. What percent of the final balance is interest?
5. Suppose you invest $130 a month for 5 years into an account earning 9% APR compounded monthly.

      After 5 years, you leave the money, without making additional deposits, in the account for another 25
      years.

          a. How much will you have in the end?
86  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

          b. How much interest did you earn?

          c. What percent of balance is interest?
6. Suppose you invest $200 per month for 10 years into an account earning 5% APR compounded monthly.

      You then leave the money, without making additional deposits, in the account for another 20 years.

          a. How much will you have after the first 10 years?

          b. How much will you have after the additional 20 years?

          c. How much total interest did you earn?

          d. What percent of the final balance is interest?
7. Suppose you have 30 months in which to save $3,500 for a cruise for your family. If you can earn an

      APR of 3.8%, compounded monthly, how much should you deposit each month?
8. You wish to have $3,000 in 2 years to buy a fancy new stereo system. How much should you deposit

      each quarter into an account paying 6.5% APR compounded quarterly?
9. Jamie has determined they need to have $450,000 for retirement in 30 years. Their account earns 6%

      APR. How much would Jamie need to deposit in the account each month?
10. Lashonda already knows that she wants $500,000 when she retires. If she sets up a saving plan for

      40 years in an account paying 10% APR, compounded quarterly, how much should she deposit each
      quarter?
11. Jose' inherits $55,000 and decides to put it in the bank for the next 25 years to save for his retirement.
      He will earn an average of 5.6% APR compounded monthly for the next 25 years. His partner deposits
      $375 a month in a separate savings plan that earns 5.6% APR compounded monthly for the next 25
      years.

          a. How much will each have at the end of 25 years?

          b. How much interest did each person earn?

          c. What percent of balance is interest for each person?
12. Akiko inherits $45,000 and decides to put it in the bank for the next 30 years to save for her retirement.

      She will earn an average of 7.8% APR compounded monthly for the next 30 years. Her spouse deposits
      $200 a month in a separate savings plan that earns 7.8% APR compounded monthly for the next 30
      years.

          a. How much will each have at the end of 30 years?

          b. How much interest did each person earn?

          c. What percent of balance is interest for each person?
13. Sylvin makes an initial deposit of $1000 into a savings account and then adds $100 each month for 10

      years into an account pays 4.5% APR compounded monthly.

          a. What will be her final balance?

          b. How much interest did she earn?

          c. What percent of the final balance is interest?
14. Elena makes an initial deposit of $5000 into a savings account and then adds $1000 each year for 20

      years into an account pays 2.35% APR compounded annually.

          a. What will be her final balance?

          b. How much interest did she earn?

          c. What percent of her final balance is interest?
2.3. SAVINGS PLANS  87

15. Vanessa just turned 40 years old. Her plan is to save $100 per month until retirement at age 65. Suppose
      she deposits that $100 each month into a savings account that earns 4% APR compounded monthly.

          a. What will her balance be when she turns 65 years old?

          b. If she started saving when she turned 25 years old instead, what would her balance be?
16. Chris wants to start saving money for retirement. Suppose he deposits $1000 every year into a savings

      account that pays 5% APR compounded annually.

          a. How much will Chris have saved in 20 years?

          b. How much will Chris have saved in 40 years?
17. Fareshta and Ahmad want to save to help send their child to college. Their plan is to put aside $50 every

      week. Suppose they deposit that money into an account that pays 3.5% APR compounded weekly.

          a. How much money will be in the account in 18 years? (assume 52 weeks in a year)

          b. What minimum initial lump sum deposit would they need to make today to have the same balance
              in 18 years if they weren't putting aside the $50 per week?

18. Elisa decides to cancel her cable TV and to deposit the $100 she will save each month into an account
      that pays 4.5% APR compounded monthly.

          a. How much will she have in the account in 10 years?

          b. What minimum initial lump sum deposit would she need to make today to have the same balance
              in 10 years without saving the $100 per month?
88                 CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

2.4 Loan Payments

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Use a spreadsheet and/or formula to calculate the payment amount for student loans, car loans, paying
       off credit cards and mortgage loans

   · Calculate the total paid over the life of a loan, amount of interest paid, and the percentage of the total
       amount paid in interest

   · Determine when to use each formula in the financial math chapter

In the last section, you learned about savings plans. In this section, you will learn about conventional loans
(also called amortized loans or installment loans). Examples include student loans, car loans and home
mortgages. These techniques do not apply to payday loans, add-on loans, or other loan types where the
interest is calculated up front. In this section we will also briefly cover credit cards. There is a more thorough
chapter on credit cards available as an optional chapter.

2.4.1 Installment Loans

Installment loans are also called amortized loans. They are designed so that the payment amount remains
the same over the life (term) of the loan. In order for that amount to remain constant, the amount of money
going towards paying the principal (amount owed) and towards the interest will vary. At the beginning
of the loan, the amount owed is the largest. So, at the beginning the amount of interest charged will also
be the largest. As the loan gets repaid the amount owed is reduced and therefore the interest is reduced.
Therefore, at the beginning of an installment loan payments go mostly towards the interest, towards the end
the payments are going mostly towards the principal.

This is a graph of the interest and principal paid on a loan of $34,000 at 10% APR. Each year $5391.72
was paid in total. In the first year, $3,3305.92 was applied to the interest and $2085.80 was applied to the
principal. In the last year of the loan, only $281.04 was applied to the interest and $5,110.68 was applied to
the principal. Over 5 years, a total of $53,917.2 was paid for a loan of $34,000.

2.4.2 Loan Formulas

In a savings plan, you start with nothing, put money into an account once or on a regular basis, and have
a larger balance at the end. Loans work in reverse. You start with a balance owed, make payments and the
future value is zero when the loan is paid off.
2.4. LOAN PAYMENTS                                                                                     89

We will continue to use the same spreadsheet formulas. The ones that are most useful for loans are =PV and
=PMT. We will look at how the inputs change for a loan.

                                                      Spreadsheet Formulas.
          =PV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, future value)

          =PMT(rate per period, number of periods, present value, future value)

rate per period
               is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

number of periods
               is the total number of periods, n  t

payment amount
               is the amount of regular payments, d

present value
               is the amount deposited or principal, P

future value
               is the amount you want in the future, 0 for a loan

These two formulas correspond to the formulas below. The formula for loans is derived in a similar way that
we did for savings plans, but notice they have negative exponents. The details are omitted here.

                             Loan Formulas.

                          ( ( r )-nt)                              P(r)
                        d 1- 1+ n       or d = ( ( n )-nt)
                    P=  (r)
                                                1 - 1 + rn
                        n

P  is the balance in the account at the beginning (the principal, or amount of the loan).

d  is your loan payment (your monthly payment, annual payment, etc.)

r  is the annual interest rate in decimal form

n  is the number of compounding periods in one year

t  is the length of the loan, in years

Like before, the compounding frequency is not always explicitly given, but is determined by how often
you make payments

Example 2.4.2 Teresa wants to buy a car that costs $15,000. She has $3,000 saved for the car and plans
to finance the rest. She found a 3-year loan at 2.75% APR and a 5-year loan at 4% APR. How much will
her monthly car payment be for each loan and how do these loans compare to each other.
To use a spreadsheet, we use the =PMT formula. For a loan, the loan amount is the present value and the
future value is 0, indicating that the loan will be paid off. Teresa is making a down payment, so we also need
to subtract that from the cost of the car to find the loan amount:
$15,000-$3,000 = $12,000
Her loan amount is $12,000. For the 3-year loan at 2.75% APR, we enter:

     =PMT(0.0275/12, 12*3, 12000, 0)

and get a result of $347.65.
90                                                                       CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

For the formula, we use the one solved for d:
r = .0275, for 2.75% annual rate
n = 12, monthly payments
t = 3, for 3 years
P = 12000, since she can pay $3,000 of the $15,000

                                   d= (       ( P n ( r )  )-nt)

                                         1 - 1 + rn
                                              12000 ( 0.0275 )
                                   =(         ( 0.0275 12 )-12·3)

                                         1 - 1 + 12

                                    $347.65

Teresa's car payment would be $347.65.
Now for the 5-year loan at 4% APR, we enter:

    =PMT(0.04/12, 12*5, 12000, 0)

and we get $221.00.

To use the formula, we have:
r = .04, for 4% annual rate
n = 12, monthly payments
t = 5, for 5 years
P = 12000, the loan amount

                                   d= (         (   P n ( r )  )-nt)

                                         1 - 1 + rn
                                                12000 ( 0.04 )
                                   =(                          12     )
                                                ( 0.04 )-12·3
                                         1 - 1 + 12

                                    $221.00

Now let's compare the loans by finding out how much Teresa would pay in interest for each loan.

For the 3-year loan at 2.75% APR, her payments                 For the 5-year loan at 4% APR, her payments
would total:                                                   would total:

    $347.65(12)(3) = $12,515.40.                                         $221.00(12)(5) = $13,260.00.

Her interest would be $515.40.                                 Her interest would be $1,260.00.

There are two main differences between these two loans: the monthly payments and the total paid over the

life of the loans. The first loan has a higher monthly payment by $126.65 per month. However, she would

pay $744.60 less in interest.                                                                          
2.4. LOAN PAYMENTS                                                                                    91

In addition to loan payments, we can calculate the amount of loan we can afford given a monthly payment.
Let's look at that in the next example.

Example 2.4.3 You can afford $200 per month as a car payment. If you can get an auto loan at 3% APR
for 60 months (5 years), how expensive of a car can you afford? In other words, what amount loan can you
pay off with $200 per month?
Solution. To use a spreadsheet for this problem, we use the =PV formula because we want to know the
present value, which is the value of the loan right now. We enter

     =PV(0.03/12, 12*5, 200,0)

which gives $11,130.47.

To use a formula, we are looking for P, the starting amount of the loan.
d = $200, the monthly loan payment
r = 0.03, 3% annual rate
n = 12, since we're doing monthly payments, we'll compound monthly
t = 5, since we're making monthly payments for 5 years

                                    ( ( r )-nt)
                                    d 1- 1+ n
                                P=
                                    r

                                              n

                                    ( ( 0.03 )-12·5)
                                    200 1 - 1 + 12
                                =
                                                        0.03

                                                        12

                                   200(1 - (1.0025)-60)
                                =

                                             0.0025

                                 $11,130.47

You can afford a maximum loan of $11,130.47. If you have a down payment you can add that to get the

value of the car you can buy. If there are any closing costs for the loan you also need to take that into

consideration.

To find the amount of interest you will pay for this loan, calculate the total of all your payments.

$200(5)(12) = $12,000

Then take the difference between the total payments and the loan amount.

$12,000 - $11,130.47 = $869.53

In this case, you would be paying $869.53 in interest.                                                

So far, we have looked at car loans. Student loans and home mortgages are calculated in the same way. Here
is an example of a mortgage payment.

Example 2.4.4 You want to take out a $140,000 mortgage (home loan). The interest rate on the loan is
6%, and the loan is for 30 years. How much will your monthly payments be? What percentage of your total
payments will go towards interest?

Solution. To use a spreadsheet for this problem, we use the =PMT formula because we want to know the
payment amount. The amount of the loan is the present value and to pay off the loan the future value is 0.
We enter

=PMT(0.06/12, 12*30, 140000,0)

which gives us $839.37.
92                                                                      CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

To use the formula, we have:
r = 0.06, 6% annual rate
n = 12, since we're paying monthly
t = 30, 30 years
P = $140,000, the starting loan amount
In this case, we're going to use the equation that is solved for d.

    d= (  (P n ( r )                                      )-nt)

          1 - 1 + rn
          140000 ( 0.06 )
    =(                                                    12         )
          ( 0.06 )-12·30
          1 - 1 + 12

                700
    = (1 - (1.005)-360)

     $839.37

You would make payments of $839.37 per month for 30 years. To find out what percentage of the total will
go towards interest, we need to total up all of the payments.

                                                   $839.37(30)(12) = $302,173.20
Then take the difference between the total payments and the loan amount.

                                              $302,173.20 - $140,000 = $162,173.20

In this case, you would be paying $162,173.20 in interest over the life of the loan. To find the percentage,
we divide the interest by the total amount paid.

    $162,173.20  0.5367
    $302,173.20

About 53.7% of the total is being paid towards interest.                          

2.4.3 Remaining Loan Balance

With loans, it is often desirable to determine what the remaining loan balance will be after some number of
years. For example, if you purchase a home and plan to sell it in five years, you might want to know how
much of the loan balance you will have paid off and how much you will have to pay from the sale.

To determine the remaining loan balance after some number of years, we first need to calculate the payment
amount, if we don't already know it. Remember that only a portion of your loan payments go towards the
loan balance; a portion is going to go towards interest. For example, if your payments were $1,000 a month,
after a year you will not have paid off $12,000 of the loan balance.

To determine the remaining loan balance, we can think "how much loan will these loan payments be able to
pay off in the remaining time on the loan?"

Example 2.4.5 If a 30-year mortgage at an interest rate of 6% APR has payments of $1,000 a month, what
will the loan balance be in 5 years?
Solution. To determine this, we need to think backwards. We are looking for the amount of the loan that
2.4. LOAN PAYMENTS                                                              93

can be paid off by $1,000 per month in the remaining 25 years. In other words, we're looking for P when:
d = $1,000, for the monthly loan payment
r = 0.06, for 6% annual rate
n = 12, since we're doing monthly payments, we'll compound monthly
t = 25, since we'd be making monthly payments for 25 more years
To use a spreadsheet for this problem, we use the =PV formula because we want to know what the present
value would be at the time you want to sell in 5 years. We enter:

     =PV(0.06/12, 12*25, 1000,0)

which gives us $155,206.86.

To check this with the formula we have:

                                         ( ( 0.06 )-12·25)
                                         1000 1 - 1 + 12
                    P=
                                         0.06

                                         12

                       1000(1 - (1.005)-300)
                    =

                                  0.005

                     $155,206.86

The loan balance with 25 years remaining on the loan will be $155,206.86        

Sometimes answering remaining balance questions requires two steps, both of which we have done in this
section:

1 Calculate the monthly payment on the loan
2 Calculate the remaining loan balance based on the remaining time on the loan

2.4.4 Credit Cards

Credit cards are useful to many people. They can be used to build a credit score, as a short-term loan and
as an alternative to physical cash. It is highly advisable to fully pay off a credit card each month because
the interest rates are much higher than the conventional installment loans we discussed earlier. There can
also be many expensive fees applied when carrying a balance. Because of these higher rates, it can be very
easy to get into a lot of debt quickly.

Credit cards are a common source of loan money, and therefore a common source of debt which must be
repaid. There are much fewer and lower barriers to obtaining and using a credit card than there are to
obtaining, for example, a mortgage. As such, there are some drawbacks both in terms of typically higher
interest rates, as well as some structural differences.

Example 2.4.6 Bilqis gets a credit card, with 17.99% APR compounding daily. She uses the card to
buy a $900 plane ticket. She does not make any payments during the interest-free grace period. Her first
payment is due 35 days after the grace period ended. Following the fine print in the credit card agreement,
the minimum payment is calculated to be 1% of the outstanding balance after applying the APR; or $25,
whichever is larger. What is her outstanding balance? What is her minimum payment? If she pays the
minimum payment what will her new balance be?

Solution. First we will see what she owes with the 17.99% APR using the compound interest formula for
35 days:
94                                                                     CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

                                  ( 0.1799 )35
                                  900 1 + 365              915.66

The spreadsheet formula for this computation is

     =FV(0.1799/365,35,0,900)

With interest, Bilqis now owes $915.66.
Now we will find one percent of the new balance which is

                                  $915.66(0.01)  $9.16

$25 is larger than $9.16, so her first payment must be at least $25. If she makes the minimum payment we
can subtract to find her new balance:

                                  $915.66 - $25 = $890.66

Her new balance will be $890.66.                                          

2.4.5 Summary of Spreadsheet Formulas

Here are all the spreadsheet formulas from this chapter so far together so you can see the similarities and
differences.

                                                      Spreadsheet Formulas.
         =principal+principal*rate*time
         =FV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, present value)
         =principal*EXP(yearly rate*years)
         =PV(rate per period, number of periods, payment amount, future value)
         =PMT(rate per period, number of periods, present value, future value)
         =EFFECT(stated rate, number of compounding periods per year)

    rate per period
                   is the interest rate per compounding period, r/n

    number of periods
                   is the total number of periods, n  t

    payment amount
                   is the amount of regular payments, d

    present value
                   is the amount deposited or principal, P

    future value
                   is the amount you want in the future, 0 for a loan

2.4.6 When to use each spreadsheet formula: What is the question asking?

   · Find a payment: =PMT
2.4. LOAN PAYMENTS                                                                                   95

· Find the effective rate or compare accounts: =EFFECT

· How much do you need to deposit now, what loan amount can you afford, or remaining loan balance:
   =PV

· What will the account balance be in the future?

        Simple interest: =principal+principal*rate*time
        Compound interest (except continuous): =FV
        Continuously compounded interest: principal*EXP(rate*years)

2.4.7 Summary of Mathematical Formulas

                         Mathematical Formulas.

Simple Interest

                         I = Prt or A = P + Prt

Compound Interest        ( A = P 1 + r )nt or P = (     A
Continuously Compounded                                    )nt
                              n 1 + rn

                            A = Pert or P = ert A

Savings Plans              (( r )nt )                   A(r)
Loans                    d 1+ n -1                      n
                    A=   (r)            or d = ((       )nt     )
                                                     1 + rn - 1
                         n

                           ( ( r )-nt)                  P(r)
                    P=   d 1- 1+ n      or d = ( ( n )-nt)

                         r                     1 - 1 + rn

                         n

P  is the principal, starting amount, or present value

d  is your loan payment (your monthly payment, annual payment, etc.)

r  is the annual intrest rate in decimal form

n  is the number of compounding periods in one year

t  is the length of the loan, in years

A  is the end amunt or future value

If the compounding frequency is not always explicitly given, it is determined by how often you make
payments

2.4.8 When to use each mathematical formula: What is the question asking?

   · Find a payment
96  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

            Savings payment: savings plan equation (positive exponent) solved for d
            Loan payment: loan equation (negative exponent) solved for d

   · How much do you need to deposit now?

            Compound interest (except continuous): compound interest formulas solved for P
            Continuously compounded: the formula with e solved for P

   · What loan amount can you afford, or remaining loan balance: loan formula solved for P

   · What will the account balance be in the future?

            One-time deposit:
                 Simple interest: simple interest formula
                 Compound interest (except continuous): compound interest formula solved for A
                 Continuously compounded interest: the formula with e in it, solved for A

            Regular payments: Savings plan formula solved for A

Remember, the most important part of answering any kind of question, money or otherwise, is first to
correctly identify what the question is really asking, and to determine what approach will best allow you
to solve the problem. After practicing with the exercises from this section, you can test yourself on which
formula to use with exercises 14-21.

2.4.9 Exercises

1. You can afford a $700 per month mortgage payment. You've found a 30-year loan at 5.5% APR.

          a. How big of a loan can you afford?
          b. How much total money will you pay the loan company?
          c. How much of that money is interest?
2. Marie can afford a $250 per month car payment. She's found a 5-year loan at 7% APR.

          a. How expensive of a car can she afford?
          b. How much total money will she pay the loan company?
          c. How much of that money is interest?
3. You want to buy a $25,000 car. The company is offering an interest rate of 2% APR for 48 months (4
      years). What will your monthly payments be?
4. You decide to finance a $12,000 car at 3% APR compounded monthly for 4 years. What will your
      monthly payments be? How much interest will you pay over the life of the loan?
5. You want to buy a $200,000 home. You plan to pay 10% as a down payment and take out a 30-year
      loan for the rest.

          a. How much is the loan amount going to be?
          b. What will your monthly payments be if the interest rate is 5%?
          c. What will your monthly payments be if the interest rate is 6%?
6. Lynn bought a $300,000 house, paying 10% down, and financing the rest at 6.5% APR for 30 years.
          a. Find her monthly payments.
          b. How much interest will she pay over the life of the loan?
2.4. LOAN PAYMENTS  97

          c. What percentage of her total payment was interest?

7. Emile bought a car for $24,000 three years ago. The loan had a 5-year term at 3% APR. How much
      does he still owe on the car?

8. A friend bought a house 15 years ago, taking out a $120,000 mortgage at 6% APR for 30 years. How
      much does she still owe on the mortgage?

Exercise Group. Use a spreadsheet (not formulas) to answer problems 9 through 13 below.
    9. Imagine you have $20,000 saved as a down payment on a house. You wish to take out a fixed-
           rate 30-year mortgage loan at 4% APR (remember that mortgage rates usually assume monthly
           compounding). If the maximum mortgage payment you can afford is $950 per month, then what is
           the maximum house price that you can afford?
    10. Suppose another mortgage lender offers you a fixed-rate 15-year mortgage at 2.95% APR. You have
           $20,000 saved as a down payment, and you can afford a maximum mortgage payment of $950 per
           month. You are interested in a certain house for sale, with firm selling price of $200,000.

               a. Find the monthly payment for this house. Can you afford it, under the terms of this lender?

               b. (Challenge): Suppose this same lender offers to increase the APR by only 0.05%, for each
                   additional year added to the loan period beyond 15 years (so that a 16-year loan would have
                   3.00% APR, and a 17-year loan would have 3.05% APR, and so on), up to a maximum loan
                   period of 25 years. Given these terms, does any combination of APR and loan period exist that
                   would let you afford the house? If so, state the minimum number of additional years needed,
                   the total resulting loan period, the resulting APR, and the resulting monthly payment.

    11. An annuity firm pays 5% APR compounded yearly, and offers an investor the following: Deposit
           $100,000 with them today, and then starting one year from today, you will receive ten equal annual
           payments, with zero balance remaining afterward in the account. If an investor accepts their offer,
           then find the following:

               a. What will be the payment amount for each of the ten equal payments?

               b. After ten years, how much interest will the investor have received, and what percentage of the
                   total payment sum will represent interest?

    12. For twelve full years, and into an account that pays 3.5% APR compounded quarterly: Yanhong
           will either pay $1500 at the end of each calendar quarter, or, deposit a single lump sum that will
           give the same future value amount.

               a. If Yanhong chooses the single lump sum option, then how much will Yanhong need to deposit?

               b. If Yanhong needs to have earned $100,000 in this account at the end of the twelve years, then
                   the quarterly deposit amount will need to be increased. What would the new quarterly deposit
                   amount need to be?

               c. (Challenge): If Yanhong will make quarterly deposits into this account for the twelve years,
                   but also has $8,000 to additionally deposit into this account right away: What would the new
                   quarterly deposit amount need to be, so that the total balance after twelve years is $100,000?

    13. Assume you take out a 30-year mortgage loan for $250,000 at a fixed 4.5% APR.

               a. What will be the amount of your monthly payment?

               b. After the first ten years of payments, how much will remain on your loan balance?

               c. After the first twenty years of payments, how much will remain on your loan balance?

               d. Notice that the amount of the loan balance reduction during the second ten years, was very
                   considerably bigger than the amount of the loan balance reduction during the first ten years.
98  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

    Why does the loan balance decrease at a faster and faster pace, the longer that the loan has
    been in repayment?

Exercise Group. For each of the following scenarios, determine which formula from sections 2.2-2.4 to
use and solve the problem.

    14. Keisha received an inheritance of $20,000 and invested it at 6.9% APR, compounded continuously.
           How much will she have for college in 8 years?

    15. Paul wants to buy a new car. Rather than take out a loan, he decides to save $200 a month in an
           account earning 3.5% APR compounded monthly. How much will he have saved up after 3 years?

    16. Sol is managing investments for a non-profit company. They want to invest some money in an
           account earning 5% APR compounded annually with the goal to have $30,000 in the account in 6
           years. How much should Sol deposit into the account?

    17. Miao is going to finance new office equipment at 2.8% APR over a 4-year term. If she can afford
           monthly payments of $100, how much equipment can she buy?

    18. How much would you need to save every month in an account earning 4.1% APR to have $5,000
           saved up in two years.

    19. Terry and Jess are buying a house for $405,000 and they can afford to put 10% down. Their interest
           rate is 4.3% APR for 30 years. What will their monthly mortgage payment be?

    20. You loan your sister $500 for two years and she agrees to pay you back with 3% simple interest per
           year. How much will she pay you back

    21. Zahid starts saving $150 per month in an account that pays 4.8% APR compounded monthly. If he
           continues for 20 years, how much will he have? If he waited 10 years instead and put in $300 per
           month for 10 years with the same interest, how much would he have?
2.5. INCOME TAXES  99

2.5 Income Taxes

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Calculate gross income and adjusted gross income (AGI)
   · Determine the standard deduction according to filing status
   · Determine whether to use the standard or itemized deductions and calculate taxable income
   · Calculate income tax from tables
   · Compare taxes owed to withholdings to determine whether a refund is due or a payment is required

2.5.1 A Very Brief History of Taxes

Although Benjamin Franklin famously claimed in 1789 that "in this world nothing can be said to be certain,
except death and taxes", it wasn't until 1913 that the 16th amendment was ratified, and income tax was
legalized. Prior to this, taxes were primarily collected through tariffs on imported goods, poll taxes, and
property taxes. A poll tax, also referred to as a head tax, was a fixed amount every liable individual had to
pay. Payment of the poll tax was often required before a person could register to vote or be issued a hunting
or fishing license.
Tax policy in the United States is a politically divisive issue. In general, Democrats seek to lower taxes for
low and middle income earners and raise taxes for the wealthy, while Republicans support a variety of tax
cuts and limiting the amount wealthy earners are taxed. There is even debate as to the current length of the
tax code! Some claim that the code is over 70,000 pages while others insist it is just over 2,000. Nevertheless,
there is at least one thing everyone can agree with - you don't want to be on the wrong side of the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS)!

2.5.2 Types of Income Tax

Income tax is a tax that is levied on earned income or profit. Income taxes are collected by the federal
government, states, and even some municipalities. Income taxes are an important source of funding, and are
used to finance social programs, maintain and expand infrastructure, and provide foreign aid, among other
things.

2.5.3 Federal Income Tax

Anyone who earns income over a certain amount (approximately $10,000 for an individual) must file a federal
tax return and have taxes collected on their behalf. The amount of federal tax owed is determined by your
filing status and taxable income.

2.5.4 State Income Tax

Forty-one states and the District of Columbia collect taxes on income from wages and investment. Seven
states - Washington, Nevada, South Dakota, Wyoming, Alaska, Texas, and Florida - do not collect tax on
wage or investment income, and two states - New Hampshire and Tennessee - only collect tax on investment
100  CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

income. The amount of tax collected varies by state, with each state averaging between $500 and $3000 per
person.

2.5.5 Municipal Income Tax

Some municipalities (urban districts) also collect income taxes. For example, business owners in Multnomah
County pay a municipal tax on their business income, and workers in the Tri-met district (area served by
Tri-met) have their wages taxed at 0.7537%.

2.5.6 Calculating Federal Income Tax

Not all income is taxed, and not all income that gets taxed is taxed at the same rate. The general process
of calculating the amount of federal income tax you owe is outlined in the chart below.

Figure 2.5.2 Steps to Calculate Federal Income Tax

2.5.7 Gross Income

Gross income includes all wages, tips, earned interest, dividends, rents and royalties, alimony, property
gains, income tax refunds, etc. Keep in mind that ALL income means ALL income. Even income earned
from a crime must be reported!

2.5.8 Adjusted Gross Income

Adjustments are eligible expenses used to reduce your gross income. Adjustments are tax-exempt and
thus reduce the amount owed in taxes. Eligible expenses include contributions to tax deferred savings plans
(401k, Individual Retirement Plan (IRA)), school tuition, student loan interest, moving expenses, business
expenses, flexible spending accounts and health savings account contributions.

2.5.9 Taxable Income

Taxable income is determined by subtracting your deductions from your adjusted gross income. You may
choose to take either a standard deduction, which is determined by your filing status, or you may choose
2.5. INCOME TAXES                                                                              101

to itemize your deductions. Itemized deductions may include state and local income taxes, property taxes,
medical expenses, mortgage interest, and charitable donations.

Prior to the 2018 tax year, you could also claim personal exemptions. Exemptions of $4,050 for each
member of the household were subtracted from the adjusted gross income along with either the standard
or itemized deduction to determine taxable income. Starting in 2018, however, the standard deduction was
doubled, and personal exemptions were eliminated.

Let's look at an example of how to calculate gross income and adjusted gross income (AGI).

Example 2.5.3 Sasha received $45,000 in wages and earned $1,300 in interest from his savings plan. He paid

$1,400 in student loan interest, and put $4,000 into his Individual Retirement Account (IRA). Determine

Sasha's adjusted gross income.

To calculate Sasha's adjusted gross income, we need to first determine his gross income. His gross income

includes his wages and earned interest:

Gross Income = $45,000 + $1,300 = $46,300

To find his adjusted gross income, we need to subtract eligible adjustments from his gross income. His eligible

adjustments include the interest paid on his student loans, and his contributions to his IRA:

Adjusted Gross Income = $46,300 - $1,400 - $4,000 = $40,900                                    

2.5.10 Filing Status

Your filing status is determined by your family situation. Are you married, widowed, divorced, caring for a
family member? It is possible to fall into more than one category, but you may choose the one that is most
beneficial for you.

· Single: If you are unmarried, legally separated from your spouse, or divorced on the last day of the
   year.

· Married Filing Jointly: If you are married and both you and your spouse agree to file a joint return.
   (On a joint return, you report your combined income and deduct your combined allowable expenses.)

· Married Filing Separately: If you are married and you want to be responsible only for your own
   tax, or if this status results in less tax than a joint return.

· Head of Household (with qualifying person): If you are 1) unmarried or considered unmarried
   on the last day of the year, 2) paid more than half the cost of keeping up a home for the year, and 3)
   have a qualifying dependent living with you for more than half the year (except temporary absences,
   such as school).

· Qualifying Widow/Widower (with dependent child): This status is available for the two years
   following the death of your spouse.

Your filing status determines your standard deduction and tax liability. The standard deduction for each
filing status for the tax year 2024 is given in the table below.

Filing Status                              Standard Deduction for Tax Year 2024
Single                                                              $14600
Married Filing Jointly                                              $29200
Married Filing Separately                                           $14600
Head of Household                                                   $21900
Qualifying Widow                                                    $29200

Here is an example where we calculate adjusted gross income and taxable income.
102                                                    CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

Example 2.5.4 Maria earned wages of $32,400 from her job as a server. She also earned $8,300 in tips, and
received $95 in interest from a savings account. In trying to save for retirement, Maria has put $3,500 into
a 401K tax deferred savings plan. She is unmarried and lives with her six year old daughter. Determine
Maria's gross income, adjusted gross income, and taxable income.

Solution. Maria's gross income includes her wages, tips, and earned interest.

Gross Income = $32,400 + $8,300 + $95 = $40,795

Maria can use her 401k contribution as an adjustment.

Adjusted Gross Income = $40,795 - $3,500 = $37,295

Since Maria is unmarried and is the primary caregiver for her daughter, she can file as the head of household

and take the standard deduction of $18,000.

Taxable Income = $37,295 - $18,000 = $19,295                                   

2.5.11 Tax Tables

The United States has a progressive federal income tax system which means the more income you have,
the more you generally pay in taxes. There are marginal tax rates that go up according to our income,
but we don't pay the same rate on all of our income. The ranges of income are called tax brackets and the
buckets in the illustration below can help us visualize the brackets.

The cutoff values in the figure are for a married couple filing jointly, but the percentages are the same for
everyone as you'll see in the table on the next page. We pay 10% of any taxable income in the first bucket.
If the first bucket is full, we move to the second bucket and we pay 12% of that income. This couple is in the
22% tax bracket because the 3rd bucket is partially filled. They will pay 22% of the income in that bucket,
but they are not paying 22% of their entire income.

Figure 2.5.5 Tax Buckets by John Chesbrough, licensed under CC-BY-ND-NC 4.01.
Here is a table with cutoff values for each filing status. Everyone pays a tax of 10% on any income in the
first tax bracket. Then we all pay 12% of the next bracket of income, 22% of the next bracket, and so on.
This keeps going up to the 37% tax bracket.

   1creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
2.5. INCOME TAXES                                                                      103

Table 2.5.6 2024 Tax Year Marginal Tax Rates

Marginal  Filing Single        Filing as Head       Married filing       Married filing
Tax Rate                       of Household         Jointly              Separately
On        First $11,600
Taxable   $11,600 - $47,150    First $16,550        First $23,200        First $11,600
Income    $47,150 - $100,525   $16,550 - $63,100    $23,200 - $94,300    $11,600 - $47,150
          $100,525 - $191,950  $63,100 - $100,500   $94,300 - $201,050   $47,150 - $100,525
    10%   $191,950 - $243,725  $100,500 - $191,950  $201,050 - $383,900  $100,525 - $191,950
    12%   $243,725 - $609,350  $191,950 - $243,700  $383,900 - $487,450  $191,950 - $243,725
    22%   Over $609,350        $243,700 - $609,350  $487,450 - $731,200  $243,725 - $365,600
    24%                        Over $609,350        Over $731,200        Over $365,600
    32%
    35%
    37%

Let's see how to use this table to calculate taxes in an example.

Example 2.5.7 If Avery is filing single and has $55,100 in taxable income, calculate their tax.

Solution. We begin with the lowest tax bracket and take 10% of $11,600. Since their income is higher
than that, we add 12% of the next amount, found by subtracting the values in that bracket. Avery's taxable
income is in the 22% tax bracket, so we find the amount over $38,700 by subtracting. Here is the full
calculation:
0.10($11,600) + 0.12($47,150 - 11,600) + 0.22($55,100 - 47,150)

                   = 0.10($11,600) + 0.12($5,550) + 0.22($7,950)
                   = $1,160 + 4, $266 + $1,749
                   = $5,426 + $1,749
                   = $7,175

Avery would owe $7,175 in taxes. Note that their overall tax rate is somewhere between 10% and 22%. We
can calculate the actual rate by dividing their tax owed by their taxable income:
$7,175 $55,100 = 0.1302 or about 13% 

We could calculate all taxes this way, but you might notice that the first few terms will be the same if the
buckets are full. For this reason, we can simplify these tax tables. The tax tables below give the value for all
of the lower tax buckets that are full. There is a tax table for each filing status and the cutoffs are regularly
adjusted for inflation, so they usually vary from year to year.

The next four tables give the tax calculations for 2024 federal income taxes by filing status.

Table 2.5.8 Filing Single (Tax Year 2024)

If taxable income is:                The tax is:
Not over $11,600                     10% of the taxable income
Over $11,600 but not over $47,150    $1,160 plus 12% of the excess over $11,600
Over $47,150 but not over $100,525   $5,426 plus 22% of the excess over $47,150
Over $100,525 but not over $191,950  $17,168.50 plus 24% of the excess over $100,525
Over $191,950 but not over $243,725  $39,110.50 plus 32% of the excess over $191,950
Over $243,725 but not over $609,350  $55,678.50 plus 35% of the excess over $243,725
Over $609,350                        $183,647.25 plus 37% of the excess over $609,350
104                                                      CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

Table 2.5.9 Filing as Head of Household (Tax Year 2024)

     If taxable income is:                The tax is:
     Not over $16,650                     10% of the taxable income
     Over $16,650 but not over $63,100    $1,665 plus 12% of the excess over $16,650
     Over $63,100 but not over $100,500   $7,241 plus 22% of the excess over $63,100
     Over $100,500 but not over $191,950  $15,469 plus 24% of the excess over $100,500
     Over $191,950 but not over $243,700  $37,417 plus 32% of the excess over $191,950
     Over $243,700 but not over $609,350  $53,977 plus 35% of the excess over $243,700
     Over $609,350                        $181,954.50 plus 37% of the excess over $609,350

Table 2.5.10 Married Filing Jointly (Tax Year 2024)

     If taxable income is:                The tax is:
     Not over $23,200                     10% of the taxable income
     Over $23,200 but not over $94,300    $2,320 plus 12% of the excess over $23,200
     Over $94,300 but not over $201,050   $10,852 plus 22% of the excess over $94,300
     Over $201,050 but not over $383,900  $34,337 plus 24% of the excess over $201,050
     Over $383,900 but not over $487,450  $78,221 plus 32% of the excess over $383,900
     Over $487,450 but not over $731,200  $111,357 plus 35% of the excess over $487,450
     Over $731,200                        $196,669.50 plus 37% of the excess over $731,200

Table 2.5.11 Married Filing Separately (Tax Year 2024)

     If taxable income is:                The tax is:
     Not over $11,600                     10% of the taxable income
     Over $11,600 but not over $47,150    $1,160 plus 12% of the excess over $11,600
     Over $47,150 but not over $100,525   $5,426 plus 22% of the excess over $47,150
     Over $100,525 but not over $191,950  $17,168.50 plus 24% of the excess over $100,525
     Over $191,950 but not over $243,725  $39,110.50 plus 32% of the excess over $191,950
     Over $243,725 but not over $365,600  $55,678.50 plus 35% of the excess over $243,725
     Over $365,600                        $98,334.75 plus 37% of the excess over $365,600

Example 2.5.12 Suppose Adira is filing as head of household and has a taxable income of $106,450. Cal-
culate her taxes using the individual tax brackets and with the simplified table.

Solution. We will calculate Adira's taxes first the long way:
0.10($16,650) + 0.12($63,100 - $16,650) + 0.22($100,500 - $63,100) + 0.24($106,450 - $100,500)

                              = 0.10($16,650) + 0.12($46,450) + 0.22($37,400) + 0.24($5,950)
                              = $1,665 + $5,574 + $8,228 + $1,428
                              = $15,467 + $1,428
                              = $16,895

Now, using the simplified tax table for single filing status, we see that Adira's taxable income puts her in the
24% tax bracket. The simplified table tells us that her taxes will be equal to $15,469 plus 24% of the excess
over $100,500. Notice the number $15,469 is very close to what we got for all of the "full" tax brackets, so
we only need to calculate the last one. To find the excess over $82,500, we subtract $82,500 from her taxable
income. Thus, her taxes are:

     $15,469 + 0.24($106,450 - $100,500) = $15,469 + 0.24($1,428)
                                                     = $15,469 + $1,428
2.5. INCOME TAXES                                                                     105

                                          = $16,897

We see that both methods result in the same value, $16,897, for Adira's taxes.        

Example 2.5.13 Phyllis and Gladys are married and filing jointly. Together their taxable income is $132,000.
Use the simplified 2024 tax tables from this section to determine how much they owe in taxes.

Solution. Since Phyllis and Gladys are married and filing jointly, their taxable income puts them in the
22% tax bracket. Using the simplified 2024 tax table, their taxes are $10,852 plus 22% of the excess over
$94,300:

                   $10,852 + 0.22($132,000 - $94,300) = $10,852 + 0.22($37,700)
                                                                  = $10,852 + $8,294
                                                                  = $19,146

Phyllis and Gladys owe $19,146 in taxes.                                              

2.5.12 Tax Credits

Tax credits are different from deductions in that they reduce the amount of tax you owe by the full amount
of the credit, not just a percentage. This makes credits much more valuable than deductions.

Common tax credits include child tax credits, earned income credits, child and dependent care credits,
American opportunity tax credits, lifetime learning credits, and various federal energy credits.

Example 2.5.14 Shiro is in the 22% tax bracket and itemizes his deductions. How much will his tax bill be
reduced if he makes a $1,000 contribution to charity? How much will his bill be reduced if he gets a $1,000
tax credit?
Solution. The tax credit will reduce his tax bill by the full amount of the credit, so the $1,000 tax credit
will reduce his tax bill by $1,000. As a deduction, however, his contribution to charity will only reduce his
tax bill by 22% of the $1,000, or 0.22($1,000) = $220. Tax credits are always better than deductions. 

2.5.13 Calculating a Refund or Payment Due

Employers are required to take out an estimated amount for taxes from each of our paychecks. These
withholdings are taken out, so we don't all have huge tax bills at the end of the year, and so the government
has the income it needs to run. When you file your taxes, you compare the amount of tax you actually owe,
with the withholdings from your paycheck. If you had more withheld during the year than you owe, you will
file for a refund. If your withholdings were less, though, you must pay the difference. Let's look at a couple
of examples with tax credits and withholdings.

Example 2.5.15 John's taxes are $4,342.50. He can claim an American opportunity tax credit of $2,300
and he had $3,135 withheld from his paychecks. Determine if John will owe money or get a refund.

Solution. The first step is to reduce John's taxes by the full amount of the tax credit.
$4,342.50 - $2,300 = $2,042.50
Next we subtract the amount withheld from his paychecks by his employer. Since his withholdings are greater
than the amount he owes after applying the tax credit, he will receive a refund equal to the difference.
$2,042.50 - $3,135 = -$1,092.50
John will receive a refund of $1,092.50. Notice that having a negative amount after subtracting credits and
withholdings means you will receive a refund, while having a positive amount means you still owe money. 

Example 2.5.16 As we discovered in Example 2.5.13, Phyllis and Gladys owe $19,146 in taxes. Their
employers withheld $9,905 and they received a $8,500 credit for their purchase of an electric car. Will they
receive a refund, or will they need to make a payment?
106                                                                       CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

Solution. To determine whether they will receive a refund or if they will still owe money, we will first

subtract the full amount of the electric car credit.

$19,146 - $8,500 = $10,646

We now subtract their withholdings:

$10,646 - $9,905 = $741

Since the value is positive, Phyllis and Gladys still owe $741 in taxes.  

2.5.14 Exercises

1. Which decreases your tax bill more, a credit or a deduction?
2. You are in the 12% tax bracket and get a credit of $500. How has the amount of taxes owed changed?
3. You are in the 12% tax bracket and get a deduction of $500. How has the amount of taxes owed

      changed?
4. Can you take the standard deduction and itemize your deductions?
5. Can you make adjustments to your income and take the standard deduction?
6. If you decide to take the standard deduction what have you considered?
7. Shaysiah has paid $13,500 in mortgage interest which she can take as a deduction and has $1,900 in

      other deductions that she can take this year. She is filing as single. Should she itemize her deductions
      or take the standard deduction?
8. If you are married do you have to file your taxes together?
9. Fredrick is concerned about the effect of a raise on his taxes. He's getting a raise of $3,000, putting him
      into a higher tax bracket by $1,000 dollars. He's concerned about his entire income being taxed at 22%
      instead of 12%. Should he be concerned? Why or why not?
10. A single person with taxable income of $95,000 will have the first $11,600 of that income taxed at what
      rate? Determine the taxes owed on just the first $11,600.
11. A single person with taxable income of $185,000 will have the first $11,600 of that income taxed at
      a different rate than the income between $11,600 and $47,150. Determine the taxes owed on just the
      second bracket.
12. Using the simplified 2024 tax table, determine the income tax owed for a single person who has $90,000
      of taxable income.
13. Doug and Chris are filing jointly. They owe $16,589 in taxes. Throughout the year they had $13,456
      withheld from their paychecks, and they can claim an energy credit of $2,500 for purchasing a hybrid
      vehicle. Determine the amount they will need to pay or will get refunded.
14. Heather owes $7,589 in taxes. Throughout the year she had $6,456 withheld from her paychecks and
      she can claim an education credit of $1,980. Determine the amount she will need to pay or will get
      refunded.
15. Determine the amount of taxes owed or the refund that would result in this situation:

          · Filing Status: Married filing jointly

          · Gross Income: $135,000

          · Adjustments: $5,600

          · Itemized Deductions: $19,400

          · Credits: $15,000

                 a. What is their adjusted gross income (AGI)?
                b. Should they itemize or take the standard deduction?
                 c. Use the simplified 2018 tax tables to determine their taxes.
                d. What is their final tax refund or amount still owed?
2.5. INCOME TAXES  107

16. Francis and Edward are planning to get married and they want to determine whether there is an
      advantage or disadvantage to marrying before the end of the year and filing their taxes jointly. Use the
      information below to calculate the amount they would owe or receive if they each filed as single, and the
      amount they would owe or receive if they filed jointly as a married couple. Which is the better choice?

          · Filing Status: TBD

          · Francis' Gross Income: $45,000

          · Edward's Gross Income: $50,000

          · Francis' Adjustments: $8,000

          · Edward's Adjustments: $4,000

          · Francis' Withholdings: $3,000

          · Edward's Withholdings: $3,500

          · Francis' Credits: $4,000

          · Edward's Credits: $1,000
17. Janice is unmarried and has two kids. She earned $96,000 in wages last year, received $850 in interest

      from a savings account, and contributed $26,000 to a tax deferred savings account. Her itemized
      deductions are $22,600.

          a. Determine Janice's gross income.

          b. Determine Janice's adjusted gross income.

          c. Should Janice take the standard deduction or itemize? Explain.

          d. Determine Janice's taxable income.

          e. If Janice has $4,000 in child tax credits and had $5,300 withheld for taxes from her wages, will
              Janice owe money, or will she receive a refund? Calculate the amount.
108                                                     CHAPTER 2. FINANCIAL MATH

2.6 Chapter 2 Review

1. If you deposit $1,525 in an account at 5.6% APR for fourteen years, how much will you have in the
      account and how much interest did you earn after 14 years if:

a. The interest is compounded using simple interest.

b. The interest is compounded quarterly.

c. The interest is compounded weekly.

          d. The interest is compounded continuously.

2. Alicia takes out a $2,300 loan that charges 15% APR simple interest. How much will she pay if she has
      the loan for 3 years? How much interest did she pay?

3. Devon invests $25,000 into an account for 15 years. He earns 6.5% interest compounded quarterly.
      What is the future value and how much interest did he earn?

4. The current inflation rate is 2.92%. If this continues for the next 10 years find the cost of the following
      items in the year 2029. Note: Inflation is Continuous Compound Interest.

a. Gas Average: $3.49

b. Dozen Eggs: $1.99

c. Bread: $3.29

d. Basic Monthly Cell Phone bill: $79.99

          e. Average cost of downloading a song: $1.99

5. You are purchasing new furniture that costs $3500. You are required to make a down payment of $350.
      The loan will be a simple interest at 13% APR and the length of the loan will be 28 months. What is
      your monthly payment and how much did you pay back?

6. Tom has misplaced the sales contract for his car and cannot remember the amount he originally financed.
      He does know that the interest rate was 9.6% APR for 60 months and the simple interest loan required
      a total of 60 payments at $254.23. What is the amount of money that Tom borrowed?

7. For each find the future value, the total amount deposited, and the interest earned.

a. Regular Deposit $350, Compounded Monthly, 6.5% APR for 25 years

b. Regular Deposit $500, Compounded Quarterly, 6.5% APR for 15 years

          c. Regular Deposit $75, Compounded Weekly, 4.5% APR for 30 years

8. For each house find the monthly payment for a 30 year loan and 5% APR. Find the amount of interest
      you pay on each loan.

· House 1: John's Landing Townhouse: $299,900

          · House 2: Gresham 4 bedroom House: $389,900
9. Find the net monthly cash flow (1 month = 4 weeks)

Income:                                        Expense
Job Income: $475 per week                      Rent: $650 per month
Loan: $2500 per term. (10 weeks)               Groceries: $55 per week
                                               Tuition and fees: $3000 per term
                                               Books: $255 per term
                                               Miscellaneous: $75 per week
2.6. CHAPTER 2 REVIEW  109

10. Pat loves painting. With tax, the total spent is about $46 each month on supplies. Once a week (52
      weeks per year) the art class cost Pat $15.75. How much is Pat spending on painting in a year?

11. If you are in the 12% tax bracket and can take a $1,000 deduction, how much will your tax bill decrease
      by?

12. If you are in the 12% tax bracket and can take a $1,000 credit, how much will your tax bill decrease
      by?

13. Amir's made $43,000 in wages and $1000 in tips. He contributed $3,000 into his IRA account.

          a. Find Amir's Gross Income.

          b. Find Amir's Adjusted Gross Income (AGI).
14. Amir has $9,540 he could take in itemized deductions. The standard deduction for a single filer is

      $14,600 for the 2024 tax year.

          a. Find Amir's taxable income.

          b. Use the 2024 tax table determine to determine how much Amir owes in taxes.
15. Amir can take a $1200 education credit and has had $2500 withheld from his paychecks. Determine the

      amount Amir will owe or be refunded.
Chapter 3

Statistics

Dr. David Blackwell and Statistics.
Dr. David Blackwell1 (1919 - 2010) was a theoretical statistician noted for
his teaching and work in game theory and probability theory. He was the
first and only African American member of the National Academy of Sci-
ences (Williams, 2008). Blackwell's research in mathematics and statistics
have found application in many fields including economics and accounting.
Dr. Blackwell grew up in Centralia, Ill. In school, he was intrigued by
geometry and calculus. His high school math club advisor would challenge
members with problems from the School Science and Mathematics journal
and submit their solutions. Blackwell was identified three times in the
magazine as having solved problems and one of his solutions was published
(David Harold Blackwell: National Visionary Leadership Project: African
American History, 2013).
At 16, Blackwell enrolled at the University of Illinois and majored in mathematics. After three years, he
graduated and continued at the university to obtain his master's and doctorate degrees. Dr. Blackwell
was given a one-year appointment as a Rosenwald Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study
at Princeton University in 1941. It was common for Institute members to be made visiting fellows of
Princeton. This created a controversy because there were no Black students enrolled at the university
during that time. Princeton's president wrote a letter to the Institute protesting Blackwell's admission, but
the Institute honored the appointment (David Harold Blackwell: National Visionary Leadership Project:
African American History, 2013).
When his fellowship was drawing to a close, Dr. Blackwell applied for teaching positions at 105 Black colleges.
He didn't apply to white institutions because he assumed they would not accept him because of his race
(Williams, 2008). His first teaching job was at Southern University in Baton Rouge, La.
Dr. Blackwell's focus later shifted to the field of statistics and is famous for the Rao-Blackwell Theorem.
In 1954, he accepted a professorship at the University of California at Berkeley, where he was previously
unable to teach due to racism. By 1956, he was appointed chairman of the statistics department. He
continued teaching and publishing a substantial amount of research until his retirement as professor emeritus
in 1989. He is the recipient of numerous awards and holds honorary degrees from 12 universities, among
them Carnegie-Mellon, Yale, Howard and Harvard.

    1Photo: "David Blackwell" by George M. Bergman is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

                                                                     111
112                                      CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.1 Overview of the Statistical Process

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Define and identify the population, parameter, sample and statistic

   · Identify four sampling methods: simple random sample (SRS), stratified, systematic and convenience

   · Identify and discuss types of bias association with sampling

   · Distinguish between experimental and observational studies

   · Explain margin of error and confidence intervals

Introduction to Statistics. We are bombarded by information and statistics every day. But if we cannot
distinguish credible information from misleading information, then we are vulnerable to manipulation and
making decisions that are not in our best interest. Statistics provides tools for us to evaluate information
critically. In this sense, statistics is one of the most important things to know about.
Statistics are often presented to add credibility to an argument. To give some examples, here are some claims
that we have heard on several occasions. (We are not saying that each one of these claims is true!)

   · 4 out of 5 dentists recommend Dentyne.

   · Almost 85% of lung cancers in men and 45% in women are tobacco-related.

   · Condoms are effective 94% of the time.

   · People tend to be more persuasive when they look others directly in the eye and speak loudly and
       quickly.

   · Women make 75 cents to every dollar a man makes when they work the same job.

   · A surprising new study shows that eating egg whites can increase one's life span.

   · People predict that it is very unlikely there will ever be another baseball player with a batting average
       over 400.

   · There is an 80% chance that in a room full of 30 people that at least two people will share the same
       birthday.

   · 79.48% of all statistics are made up on the spot.

All these claims are statistical in character. We suspect that some of them sound familiar; if not, you
have probably heard other claims like them. Notice how diverse the examples are; they come from psy-
chology, health, law, sports, business, etc. Data and data-interpretation show up in virtually every facet of
contemporary life.
Many of these numbers do not represent careful statistical analysis. They can be misleading and push you
into decisions that you might regret. This chapter will help you learn the skills to be a critical consumer of
statistical claims.

3.1.1 Statistical Process

To give you an overview, here is a diagram of the steps taken in a poll or other statistical study, and the
elements in each step that we will discuss in this chapter. We will use many examples to illustrate the whole
process.
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS                                       113

3.1.2 Population

Before we begin gathering any data to analyze, we need to identify the population we are studying. The
population of a study is the group we want to know something about. The population could be people,
auto parts or tomato plants.

If we want to know the amount of money spent on textbooks by a typical college student, our population
might be all students at Portland Community College. Or it might be:

1. All community college students in the state of Oregon.
2. All students at public colleges and universities in the state of Oregon.
3. All students at all colleges and universities in the state of Oregon.
4. All students at all colleges and universities in the entire United States.
5. And so on.

The intended population is also called the target population, since if we design our study badly, the
collected data might not actually be representative of the intended population.

Example 3.1.2 A newspaper website contains a poll asking people their opinion on a recent news article.
What is the population?

Solution. While the target (intended) population may have been all people, the real population of the

survey is readers of the website.                                              

3.1.3 Parameter

A parameter is the value (percentage, average, etc.) that we are interested in for the whole population.
Since it is often too time-consuming, expensive and/or impossible to get data for the entire population, the
parameter is usually a theoretical quantity that we are trying to estimate. For example, the typical amount
of money spent per year on textbooks by students at your college in a year is a parameter.
114                                                                      CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.1.4 Sample

To estimate the parameter, we select a sample, which is a smaller subset of the entire population. It is very
important that we choose a representative sample, one that matches the characteristics of the population,
to have a good estimate. If we survey 100 students at your college, those students would be our sample. We
will talk about how to choose a representative sample later in this section.

3.1.5 Statistic

To get our data, we would then ask each student in the sample how much they spent on textbooks and
record the answers, or raw data. Then we could calculate the average, which is our statistic. A statistic
is a value (percentage, average, etc.) calculated using data from a sample.

Example 3.1.3 A researcher wants to know how the citizens of Portland feel about a voter initiative. To
study this, they go downtown to the Pioneer Place Mall and survey 500 shoppers. Sixty percent indicate
they are supportive of the initiative. Identify the population, parameter, sample and statistic.

Solution. Population: While the intended population of this survey is Portland citizens, the effective

population is Pioneer Place Mall shoppers. There is no reason to assume that shoppers at this mall would

be representative of all Portland citizens.

Parameter: The parameter is what we want to know about the population, the percentage of Portland

citizens that support the initiative.

Sample: The sample is the subgroup of the population selected. The 500 shoppers questioned make up the

sample, which, again, is probably not representative of the population.

Statistic: The statistic is calculated using the data from the sample. The percentage of people sampled who

support the initiative is 60%.                                           

3.1.6 Sampling

As we mentioned in a previous section, the first thing we should do before conducting a survey is to identify
the population that we want to study. Suppose we are hired by a politician to determine the amount
of support they have among the electorate should they decide to run for another term. What population
should we study? Every person in the district? Eligible voters might be better, but what if they don't
register? Registered voters may not vote. What about "likely voters?"

This is the criteria used in a lot of political polling, but it is sometimes difficult to define a "likely voter." Here
is an example of the challenges of political polling.

Example 3.1.4 In November 1998, former professional wrestler Jesse "The Body" Ventura was elected
governor of Minnesota. Up until right before the election, most polls showed he had little chance of winning.
There were several contributing factors to the polls not reflecting the actual intent of the electorate:

· Ventura was running on a third-party ticket and most polling methods are better suited to a two-
   candidate race.

· Many respondents to polls may have been embarrassed to tell pollsters that they were planning to vote
   for a professional wrestler.

· The mere fact that the polls showed Ventura had little chance of winning might have prompted some
   people to vote for him in protest to send a message to the major-party candidates.

But one of the major contributing factors was that Ventura recruited a substantial amount of support from

young people, particularly college students, who had never voted before and who registered specifically to

vote in that election. The polls did not deem these young people likely voters (since in most cases young

people have a lower rate of voter registration and a lower turnout rate for elections) so the polling samples

were subject to sampling bias: they omitted a portion of the electorate that was weighted in favor of the

winning candidate.                                                       
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS                                115

So, identifying the population can be a difficult job, but once we have identified the population, how do we
choose a good sample? We want our statistic to estimate the parameter we are interested in, so we need
to have a representative sample. Returning to our hypothetical job as a political pollster, we would not
anticipate very accurate results if we drew all of our samples from customers at a Starbucks, or your list of
TikTok followers. How do we get a sample that resembles our population?

3.1.7 Sampling Methods

One way to get a representative sample is to use randomness. We will look at three types of sampling that
use randomness and one that does not.

3.1.8 Simple random sample (SRS)

A simple random sample, abbreviated SRS, is one in which every member of the population has an equal
probability of being chosen.

Example 3.1.5 If we could somehow identify all likely voters in the state, put each of their names on a

piece of paper, toss the slips into a (very large) hat and draw 1000 slips out of the hat, we would have a

simple random sample.                                                   

In practice, computers are better suited for this sort of endeavor. It is always possible, however, that even
a random sample might end up not being totally representative of the population. If we repeatedly take
samples of 1000 people from among the population of likely voters in the state of Oregon, some of these
samples might tend to have a slightly higher percentage of Democrats (or Republicans) than the general
population; some samples might include more older people and some samples might include more younger
people; etc. This is called sampling variation. If there are certain groups that we want to make sure are
represented, we might instead use a stratified sample.

3.1.9 Stratified sampling

In stratified sampling, a population is divided into a number of subgroups (or strata). Random samples
are then taken from each subgroup. It is often desirable to make the sample sizes proportional to the size of
each subgroup in the population.

Example 3.1.6 Suppose that data from voter registrations in the state indicated that the electorate was

comprised of 39% Democrats, 37% Republicans and 24% Independents. In a sample of 1000 people, they

would then expect to get about 390 Democrats, 370 Republicans and 240 Independents. To accomplish this,

they could randomly select 390 people from among those voters known to be Democrats, 370 from those

known to be Republicans, and 240 from those with no party affiliation.  

A way to remember stratified sampling is think about having a piece of layer cake. Each layer represents a
stratum or subgroup, and a slice of the cake represents a sample of each layer.

3.1.10 Systematic sampling

In systematic sampling, every nth member of the population is selected to be in the sample. The starting
position is often chosen at random.

Example 3.1.7 To select a systematic sample, Portland Community College could use their database to
select a random student from the first 100 student ID numbers. Then they would select every 100th student
ID number after that. Systematic sampling is not as random as a simple random sample (if your ID number
is right next to your friend's because you applied at the same time, you could not both end up in the same
sample) but it can yield acceptable samples. This method can be useful for people waiting in lines, parts on
116                                        CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS
a manufacturing line, or plants in a row.                                     

3.1.11 Convenience sampling

Convenience sampling is when samples are chosen by selecting whomever is convenient. This is the worst
type of sampling because it does not use randomness.

Example 3.1.8 A pollster stands on a street corner and interviews the first 100 people who agree to speak

to them. This is a convenience sample.     

3.1.12 Statistical Bias

There is no way to correct for biased data, so it is very important to think through the entire study and data
analysis before we start. We talked about sampling or selection bias, which is when the sample is not
representative of the population. One example of this is voluntary response bias, which is bias introduced
by only collecting data from those who volunteer to participate. This can lead to bias if the people who
volunteer have different characteristics than the general population. Here is a summary of some additional
sources of bias.

3.1.13 Types of bias

Sampling bias - when the sample is not representative of the population

Voluntary response bias - the sampling bias that often occurs when the sample is made up of volunteers

Self-interest study - bias that can occur when the researchers have an interest in the outcome

Response bias - when the responder gives inaccurate responses for any reason

Perceived lack of anonymity - when the responder fears giving an honest answer might negatively affect
them

Loaded questions - when the question wording influences the responses

Non-response bias - when people refuse to participate in a study or drop out of an experiment, we can
no longer be certain that our sample is representative of the population

Sources of bias may be conscious or unconscious. They may be innocent or as intentional as pressuring by
a pollster. Here are some examples of the types of bias.

Example 3.1.9

    a. Consider a recent study which found that chewing gum may raise math grades in teenagers1. This
        study was conducted by the Wrigley Science Institute, a branch of the Wrigley chewing gum company.
        This is an example of a self-interest study; one in which the researches have a vested interest in the
        outcome of the study. While this does not necessarily mean the study was biased, we should subject
        the study to extra scrutiny.

    b. Consider online reviews of products and businesses. Customers tend to leave reviews if they are very
        satisfied or very dissatisfied. While you can look for overall patterns and get useful information, these
        reviews suffer from voluntary response bias and likely capture more extreme views than the general
        population.

    c. A survey asks participants a question about their interactions with people of different ethnicities. This
        study could suffer from response bias. A respondent might give an untruthful answer to not be perceived
        as racist.

    d. An employer puts out a survey asking their employees if they have a drug abuse problem and need
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS  117

treatment help. Here, answering truthfully might have serious consequences; responses might not be
accurate if there is a perceived lack of anonymity and employees fear retribution.

e. A survey asks, "Do you support funding research on alternative energy sources to reduce our reliance
   on high-polluting fossil fuels?" This is an example of a loaded or leading question - questions whose
   wording leads the respondent towards a certain answer.

f. A poll was conducted by phone with the question, "Do you often have time to relax and read a book?"
   Fifty percent of the people who were called refused to participate in the survey (Probably because they
   didn't have the time). It is unlikely that the results will be representative of the entire population.
   This is an example of non-response bias.

                                                                                                                                            

Loaded questions can occur intentionally by pollsters with an agenda, or accidentally through poor question
wording. Also of concern is question order, where the order of questions changes the results. Here is an
example from a psychology researcher2:

Example 3.1.10 "My favorite finding is this: we did a study where we asked students, 'How satisfied are you

with your life? How often do you have a date?' The two answers were not statistically related - you would

conclude that there is no relationship between dating frequency and life satisfaction. But when we reversed

the order and asked, 'How often do you have a date? How satisfied are you with your life?' the statistical

relationship was a strong one. You would now conclude that there is nothing as important in a student's life

as dating frequency."                     

3.1.14 Observational Studies

So far, we have primarily discussed surveys and polls, which are types of observational studies - studies
based on observations or measurements. These observations may be solicited, like in a survey or poll. Or,
they may be unsolicited, such as studying the percentage of cars that turn right at a red light even when
there is a "no turn on red" sign.

3.1.15 Experiments

In contrast, it is common to use experiments when exploring how subjects react to an outside influence. In
an experiment, some kind of treatment is applied to the subjects and the results are measured and recorded.
When conducting experiments, it is essential to isolate the treatment being tested. Here are some examples
of treatments.
Example 3.1.11

   a. A pharmaceutical company tests a new medicine for treating Alzheimer's disease by administering the
       drug to 50 elderly patients with recent diagnoses. The treatment here is the new drug.

   b. A gym tests out a new weight loss program by enlisting 30 volunteers to try out the program. The
       treatment here is the new program.

   c. A psychology researcher explores the effect of music on affect by measuring people's mood while listening
       to different types of music. The music is the treatment.

   d. Suppose a middle school finds that their students are not scoring well on the state's standardized math
       test. They decide to run an experiment to see if a new curriculum would improve scores. To run the
       test, they hire a math specialist to come in and teach a class using the new curriculum. To their delight,
       they see an improvement in test scores.

   1Reuters. news.yahoo.com/s/nm/20090423/od_uk_nm/oukoe_uk_gum_learning. Retrieved 4/27/09
   2Swartz, Norbert. umich.edu/~newsinfo/MT/01/Fal01/mt6f01.html Retrieved 3/31/2009
118  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

     The difficulty with the last scenario is that it is not clear whether the new curriculum or the math
     specialist is responsible for the improvement. This is called confounding and it is the downfall of many
     experiments, though it is often hidden.

                                                                                                                                         

3.1.16 Confounding

Confounding occurs when there are two or more potential variables that could have caused the outcome
and it is not possible to determine which one actually caused the result.

Example 3.1.12

   a. A drug company study about a weight loss pill might report that people lost an average of 8 pounds
       while using their new drug. However, in the fine print you find a statement saying that participants
       were encouraged to also diet and exercise. It is not clear in this case whether the weight loss is due to
       the pill, to diet and exercise, or a combination of both. In this case confounding has occurred.

   b. Researchers conduct an experiment to determine whether students will perform better on an arithmetic
       test if they listen to music during the test. They first give the student a test without music, then give
       a similar test while the student listens to music. In this case, the student might perform better on the
       second test, regardless of the music, simply because it was the second test and they were warmed up.

                                                                                                                                            
There are a number of measures that can be introduced to help reduce the likelihood of confounding. The
primary measure is to use a control group.

3.1.17 Control group

In experiments, the participants are typically divided into a treatment group and a control group. The
treatment group receives the treatment being tested; the control group does not receive the treatment.

Ideally, the groups are otherwise as similar as possible, isolating the treatment as the only potential source of
difference between the groups. For this reason, the method of dividing groups is important. Some researchers
attempt to ensure that the groups have similar characteristics (same number of each gender identity, same
number of people over 50, etc.), but it is nearly impossible to control for every characteristic. Because of
this, random assignment is very commonly used.

Example 3.1.13

   a. To determine if a two-day prep course would help high school students improve their scores on the SAT
       test, a group of students was randomly divided into two subgroups. The first group, the treatment
       group, was given a two-day prep course. The second group, the control group, was not given the prep
       course. Afterwards, both groups took the SAT test.

   b. A company testing a new plant food grows two crops of plants in adjacent fields that typically produce
       the same amount of food. The treatment group receives the new plant food and the control group does
       not. The crop yields would then be compared. By growing the two crops at the same time in similar
       fields, they are controlling for weather and other confounding factors.

                                                                                                                                            
Sometimes not giving the control group anything does not completely control for confounding variables. For
example, suppose a medicine study is testing a new headache pill by giving the treatment group the pill and
the control group nothing. If the treatment group showed improvement, we would not know whether it was
due to the medicine, or a response to have something. This is called a placebo effect.
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS                     119

3.1.18 Placebo effect

The placebo effect is when the effectiveness of a treatment is influenced by the patient's perception of how
effective they think the treatment will be, so a result might be seen even if the treatment is ineffectual.

Example 3.1.14 A study found that when doing painful dental tooth extractions, patients told they were

receiving a strong painkiller while actually receiving a saltwater injection found as much pain relief as patients

receiving a dose of morphine.3                               

To control for the placebo effect, a placebo, or dummy treatment, is often given to the control group. This
way, both groups are truly identical except for the specific treatment given.

3.1.19 Placebo and Placebo-controlled experiments

An experiment that gives the control group a placebo is called a placebo-controlled experiment.

Example 3.1.15

   a. In a study for a new medicine that is dispensed in a pill form, a sugar pill could be used as a placebo.

   b. In a study on the effect of alcohol on memory, a non-alcoholic beer might be given to the control group
       as a placebo.

   c. In a study of a frozen meal diet plan, the treatment group would receive the diet food, and the control
       group could be given standard frozen meals taken out of their original packaging.

                                                                                                                                            
In some cases, it is more appropriate to compare to a conventional treatment than a placebo. For example,
in a cancer research study, it would not be ethical to deny any treatment to the control group or to give a
placebo treatment. In this case, the currently acceptable medicine would be given to the second group, called
a comparison group. In our SAT test example, the non-treatment group would most likely be encouraged
to study on their own, rather than be asked to not study at all, to provide a meaningful comparison. It is
very important to consider the ethical ramifications of any experiment.

3.1.20 Blind studies

A blind study is one that uses a placebo and the participants do not know whether they are receiving the
treatment or a placebo. A double-blind study is one in which the subjects and those interacting with them
don't know who is in the treatment group and who is in the control group.

Example 3.1.16 In a study about anti-depression medication, you would not want the psychological eval-

uator to know whether a patient is in the treatment or control group, as it might influence their evaluation.

The experiment should be conducted as a double-blind study.  

3.1.21 Margin of Error and Confidence Intervals

Even when a study or experiment has successfully avoided bias and has been well done, there is still an
element of variation. If we took 5 different random samples of 100 college students and calculated their
average textbook cost, we wouldn't expect to get the exact same average for each sample. This is due to
sampling variation. To account for this, researchers publish their margin of error or a confidence interval for
their statistics. These numbers describe the precision of the estimate for a certain confidence level.

   3Levine JD, Gordon NC, Smith R, Fields HL. (1981) Analgesic responses to morphine and placebo in individuals with
postoperative pain. Pain. 10:379-89.
120                                                                     CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

You've probably heard something like, "The candidate has 54 percent of the likely voters, plus or minus
three percent." The 3% is called the margin of error, so the true percentage is somewhere between 51%
and 57%, with a certain level of confidence. To write this as a confidence interval, we place the numbers
in parentheses from smallest to largest, separated by a comma: (51%, 57%).

The most common confidence level is 95%, which means if the poll was conducted repeatedly, and we
made a confidence interval each time, we would expect the true percentage, or parameter, to fall within our
confidence interval 95 out of 100 times. You can learn more on how to calculate the margin of error for
different confidence levels in a statistics class.

Example 3.1.17 Let's say we asked a random sample of 100 students at Portland Community College and
found that they spent an average of $451.32 on books their first year, plus or minus $85.63. Write this as a
confidence interval, assuming a 95% confidence level.

Solution. If the margin of error was calculated to be plus or minus $85.63, then with a confidence level

of 95% we could say that the average amount spent by the population is somewhere between $365.69 and

$536.95.

These values are found by computing $451.32 - $85.63 = $365.69 and $451.32 + $85.63 = $536.95

We could also write this as a confidence interval: ($365.69, $536.95).

Now we have come full circle and seen how we can use data from a sample to estimate the parameter we

were interested in for our population.                                                         

3.1.22 Exercises

1. Describe the difference between a sample and a population.
2. Describe the difference between a statistic and a parameter.
3. The ASPCC randomly selects 200 students from PCC Cascade campus to participate in a childcare

      survey in order to determine the demand for additional childcare options for PCC students.

          a. Who is the intended population?

          b. What is the sample?

          c. Is the collected data representative of the intended population? Why or why not?
4. A local research firm randomly selects 1200 homes in Washington County to determine support for

      adding compost pick up to residents' regular garbage service.

          a. Who is the intended population?

          b. What is the sample?

          c. Is the collected data representative of the intended population? Why or why not?
5. A political scientist surveys 28 of the current 106 representatives in a state's congress. Of them, 14

      said they were supporting a new education bill, 12 said there were not supporting the bill, and 2 were
      undecided.

          a. Who is the population of this survey?

          b. What is the size of the population?

          c. What is the size of the sample?

          d. Give the statistic for the percentage of representatives surveyed who said they were supporting
              the education bill.

          e. If the margin of error was 5%, give the confidence interval for the percentage of representatives
              we might we expect to support the education bill and explain what the confidence interval tells
              us.
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS  121

6. The city of Raleigh has 9,500 registered voters. There are two candidates for city council in an upcoming
      election: Brown and Feliz. The day before the election, a telephone poll of 350 randomly selected
      registered voters was conducted. 112 said they'd vote for Brown, 207 said they'd vote for Feliz, and 31
      were undecided.

          a. Who is the population of this survey?

          b. What is the size of the population?

          c. What is the size of the sample?

          d. Give the statistic for the percentage of voters surveyed who said they'd vote for Brown.

          e. If the margin of error was 3.5%, give the confidence interval for the percentage of voters surveyed
              that we might we expect to vote for Brown and explain what the confidence interval tells us.

7. To determine the average length of trout in a lake, researchers catch 20 fish and measure them. Describe
      the population and sample of this study.

8. To determine the average diameter of evergreen trees in a forested park, researchers randomly tag 45
      specimens and measure their diameter. Describe the population and sample of this study.

9. A college reports that the average age of their students is 28 years old. Is this a parameter or a statistic?
10. A local newspaper reports that among a sample of 250 subscribers, 45% are over the age of 50. Is this

      a parameter or a statistic?
11. A recent survey reported that 64% of respondents were in favor of expanding the BIKETOWN bike

      share system to the greater Portland area. Is this a parameter or a statistic?
12. Which sampling method is being described?

          a. In a study, the sample is chosen by separating all cars by size and selecting 10 of each size grouping.

          b. In a study, the sample is chosen by writing everyone's name on a playing card, shuffling the deck,
              then choosing the top 20 cards.

          c. Every 4th person on the class roster was selected.
13. Which sampling method is being described?

          a. A sample was selected to contain 25 people aged 18-34 and 30 people aged 35-70.

          b. Viewers of a new show are asked to respond to a poll on the show's website.

          c. To survey voters in a town, a polling company randomly selects 100 addresses from a database
              and interviews those residents.

14. Identify the most relevant source of bias in each situation.

          a. A survey asks the following: Should the mall prohibit loud and annoying rock music in clothing
              stores catering to teenagers?

          b. To determine opinions on voter support for a downtown renovation project, a surveyor randomly
              questions people working in downtown businesses.

          c. A survey asks people to report their actual income and the income they reported on their IRS tax
              form.

          d. A survey randomly calls people from the phone book and asks them to answer a long series of
              questions.

          e. The Beef Council releases a study stating that consuming red meat poses little cardiovascular risk.

           f. A poll asks, "Do you support a new transportation tax, or would you prefer to see our public
              transportation system fall apart?"
122  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

15. Identify the most relevant source of bias in each situation.

          a. A survey asks the following: Should the death penalty be permitted if innocent people might die?

          b. A study seeks to investigate whether a new pain medication is safe to market to the public. They
              test by randomly selecting 300 people who identify as men from a set of volunteers.

          c. A survey asks how many sexual partners a person has had in the last year.

          d. A radio station asks listeners to phone in their response to a daily poll.

          e. A substitute teacher wants to know how students in the class did on their last test. The teacher
              asks the 10 students sitting in the front row to state their latest test score.

           f. High school students are asked if they have consumed alcohol in the last two weeks.
16. Identify whether each situation describes an observational study or an experiment.

          a. The temperature on randomly selected days throughout the year was measured.

          b. One group of students listened to music and another group did not while they took a test and
              their scores were recorded.

          c. The weights of 30 randomly selected people are measured.
17. Identify whether each situation describes an observational study or an experiment.

          a. Subjects are asked to do 20 jumping jacks, and then their heart rates are measured.

          b. Twenty coffee drinkers and twenty tea drinkers are given a concentration test.

          c. The weights of potato chip bags are weighed on the production line before they are put into boxes.
18. A team of researchers is testing the effectiveness of a new vaccine for human papilloma virus (HPV).

      They randomly divide the subjects into two groups. Group 1 receives new HPV vaccine, and Group 2
      receives the existing HPV vaccine. The patients in the study do not know which group they are in.

          a. Which is the treatment group?

          b. Which is the control group (if there is one)?

          c. Is this study blind, double-blind, or neither?

          d. Is this best described as an experiment, a controlled experiment, or a placebo-controlled experi-
              ment?

19. Studies are often done by pharmaceutical companies to determine the effectiveness of a treatment.
      Suppose that a new cancer treatment is under study. Of interest is the average length of time in months
      patients live once starting the treatment. Two researchers each follow a different set of 40 cancer patients
      throughout this new treatment.

          a. What is the population of this study?

          b. Would you expect the data from the two researchers to be identical? Why or why not?

          c. If the first researcher collected their data by randomly selecting 8 patients from each of 5 local
              hospitals, which sampling method did they use?

          d. If the second researcher collected their data by choosing 40 patients they knew, what sampling
              method did they use? What concerns would you have about this data set, based upon the data
              collection method?

20. For the clinical trials of a weight loss drug containing Garcinia Cambogia the subjects were randomly
      divided into two groups. The first received an inert pill along with an exercise and diet plan, while the
3.1. OVERVIEW OF THE STATISTICAL PROCESS  123

      second received the test medicine along with the same exercise and diet plan. The patients do not know
      which group they are in, nor do the fitness and nutrition advisors.

          a. Which is the treatment group?

          b. Which is the control group (if there is one)?

          c. Is this study blind, double-blind, or neither?

          d. Is this best described as an experiment, a controlled experiment, or a placebo-controlled experi-
              ment?

21. A study is conducted to determine whether people learn better with routine or crammed studying.
      Subjects volunteer from an introductory psychology class. At the beginning of the semester 12 subjects
      volunteer and are assigned to the routine studying group. At the end of the semester 12 subjects
      volunteer and are assigned to the crammed studying group.

          a. Identify the target population and the sample.

          b. Is this an observational study or an experiment?

          c. This study involves two kinds of non-random sampling: 1. Subjects are not randomly sampled
              from a specified population and 2. Subjects are not randomly assigned to groups. Which problem
              is more serious? What effect on the results does each have?

22. To test a new lie detector, two groups of subjects are given the new test. One group is asked to answer
      all the questions truthfully. The second group is asked to tell the truth on the first half of the questions
      and lie on the second half. The person administering the lie detector test does not know what group
      each subject is in. Does this experiment have a control group? Is it blind, double-blind, or neither?
      Explain.

23. A poll found that 30%, plus or minus 5% of college freshmen prefer morning classes to afternoon classes.

          a. What is the margin of error?

          b. Write the survey results as a confidence interval.

          c. Explain what the confidence interval tells us about the percentage of college freshmen who prefer
              morning classes?

24. A poll found that 38% of U.S. employees are engaged at work, plus or minus 3.5%.

          a. What is the margin of error?

          b. Write the survey results as a confidence interval.

          c. Explain what the confidence interval tells us about the percentage of U.S. employees who are
              engaged at work?

25. A recent study reported a confidence interval of (24%, 36%) for the percentage of U.S. adults who plan
      to purchase an electric car in the next 5 years.

          a. What is the statistic from this study?

          b. What is the margin of error?
26. A recent study reported a confidence interval of (44%, 52%) for the percentage of two-year college

      students who are food insecure.

          a. What is the statistic from this study?

          b. What is the margin of error?
124  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

27. A farmer believes that playing Barry Manilow songs to his peas will increase their yield. Describe a
      controlled experiment the farmer could use to test his theory.

28. A sports psychologist believes that people are more likely to be extroverted as an adult if they played
      team sports as a child. Describe two possible studies to test this theory. Design one as an observational
      study and the other as an experiment. Which is more practical?

29. Find a newspaper or magazine article, or the online equivalent, describing the results of a recent study
      (not a simple poll). Give a summary of the study's findings, then analyze whether the article provided
      enough information to determine the validity of the conclusions. If not, produce a list of things that are
      missing from the article that would help you determine the validity of the study. Look for the things
      discussed in the text: population, sample, randomness, blind, control, margin of error, etc.

30. Use a polling website such as pewresearch.com or gallup.com and search for a poll that interests you.
      Find the result, the margin of error and confidence level for the poll and write the confidence interval.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                           125

3.2 Describing Data

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Define and identify categorical and quantitative data

   · Read and construct frequency tables and relative frequency tables

   · Make bar charts and pie charts for categorical variables by hand and/or using technology

   · Identify elements of misleading graphs: 3-dimensional graphs, perceptual distortion, misleading scales,
       stacked bar graphs

   · Make histograms for quantitative variables by hand and/or using technology

   · Identify the number of modes in a distribution and whether it is symmetric, skewed to the left, or
       skewed to the right

Once we have collected data from an observational study or an experiment, we need to summarize and
present it in a way that will be meaningful to our audience. The raw data is not very useful by itself. In
this section we will begin with graphical presentations of data and in the rest of the chapter we will learn
about numerical summaries of data.

3.2.1 Types of Data

There are two types of data, categorical data and quantitative data. The word data is plural because it
represents many pieces of information.

Categorical (qualitative) data are pieces of information that allow us to classify the subjects into various
categories.

Example 3.2.2 We might conduct a survey to determine the name of the favorite movie that people saw

in a movie theater. When we conduct such a survey, the responses would look like: Finding Nemo, Black

Panther, Titanic, etc.

We can count the number of people who give each answer, but the answers themselves do not have any numer-

ical values: we cannot perform computations with an answer like "Black Panther" because it is categorical

data.                                                          

Quantitative data are responses that are numerical in nature and with which we can perform meaningful
calculations.

Example 3.2.3 A survey could ask the number of movies you have seen in a movie theater in the past 12

months (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...). This would be quantitative data.  

Other examples of quantitative data would be the running time of the movie you saw most recently (104
minutes, 137 minutes, 110 minutes, etc.) or the amount of money you paid for a movie ticket the last time
you went to a movie theater ($5.50, $9.75, $10.50, etc.).

We cannot assume that all numbers are quantitative data, and sometimes it is not so clear-cut. Here are
some examples to illustrate this.

Example 3.2.4

a. Suppose we gather respondents' ZIP codes in a survey to track their geographical location. ZIP codes
   are numbers, but we can't do any meaningful calculations with them (it doesn't make sense to say that
   98036 is "twice" 49018 -- that's like saying that Lynnwood, WA is "twice" Battle Creek, MI, which
   doesn't make sense at all), so ZIP codes are really categorical data.
126                                                       CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

b. A survey about the movie you most recently saw includes the question, "How would you rate the
    movie?" with these possible answers:

     1 It was awful.
     2 It was just okay.
     3 I liked it.
     4 It was great.
     5 Best movie ever!

Again, there are numbers associated with the responses, but these are really categories. A movie that rates a

4 is not necessarily twice as good as a movie that rates a 2, whatever that means; However, we often see that

a movie got an average of 3.7 stars, which is an average of categorical ratings and it can give us important

information.                                              

Overall, it is important to look at the purpose of the study for any variables that could be classified as either
categorical or quantitative. Another consideration is what you plan to do with the data. Next, we will talk
about how to display each type of data.

3.2.2 Presenting Categorical Data

Since we can't do calculations with categorical data, we begin by summarizing the data in a frequency table
or a relative frequency table.

3.2.3 Frequency Tables

A frequency table has one column for the categories, and another for the frequency, or number of times
that category occurred.

Example 3.2.5 An insurance company determines vehicle insurance premiums based on known risk factors.
If a person is considered a higher risk, their premiums will be higher. One potential factor is the color of your
car. The insurance company believes that people with some color cars are more likely to get in accidents.
To research this, they examine police reports for recent total-loss collisions. The data is summarized in this
table.

                          Car Color  Frequency of Total-
                                        Loss Collisions
                          Blue                    25
                          Green                   52
                          Red                     41
                          White                   36
                          Black                   39
                          Grey                    23
                          Total                  216

                                                          

3.2.4 Relative Frequency Tables

Counts are usually not as easy to interpret as percentages, so we will add a column for the relative frequencies.
A relative frequency is the percentage for the category, found by dividing each frequency by the total and
converting to a percentage. You'll notice the percentages may not add up to exactly 100% due to rounding.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                                                    127

Example 3.2.6

               Car Color  Frequency of Total-         Relative Frequency
                          Loss Collisions             of Total-Loss Collisions
               Blue                                   25/216 = 0.116 or 11.6%
               Green                   25             52/216 = 0.241 or 24.1%
               Red                     52             41/216 = 0.190 or 19.0%
               White                   41             36/216 = 0.167 or 16.7%
               Black                   36             39/216 = 0.181 or 18.1%
               Grey                    39             23/216 = 0.107 or 10.7%
               Total                   23             216/216 = 1.0 or 100%
                                      216

It would be even more useful to have a visual to see what is going on, and this is where charts and graphs

come in. For categorical data we can display our data using bar graphs and pie charts.  

3.2.5 Bar graphs

A bar graph is a graph that displays a bar for each category with the height of the bar indicating the
frequency of that category. To construct a bar graph with vertical bars, we label the horizontal axis with
the categories. The vertical axis will have a scale for the frequency or relative frequency.

The highest frequency in our car data is 52 colli-
sions, so we will set our vertical axis to go from 0
to 55, with a scale of 5 units. To draw bar graphs
by hand graph paper is useful, or you can use
technology. It is also very helpful to label each
bar with the frequency or relative frequency.

3.2.6 Pie Charts

A natural way to visualize relative frequencies is with a pie chart. A pie chart is a circle with wedges cut
of varying sizes like slices of pizza or pie. The size of each wedge corresponds to the relative frequency of
the category. The slices add up to 100%, just like relative frequencies. Pie charts can often benefit from
including frequencies or relative frequencies in the pie slices.

Pie charts look nice but are harder to draw by hand than bar
charts since to draw them accurately we would need to compute
the angle each wedge cuts out of the circle, then measure the
angle with a protractor. A spreadsheet is much better suited to
drawing pie charts.
128  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.2.7 Using a Spreadsheet to Make Bar Charts and Pie Charts

To make a graph using a spreadsheet, place the data from the frequency table into the cells. Then select the
data, go to the Insert tab, and choose the bar graph or pie chart that you would like. For this example, we
will choose a pie graph.

After the spreadsheet has created your pie graph you can choose which design you prefer by clicking on the
Chart Design tab. Since these pie pieces represent car colors, we matched the color of each wedge to the
color of the car in our pie chart above.

To give your graph a meaningful title, click on Chart Title. There are many other settings that you can
experiment with.

3.2.8 Misleading Graphs

Graphs can be misleading intentionally or unintentionally. It's better to keep them simple, clear and well-
labeled. People sometimes add features to graphs that don't help convey their information.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                          129

Example 3.2.7

A 3-dimensional bar chart like the one
shown is usually not as effective as a 2-
dimensional graph. The extra dimension
does not add any useful information.

Here is another way that fanciness can sometimes lead to trouble. Instead of plain bars, it is tempting to

substitute images. This type of graph is called a pictogram.  

3.2.9 Perceptual Distortion

A pictogram is a statistical graphic in which the size of the picture is intended to represent the frequency
or size of the values being represented. We need to be careful with these, because our brains perceive the
relationship between the areas, not the heights.

Example 3.2.8 A labor union might produce this graph to show the difference between the average manager
salary and the average worker salary.

The average manager salary is twice as high as the average worker
salary as in a bar graph, but the image is also twice as wide.
That makes it look like the manager salary is 4 times as large
as the worker salary. The area needs to accurately portray the
relationship, otherwise we will have a perceptual distortion.

                                                                                                                                            

3.2.10 Misleading Scale

Another type of distortion in bar charts results from setting the baseline to a value other than zero. The
baseline is the bottom of the vertical axis, representing the least number of cases that could have occurred
in a category. Normally, this number should be zero.
Example 3.2.9 Compare the two graphs below showing support for same-sex marriage rights from a poll
taken in December, 20081. At a glance, the two graphs suggest very different stories. The second graph
makes it look like more than three times as many people oppose marriage rights as support them. But when
we look at the scale we can see that the difference is about 12%. By not starting at zero the difference looks
enlarged.
130                                                                          CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

                                                                             

3.2.11 Stacked Bar Graphs

Another type of graph that can be hard to read and sometimes misleading is a stacked bar graph. In a
stacked bar graph, the values we are comparing are stacked on top of each other vertically.

Example 3.2.10 The table lists college expenses for two different students and we want to compare them.
A stacked bar graph shows the expenses stacked vertically, but we are interested in the differences, not the
totals.

     Expense               Student 1  Student 2
       Rent                    $500       $650
       Food                    $125       $125
                              $1750      $1450
     Tuition                   $325       $275
      Books                    $100       $175
       Misc

It is much easier to interpret the differences in a side-by-side bar chart.  

3.2.12 Presenting Quantitative Data

With categorical data, the horizontal axis is the category, but with quantitative, or numerical, data we have
numbers. If we have repeated values we can also make a frequency table.

   1CNN/Opinion Research Corporation Poll. Dec 19-21, 2008, from pollingreport.com/civil.htm
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                                 131

Example 3.2.11 A teacher records scores on a 20-point quiz for the 30 students in their class. The scores
in points are:

19 20 18 18 17 18 19 17 20 18 20 16 20 15 17
12 18 19 18 19 17 20 18 16 15 18 20 5 0 0

Here is a frequency table with the scores grouped and put in order.

                      Quiz    Frequency
                      Score  of Students

                         0          2
                         5          1
                        12          1
                        15          2
                        16          2
                        17          4
                        18          8
                        19          4
                        20          6

                                                                                                                                            

Using this table, it would be possible to create a standard bar chart from this summary, like we did for
categorical data. However, since the scores are numerical values, this chart wouldn't make sense; the first
and second bars would be five values apart, while the later bars would only be one value apart. Instead, we
will treat the horizontal axis as a number line. This type of graph is called a histogram.

3.2.13 Histograms

A histogram is like a bar graph, but the horizontal axis is a number line. Unlike a bar graph, there are no
spaces between the bars. Here are two histograms for the data given above. Notice that in the one on the
left, the two scores of 15 are to the right of 15, or between 15 and 16. The horizontal scales on histograms
can be confusing for this reason. Some people choose to have bars start at ½ values to avoid this ambiguity,
as in the one on the right.

If we have a large number of different data values, a frequency table listing every possible value would be
way too long. There would be too many bars on the histogram to reveal any patterns. For this reason, it is
common with quantitative data to group data into class intervals.

3.2.14 Class Intervals

Class intervals are groupings of the data. In general, we define class intervals so that:
132                                                              CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

1. Each interval is equal in size. For example, if the first class contains values from 120 up to but not
   including 135, the second class should include values from 135 up to but not including 150.

2. We typically have somewhere between 5 and 20 classes, depending on the number of data values we're
   working with.

In the next example, we'll make a histogram using class intervals.

Example 3.2.12 Suppose we have collected weights from 100 subjects who identify as male, as part of a
nutrition study. For our weight data, we have values ranging from a low of 121 pounds to a high of 263
pounds, giving a total span of 263 - 121 = 142.
There are many ways to draw a histogram and we will explain one way as an example. We will create 10
classes by doing the following calculation: Take the range of 142 and divide it by 10 to find the class width.
142/10 = 14.2
Then we round up the class width so that the largest data value will be in one of the classes. So we round
up to a class width of 15. Since the minimum data value is 121, we will choose 120 to start with since it is
a multiple of 15 that is less than 121.

 Interval   Frequency
120-134.99        4
135-149.99        14
150-164.99        16
165-179.99        28
180-194.99        12
195-209.99        8
210-224.99        7
225-239.99        6
240-254.99        2
255-269.99        3

                                                                 

When using class intervals, it is much easier to use technology that was specifically designed to make his-
tograms. GeoGebra is one program that lets you adjust the class widths to see which graph best displays
the data.

3.2.15 Histograms Using Technology

We will be using GeoGebra throughout this chapter to make graphs and calculate summary statistics. There
is an online version and one you can download at geogebra.org. To access the online version, select "GeoGebra
Classic from the GeoGebra home page. To download it, select "App Downloads" from the home page. The
instructions are similar for both.

The first thing we need to do is enter the data in GeoGebra's
spreadsheet. You can access the spreadsheet from Main Menu
View Spreadsheet. Next, enter your data and select that
column. Then click on the histogram icon in the menu bar on the
left side and select One Variable Analysis.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                                133

A new window will pop up showing a visual of the data. There
is a drop-down menu for the type of graph, but histogram is the
default. Notice that the bars are not lined up with the tick-marks
at the bottom, so we want to edit this histogram. The slider bar
at the top will let you see different class widths, but we want to
choose our class widths manually.

If you close the menu at the top right by clicking on the left
pointing triangle, you will see a settings wheel. Click on the
wheel and check the box for set classes manually. To match our
previous histogram, we will start at 120 pounds and set a class
width of 15 pounds.

Now the bars of the histogram match our previous graph, but we
need to edit the axis labels to match. Click on the graph tab on
the right side and uncheck the box for automatic dimensions. We
set the x min, x max, x step, y min, y max and y step as shown.

 To put the graph in an assignment or a book such as this one,
 select the export icon and choose Export as Picture. The down-
 loaded version also has a Copy to Clipboard option. Then insert
 the graph into any document and add axis labels.

Here is our finished histogram:

3.2.16 The Shape of a Distribution

Once we have our histogram, we can use it to determine the shape of the data or distribution. When
describing distributions, we are going to look at four characteristics: shape, center, spread and outliers.
Center and spread (variation) will be covered in the next two sections.
134  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.2.17 Modality

The modality of a distribution indicates the number of peaks or hills in its histogram.

   · It is unimodal if it has one peak.
   · It is bimodal if it has two peaks.
   · It is multimodal if it has multiple peaks.
Example 3.2.13 The first graph is unimodal, the second is bimodal and the third is multimodal.

                                                                                                                                            
A bimodal distribution can result when two different populations have been grouped together and they are
overlapping. It would be better to separate them into two separate graphs. For example, the grams of sugar
per serving in sugar and non-sugar cereals.

3.2.18 Symmetry

A distribution is symmetric if the left side of the graph mirrors the right side.
Example 3.2.14 The graph on the left is symmetric and unimodal while the graph on the right is roughly
symmetric and bimodal.

                                                                                                                                            

3.2.19 Skewness

If a distribution is not symmetric then we say it is skewed. A graph can be skewed to the left or skewed
to the right. We say it is skewed in the direction of the longer tail.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA  135

3.2.20 Skewed to the Left

A left skewed graph is also called a negatively skewed graph. The longer tail will be on the left or negative
side.

3.2.21 Skewed to the Right

A right skewed graph is also called a positively skewed graph. The longer tail will be on the right or
positive side.

3.2.22 The Normal Distribution

The normal distribution has a very specific shape. It is unimodal and symmetric with a bell-shaped
graph.

3.2.23 Outlier

Outliers are data values that are unusually far away from the rest of the data. There is often a gap between
the outlier and the rest of the graph. This visual determination of outliers is often subjective and depends
on the situation.
Example 3.2.15
136  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

       In the graph to the right we have a uni-
       modal distribution that is skewed to the
       right. There appears to be an outlier near
       20.

                                                                                                                                            

3.2.24 Exercises

1. True or False: The bars of a histogram should always touch.
2. True or False: The bars of a bar graph should always touch.
3. Is the data described categorial or quantitative?

          a. In a study, you ask the subjects their age in years.
          b. In a study, you ask the subjects their gender.
          c. In a study, you ask the subjects their ethnicity.
          d. The daily high temperature of a city over several weeks.
          e. A person's annual income.
4. Is the data described categorical or quantitative?
          a. In a study you ask the subjects how many siblings they have.
          b. In a study you ask the subjects what their favorite movie genre is.
          c. In a study to measure the subjects' blood pressure.
          d. The daily rainfall in a city over several weeks.
          e. In a study you ask the subjects the amount they spend on housing each month
5. What types of graphs are used for categorical data?
6. What types of graphs are used for quantitative data?
7. A group of adults were asked how many children they have in their family. The bar graph to the right
      shows the number of adults who indicated each number of children.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA  137

          a. How many adults had 3 children?
          b. How many adults where questioned?
          c. What percentage of the adults questioned had 0 children?
8. Jasmine was interested in how many days it would take a DVD order from Netflix to arrive at her door.
      The graph shows the data she collected.

          a. How many movies took 2 days to arrive?
          b. How many movies did she order in total?
          c. What percentage of the movies arrived in one day?
9. This relative frequency bar graph shows the percentage of students who received each letter grade on
      their last English paper. The class contains 20 students. What number of students earned an A on
      their paper?

10. This relative frequency bar graph shows the percentage of each drink type served over the weekend at
      a local coffee shop. There were 120 drinks served in total. How many served drinks were lattes?
138  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

11. Corey categorized his spending for this month into four categories: Rent, Food, Fun, and Other. The
      percentages he spent in each category are pictured here. If he spent a total of $2,600 this month, how
      much did he spend on rent?

12. Habiba categorized the amount of time spent each week into 5 categories: Work, Travel, Housework,
      Leisure, and Sleep. If there are a total of 168 hours each week, how many hours does Habiba spend
      travelling each week?
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                                                                 139

13. In a survey2, 1012 adults were asked whether they personally worried about a variety of environmental
      concerns. The number of people who indicated that they worried "a great deal" about some selected
      concerns is listed below.

          a. Is this categorical or quantitative data?

          b. Make a bar chart for these data.

          c. Why can't we make a pie chart for these data?

                     Environmenal Issue                               Frequency
               Pollution of drinking water                                 597
Contamination of soil and water by toxic waste                             526
                                                                           455
                          Air pollution                                    354
                       Global warming

14. In a survey, 2056 adults were asked about their views on immigration. The percent of people who
      responded that immigrants to the United States are making each of the following situations in the
      country better are listed below.

a. Is this categorical or quantitative data?

b. Make a relative frequency bar chart for these data.

c. Can we make a pie chart for these data?

                                  Situation     Relative Frequency (%)
                      Food, music and the arts                  57
                      The economy in general                    43
                       Social and moral values                  31

                        Job opportunities for                   19
                         you and your family
                                                                20
                                    Taxes                        7
                                    Crime

15. The following table is from a sample of five hundred homes in Oregon that were asked the primary
      source of heating in their home.

a. How many of the households heat their home with firewood?

b. What percent of households heat their home with natural gas?

                      Type of Heat            Relative Frequency (%)
                        Electricity                           33
                       Heating Oil                             4
                      Natural Gas                             50
                         Firewood                              8
                           Other                               5

16. The following table is from a sample of 50 undergraduate students at Portland State University.

a. What percent of the sampled students are below senior class?

      b. How many of the sampled students are freshmen?
2Gallup Poll. March 5-8, 2009. pollingreport.com/enviro.htm
140                                                                          CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

        Class                           Relative Frequency (%)
     Freshman                                           18
     Sophmore                                           13
                                                        23
       Junior                                           46
       Senior

17. A group of adults were asked how many cars they had in their household.

     a. Is this categorical or quantitative data?

     b. Make a relative frequency table for the data.

     c. Make a bar chart for the data.

     d. Make a pie chart for the data.

                 142212331422121322121112
18. The table below shows scores on a math test.

          a. Is this categorical or quantitative data?
          b. Make a relative frequency table for the data using a class width of 10.
          c. Construct a histogram of the data.

                                     82 55 51 97 73 79 100 60 71 85 78 59
                                     90 100 88 72 46 82 89 70 100 68 61 52

19. This graph shows the number of adults and kids who prefer each type of soda. There were 130 adults
      and kids surveyed. Discuss some ways in which the graph could be improved.

20. A poll was taken asking people if they agreed with the positions of the 4 candidates for a county office.
      Does this pie chart present a good representation of these data? Explain.
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA                                                                       141

21. Why is this a misleading or poor graph?

22. Why is this a misleading or poor graph?

23. Match each description to one of the graphs.
          a. Normal distribution
          b. Positive or right skewed
          c. Negative or left skewed
          d. Bimodal

Figure 3.2.16 The frequency of times              Figure 3.2.17 Scores on a 20-point sta-
between eruptions of the Old Faithful             tistics quiz.
geyser.
142                                            CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

     Figure 3.2.18 The distribution of scores  Figure 3.2.19 The number of heads in
     on a psychology test.                     24 sets of 100 coin flips.

24. Write a sentence or two to describe each distribution in terms of modality, symmetry, skewness and
      outliers.

25. Studies are often done by pharmaceutical companies to determine the effectiveness of a treatment.
      Suppose that a new cancer drug is currently under study. Of interest is the average length of time
      in months patients live once starting the treatment. Two researchers each follow a different set of 40
      cancer patients throughout their treatment. The following data (in months) are collected.

          a. Create a histogram for each dataset, using the same class intervals and scales so you can compare
              them.

          b. Compare and contrast the two distributions.
              Researcher 1 Patients (in months):
3.2. DESCRIBING DATA  143

  3 4 11 15 16 17 22 44 37 16 14 24 25 15 26 27 33 29 35 44
 13 21 22 10 12 8 40 32 26 27 31 34 29 17 8 24 18 47 33 34

Researcher 2 Patients (in months):

3 14 11 5 16 17 28 41 31 18 14 14 26 25 21 22 31 2 35 44
23 21 21 16 12 18 41 22 16 25 33 34 29 13 18 24 23 42 33 29
144                                         CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.3 Summary Statistics: Measures of Center

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Calculate and describe the measures of center: mean and median
   · Analyze the relationship of the mean and median to the shape of the data

3.3.1 Calculating Summary Statistics

In addition to graphical and verbal descriptions, we can use numbers to summarize quantitative distributions.
We want to know what an "average" value is (where the data is centered), and how spread out the values are.
Together, the center and spread provide important information which can be used to estimate our population
parameters. In this section we will discuss the measures of center and in the next section we will discuss the
measures of spread.

3.3.2 Measures of Center

There are a few different types of "averages" that measure the center, and the one we use will depend on the
shape of the distribution. We will mention the mode but focus mainly on the two most common "averages":
the mean and the median.

3.3.3 Mode

In the previous section, we saw that the modes are related to the peaks where similar values are grouped.
The mode is the value with the highest frequency (A mode is the value where a peak occurs. One additional
way to calculate the mode(s) is to take the midpoint of each peak in the histogram.)

3.3.4 Mean

The mean, or more formally the arithmetic mean, is what probably comes to mind when you hear the word
average. The calculation of the mean uses every data value in the distribution and is therefore strongly
affected by skew and outliers.
To calculate the mean of a distribution, we divide the sum of the data values by the number of data values we
have. The sample mean is usually represented by, a lower-case with a bar over it, read-bar. The lower-case
letter n is used to represent the number of data values or sample size.

                                                                  Mean.
                                                             sum of data values
                                                       x¯ = n

Example 3.3.2 Mirabel's exam scores for her last math class were: 79, 86, 82, and 94. What is her mean
test score?
Solution. To find the mean test score we need to find the sum of her test scores, then divide the sum by
the number of test scores (n = 4). The mean is:
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER                                                 145

x¯ = 79+86+82+94 4 = 85.25 points
We will round the sample mean to one more decimal place than the original data. In this case, we would

round 85.25 to 85.3 points. Also notice that the mean has the same units as the data and it is important to

label it.                                                                                   

It is reasonable to calculate the mean by hand when the data set is small, but if the data set is large, or if
you will be finding additional statistics, then technology is the way to go. We can find the mean of a data
set using the spreadsheet formula =AVERAGE.

Example 3.3.3 The price of peanut butter in dollars at 5 stores was 3.29, 3.59, 3.79, 3.75, and 3.99. Find
the mean price using a spreadsheet.
There are two ways to use the =AVERAGE formula. If your data set is not too large, you can enter each value
directly into the formula. Using this method, we write

=AVERAGE(3.29 3.59, 3.79, 3.75, 3.99)

and we get an answer of $3.68.
The other method is to enter the data values into a single column (or row) of the spreadsheet and reference
the column (or row) range in the formula. We can enter the range by highlighting the data values. As
illustrated below, if we enter the data into column A, the formula is

     =AVERAGE(A1:A5)

and we also get an answer of $3.68.                                                         

Sometimes when there is a lot of data with repeated values we are given a frequency table.

Example 3.3.4 One hundred families from a particular neighborhood are randomly selected and asked to
give their annual household income rounded to the nearest $5,000. The results are shown in the frequency
table below.

                      Income                 Frequency
           (thousands of dollars)
                                                    6
                         $15                        8
                         $20                       11
                         $25                       17
                         $30                       19
                         $35                       20
                         $40                       12
                         $45                        7
                         $50

Calculating the mean by hand could get tedious if we try to type in all 100 values:
146                                                                           CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

                       6 terms  8 terms  11 terms

                       x¯ = 15 + · + 15 + 20 + · + 20 + 25 + · + 25 +·
                                                     100

We could calculate this more easily by noticing that adding 15 to itself six times is the same as (15)(6) = 90.
Using this simplification, we get

     x¯ = (15)(6) + (20)(8) + (25)(11) + (30)(17) + (35)(19) + (40)(20) + (45)(21) + (50)(7)
                                                              100

       = 3390
           100

       = 33.9

The mean household income of our sample is 33.9 thousand dollars or $33,900.                              

We could also use =AVERAGE to find the mean for this example, but it would require entering each repeated
value individually. If the mean is all we need, then taking advantage of multiplication as repeated addition
is the more straightforward way to go. We could also enter the frequency table and the calculation above in
a spreadsheet.

Example 3.3.5 Extending the last example, suppose a new family moves into the neighborhood and has a
household income of $5 million ($5000 thousand). Adding this to our sample, our mean becomes:

     x¯ = (15)(6) + (20)(8) + (25)(11) + (30)(17) + (35)(19) + (40)(20) + (45)(12) + (50)(7) + (5000)(1)
                                                                      100

       = 8390
           101

       = 83.069

While 83.1 thousand dollars, or $83,100 is the correct mean household income for the new sample, it is no

longer representative of the neighborhood - in fact, it is greater than every income in the sample aside from

the new one we added!                                                                                     

Imagine the data values on a see-saw or balance scale. The mean is the value at the tip of the triangle that
keeps the data in balance, like in the picture below.

If we graph our household data, the $5 million value is so far out to the right that the mean has to adjust
to keep things in balance.

For this reason, when working with data that is skewed or has outliers, it is common to use a different
measure of center, the median.

3.3.5 Median

The median of a data set is the "middle" value, when the data are listed in order from smallest to largest.
We can also think of the median as the value that has 50% of the data below it and 50% of data above it.
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER                                                              147

As we will discover later, the median is also the 50th percentile.

                                                                 Median.
    If the number of data values is odd, then the median is the middle data value If the number of data
    values is even, then the median is the mean of the middle pair

Example 3.3.6 Finding the median of an odd number of values.
Use the following quiz scores in points:

                                           5 10 8 6 4 8 2 5 7 7 6

We must start by listing the data in order:

                                           2 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 10

It is helpful to mark or cross off the numbers as you list them to make sure you don't miss any. Also, be sure
to count the number of data values in your ordered list to make sure it matches the number of data values
in the original list.
In this example there are 11 quiz scores. When the distribution contains an odd number of data values there
will be a single number in the middle and that is the median. For small data sets, we can "walk" one value
at a time from the ends of the ordered list towards the center to find the median

                                    Lower Half Median Upper Half

                                    2, 4, 5, 5, 6 6 7, 7, 8, 8, 10

The median test score is 6 points.                                                                       

Example 3.3.7 Finding the median of an even number of values.
Use the following quiz scores in points:

                              2 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 10 20

There are now 12 quiz scores in our sample. When the distribution contains an even number of data values
there will be a pair of values in the middle rather than a single value. Then we take the average of the middle
two values.

                                    Lower Half Middle Pair Upper Half

                                    2, 4, 5, 5, 6 6, 7 7, 8, 8, 10, 20

Median=  6+7  =  6.5  points
           2
Notice that despite adding an outlier to our data set, the median is largely unaffected. The median quiz

score for the new distribution is 6.5 points. The median is not as affected by outliers as the mean is.

We can also find the median using the spreadsheet formula =MEDIAN. Just like the spreadsheet function

=AVERAGE, we can either list the individual data values in the formula, or we can enter the data values into

a row (or column) and use the row range (or column range) in the formula.

Using the data values of the original distribution, we can write the function as

    =MEDIAN(2, 4, 5, 6, 6, 7, 7, 8, 8, 10)

or

    =MEDIAN(A1:AK)

and we get 6 points for the median test score.                                                           
148                                                                                                       CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

Example 3.3.8 Let's continue with our peanut butter example and find the median both by hand and with
a spreadsheet. The price of peanut butter at 5 stores in dollars was:

                                                  3.29 3.59 3.79 3.75 3.99

To find the median by hand, we must first list the prices in order. This give us:

                                                  3.29 3.59 3.75 3.79 3.99

Since there are an odd number of data values in the sample (n = 5), we know that the median will be the
single data value in the middle of the ordered list.

                                                                            Lower Half Median Upper Half

                                                    3.29, 3.59, 3.75, 3.79, 3.99

The median price of peanut butter at these five stores is $3.75.
Using a spreadsheet, we write

     =MEDIAN(3.29, 3.59, 3.79, 3.75, 3.99)

and we get a median price of $3.75.                                                                       

It is worth noting that when you use a spreadsheet to find the median you do not have to order the data
first. You can enter the data values in the order they are given to you.

3.3.6 The Relationship Between the Mean and the Median

If a distribution is skewed, the mean is pulled in the direction of the skew, as we saw in the see-saw diagram.
In a right skewed distribution, the mean is greater than the median, while in a left skewed distribution,
the mean is less than the median. If the distribution is symmetric, the mean and the median will be
approximately equal.

To demonstrate this, we have entered some data in GeoGebra, as previously explained, and made histograms.
To see the statistics that GeoGebra calculates, we click on the summation symbol ( x) on the right-hand
menu bar.

Example 3.3.9 Fifty people from the Portland Metro area who are employed full time were sampled and
their annual salaries were recorded (to the nearest thousand dollars). The histogram and summary statistics
from GeoGebra are shown below.
From the histogram we can see that the shape of the distribution is unimodal and skewed to the right. We
can see from the statistics output on the left that the mean is greater than the median. This is because the
few people with higher incomes bring the average up.
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER  149

Figure 3.3.10 Mean = $67, 160, Median = $53, 500, Mean > Median
                                                                                                                                            

Example 3.3.11 A random selection of 30 math 105 exams at PCC were sampled and their scores were
recorded. The histogram of the resulting distribution is shown below.
The shape of the distribution is unimodal and skewed to the left. There also appears to be an outlier between
20 and 30. We can see from the statistics output that the mean is less than the median. This is because the
low test score brought the average down. points points

Figure 3.3.12 Mean = 81.7 points, Median = 87.5 points, Mean < Median
                                                                                                                                            

Example 3.3.13 Nineteen people identifying as female were sampled and their heights (in inches) were
recorded. The histogram of the resulting distribution is shown below.
The shape of the distribution is unimodal and roughly symmetric. We can also see from the statistics output
that the mean and the median are approximately equal. inches inches

Figure 3.3.14 Mean = 62.6 inches, Median = 62 inches Mean  Median
                                                                                                                                            
150     CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

We can use these observations in reverse as well. If we know the mean is greater than the median, then
we can expect the distribution to be skewed to the right. If the mean is less than the median, then we can
expect the distribution to be skewed to the left. When the mean and the median are approximately equal,
the distribution is likely to be symmetric.

Example 3.3.15 Recent college graduates were asked how much student loan debt they have. The data has
a mean of $46,265 and a median of $33,652. Just based on this information, do you expect the distribution
to be symmetric, skewed to the left, or skewed to the right?

Solution. Since the mean is greater than the median, we can expect the distribution to be skewed to the

right.  

3.3.7 Exercises

1. A group of diners were asked how much they would pay for a breakfast in dollars. Their responses were:

                       7.50 25 10 10 7.50 8.25 9 5 15 8 7.25 7.50 8 7 12

          a. Find the mean, including units.
          b. Find the median, including units.
          c. Based on the mean and the median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed

              left, or skewed right? Explain.
2. The amount of commercials in an hour of television varies by channel. The total length (in minutes)

      of all commercials from 8 pm to 9 pm for some randomly selected broadcast and cable channels on a
      weekday evening were:

                             10 12.75 7 9 9.75 6.5 12.5 12.5 8.75 17 10.5 2

          a. Find the mean, inluding units.
          b. Find the median, including units.
          c. Based on the mean and median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed left,

              or skewed right?
3. You recorded the time in seconds it took for 8 participants to solve a puzzle. The times were:

                                        15.2 18.8 19.3 19.7 20.2 21.8 22.1 29.4

          a. Find the mean, including units.
          b. Find the median, including units.
          c. Based on the mean and the median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed

              left, or skewed right? Explain.
4. You weigh 9 Oreo cookies, and you find the weights (in grams) are:

                                   3.49 3.51 3.51 3.51 3.52 3.54 3.55 3.58 3.61

          a. Find the mean, including units.
          b. Find the median, including units.
          c. Based on the mean and the median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed

              left, or skewed right? Explain.
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER                                                                  151

5. Use the following table is the cost of purchasing a car at a local dealership. Some of the cars sold were
      new and some were used.

          a. Calculate find the mean, including units.

          b. Can you figure out how to find the median using the frequency table? See if you can do it without
              listing out all the data values.

          c. Based on the mean and the median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric skewed
              left or skewed right? Explain.

             Cost  dollars)                  Frequency
(Thousands of
                                                    3
               15                                   7
               20                                  10
               25                                  15
               30                                  13
               35                                  11
               40                                   9
               45                                   7
               50

6. As part of a study of email, a researcher counted the length of 34 emails. The lengths of the emails

      are shown below, rounded to the nearest thousand characters (so a length 0 means that the numbers of
      characters rounded to 0, not that the message was blank).1

a. Calculate and find the mean, including units.

b. Can you figure out how to find the median using the frequency table? See if you can do it without
    listing all the data values.

c. Based on the mean and the median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed
    left, or skewed right?

     Length of an email                      Frequency
(Thousands of characters)
                                                    4
                  0                                 5
                  1                                 2
                  2                                 3
                  3                                 3
                  4                                 1
                  5                                 3
                  6                                 3
                  7                                 0
                  8                                 3
                  9                                 3
                  10                                2
                  11                                0
                  12                                0
                  13                                2
                  14

1The data is from Advanced High School Statistics, 2nd Ed. (openintro.org/stat/textbook.php?stat_book=aps).
152                                                                        CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

7. Studies are often done by pharmaceutical companies to determine the effectiveness of a treatment.
      Suppose that a new cancer drug is currently under study. Of interest is the average length of time
      in months patients live once starting the treatment. Two researchers each follow a different set of 40
      cancer patients throughout their treatment. The following data (in months) are collected.
      Researcher 1 Patients (in months):

     3 4 11 15 16 17 22 44 37 16 14 24 25 15 26 27 33 29 35 44
     13 21 22 10 12 8 40 32 26 27 31 34 29 17 8 24 18 47 33 34

     Researcher 2 Patients (in months):

     3 14 11 5 16 17 28 41 31 18 14 14 26 25 21 22 31 2 35 44
     23 21 21 16 12 18 41 22 16 25 33 34 29 13 18 24 23 42 33 29

          a. Find the mean and median of each group.

          b. Compare and contrast the two groups.

8. The US Census Bureau, in addition to counting the population of the US every 10 years, conducts yearly
      informational surveys, such as the American Community Survey (ACS). For the 2012 ACS, a randomly
      chosen group of 20 respondents (10 males, 10 females) answered a question about their incomes.2
      Income in dollars for people who identify as female:

                  1,600 1,200 20,000 25,000 670 29,000   44,000  30,000    5,800    50,000
     Income in dollars for people who identify as male:

     53,000 70,000 12,800 30,000 4,500 42,000 48,000 60,000 108,000 11,000

          a. Find the mean and median of each group.

          b. Compare and contrast the two groups.
9. An experiment compared the ability of three groups of participants to remember briefly-presented chess

      positions. The data are shown below. The numbers represent the average number of pieces correctly
      remembered from three chess positions.

          a. Make a histogram for each group.

          b. Find the mean of each group.

          c. Find the median of each group

          d. Compare the shapes of the distributions as well as the centers of the three groups.

     Non-players                         Beginners       Tournament        Players
           22.1                              32.5                    40.1
           22.3                              37.1                    45.6
           26.2                              39.1                    51.2
           29.6                              40.5                    56.4
           31.7                              45.5                    58.1
           33.5                              51.3                    71.1
           38.9                              52.6                    74.9
           39.7                              55.7                    75.9
           39.7                              55.7                    75.9
           43.2                              55.9                    80.3
           43.2                              57.7                    85.3

   2Data from Advanced High School Statistics, 2nd Ed. Section 2.1 Exercise #1. (openintro.org/stat/textbook.php?st
at_book=aps).
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER                          153

10. There is evidence that smiling can attenuate judgments of possible wrongdoing. This phenomenon
      termed the "smile-leniency effect" was the focus of a study by Marianne LaFrance & Marvin Hecht in
      19953. The following data are measurements of how lenient the sentences were for three different types
      of smiles and one neutral control. A higher number indicates greater leniency. The same subject was
      used for all of the conditions so that may affect the results.

          a. Make a histogram for each smile type and the neutral control.

          b. Find the mean for each type of smile and the neutral control.

          c. Find the median for each type of smile and the neutral control.

          d. Compare the shapes of the distributions as well as the centers for each type of smile and control.

False Smile  Felt Smile  Miserable           Smile  Nuetral Control
      2.5          7               5.5                         2
      5.5          3                4                          4
      6.5          6                4                          4
      3.5         4.5               5                          3
       3          3.5               6                          6
      3.5          4               3.5                        4.5
       6           3               3.5                         2
       5           3               3.5                         6
       4          3.5               4                          3
      4.5         4.5              5.5                         3
       5           7               5.5                        4.5
      5.5          5               4.5                         8
      3.5          5               2.5                         4
       6          7.5              5.5                         5
      6.5         2.5              4.5                        3.5
       3           5                3                         4.5
       8          5.5              3.5                        6.5
      6.5         5.5               8                         3.5
       8           5                5                         4.5
       6           4               7.5                        4.5
       6           5                8                         2.5
       3          6.5               4                         2.5
       7          6.5              5.5                        4.5
       8           7               6.5                        2.5
       4          3.5               5                          6
       3           5                4                          6
      2.5         3.5               3                          2
       8           9                5                          4
      4.5         2.5               4                         5.5
      5.5         8.5               4                          4
      7.5         3.5               6                         2.5
       6          4.5               8                         2.5
       9          3.5              4.5                         3
      6.5         4.5              5.5                        6.5

   3LaFrance, M., & Hecht, M. A. (1995) Why smiles generate leniency. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 207-214.
Adapted from onlinestatbook.com, by David M. Lane, et al, used under CC-BY-SA 3.0.
154                        CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

11. Make up three data sets with 5 values each that have:
          a. The same mean but different medians
          b. The same median but different means.

12. The frequency table below shows the number of women's shoes that were sold in an hour at a local shoe
      store.

          a. Would you treat this data as categorical or quantitative?
          b. How would the bar graph be different from the histogram?
          c. Treat the data as quantitative and find the mean and the median. Are these useful statistics?

     Shoe Size  Frequency
           5           4
           6           4
           7           6
           8           6
           9           5

13. At the end of the term, 400 students take a final exam, and their scores (as percentages) are plotted in
      a histogram.4

          a. Is the graph shown above skewed right, skewed left, or symmetric? Explain why you chose your
              answer.

          b. Based on your answer to part (a), which would you expect: that the mean is less than the median,
              the mean is greater than the median, or that the mean and median are equal?

14. The following graph shows the distribution of yearly incomes of 40 patrons at a college coffee shop.5

          a. Is the graph shown above skewed right, skewed right, or symmetric? Explain why you chose your
              answer.

          b. Based on your answer to part (a), which would you expect: that the mean is less than the median,
              the mean is greater than the median, or that the mean and median are equal?

15. For each of the following distributions, would you expect that the mean is less than the median, greater
      than the median, or approximately equal to the median? Explain your reasoning.

   4Graph and description from Advanced High School Statistics, 2nd Ed. Section 2.2 Exercise. (openintro.org/stat/textb
ook.php?stat_book=aps)

   5Graph and description from Advanced High School Statistics, 2nd Ed. Section 2.2 Exercise. (openintro.org/stat/textb
ook.php?stat_book=aps)
3.3. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF CENTER          155

a. Household incomes in the US
b. Weights of newborn babies born at term
c. The number of children in a household in the US
d. Medical costs for all adults
e. Medical costs for adults in the US older than 65
156                                            CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

3.4 Summary Statistics: Measures of Variation

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Calculate and describe the measures of variation: standard deviation, range and interquartile range
       (IQR)

   · Calculate the 5-number summary and construct boxplots by hand and/or using technology (boxplots
       using technology may be modified or not)

   · Compare distributions with side-by-side boxplots and percentiles

   · Calculate and apply Z-scores

3.4.1 Measures of Variation

Consider these three sets of quiz scores for a 10-point quiz:
Section A:

                                              5555555555

Section B:

                                           0 0 0 0 0 10 10 10 10 10

Section C:

                                              4445555666

All three data sets have a mean of 5 points and median of 5 points, yet the sets of scores are clearly quite
different. In Section A, everyone had the same score; in Section B half the class got no points and the other
half got a perfect score. Section C was not as consistent as section A, but not as widely varied as section B.
Thus, in addition to the mean and median, which are measures of center or the "average" value, we also
need a measure of how "spread out"" or varied each data set is.
There are several ways to measure the variation of a distribution. In this section we will look at the standard
deviation, range and the interquartile range (IQR).

3.4.2 Standard Deviation

The sample standard deviation, s, is a measure of variation that tells us how far, on average, the data
values deviate, or are different from, the mean. The mean and standard deviation are paired to provide a
measure of center and spread for symmetric distributions.
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION                                       157

                                             Sample Standard Deviation.
                                     

                                        Sum of the squared deviations from the mean
                               s= n-1
where n is the sample size, or the number of data values

We will go through the whole process for calculating the standard deviation. Let's say there is another
section of quiz scores:

Section D:

            0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 10

The mean quiz score, like Sections A, B and C, is 5 points.

The first step in finding the standard deviation is to find the deviation, or difference, of each data value from
the mean. We will do this in a table. You could also use a spreadsheet to do these calculations.

Data Value  Deviation: (Data Value - Mean)
       0                     0 - 5 = -5
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
       5                       5-5=0
      10                       5-5=0

We would like to get an idea of the "average" deviation from the mean, but if we find the average of the
values in the second column, the negative and positive values cancel each other out (this will always happen),
so to prevent this we square the deviations.

Data Value  Deviation: (Data Value - Mean)      Deviation Squared
       0                     0 - 5 = -5               (-5)2 = 25
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
       5                       5-5=0                     02 = 0
      10                      10 - 5 = 5                52 = 25

Next, we add the squared deviations and we get

            25 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + 25 = 50
158  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

Ordinarily, we would then divide by the number of scores, n, (in this case, 10) to find the mean of the
deviations, but the division by n is only done if the data set represents a population. When the data set
represents a sample (as it almost always does), we divide by n-1 (in this case,).

We assume Section D represents a sample, so we will divide by 9. Note that our units are now points-squared
since we squared all of the deviations. It is much more meaningful to use the units we started with, so to
convert back to points we take the square root.

The sample standard deviation for Section D is

                                                            
                                                       s = 50  2.36 points.

                                                                 9

For comparison, here is the standard deviation for each section listed above:
SA = 0 points
SB = 5.27 points
SC = 0.82 points
SD = 2.36 points
For the standard deviation, we usually use two more decimal places than the original data. This tells us
that on average, scores were 2.36 points away from the mean of 5 points. In summary, here are the steps to
calculate the standard deviation by hand.

                                     Calculating the Sample Standard Deviation.

        1. Find the deviations by subtracting the mean from each data value
        2. Square each deviation
        3. Add the squared deviations
        4. Compute the square root of the sum divided by n - 1:

                                         
                                             Sum of the squared deviations from the mean

                                    s= n-1

There are a few important characteristics we want to keep in mind when finding and interpreting the standard
deviation.

   · The standard deviation is never negative. It will be zero if all the data values are equal and get larger
       as the data spreads out.

   · The standard deviation has the same units as the original data and it is important to label it.
   · The standard deviation, like the mean, can be highly influenced by outliers.

Example 3.4.2 To continue our peanut butter example, we will find the standard deviation of this sample
in dollars: 3.29, 3.59, 3.79, 3.75, and 3.99.
The first thing we need to find is the sample mean, and we know it is $3.68 from our previous work. Next,
we need to find the deviation from the mean for each data value and square it.
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION                                                 159

                                Data Value       Deviation       Deviation Squared
                                    $3.29   3.59 - 3.68 = -0.09     (-0.39)2 = 1521
                                    $3.59   3.59 - 3.68 = -0.09    (-0.09)2 = 0.0081
                                    $3.79    3.79 - 3.68 = 0.11     (0.11)2 = 0.0121
                                    $3.75    3.75 - 3.68 = 0.07     (0.07)2 = 0.0049
                                    $3.99    3.99 - 3.68 = 0.31     (0.31)2 = 0.0961

The sum of the deviations squared is

                         0.1521 + 0.0081 + 0.0121 + 0.0049 + 0.0961 = 0.2733 dollars-squared.
The sample standard deviation is

                                                 
                                            s = 0.2733  $0.2614

                                                        4

Since the units are dollars, we will round to two decimal places rather than two more than the data. This

gives us a standard deviation of $0.26. Together with the mean this tells us that on average, the cost of a

jar of peanut butter is $0.26 away from the mean of $3.68.                                     

Calculating the standard deviation by hand can be quite a nuisance when we are dealing with a large data
set, so we can also use technology. We use the spreadsheet function =STDEV.S to find the sample standard
deviation. Notice that this is different from the population standard deviation, which uses the function
=STDEV.P.

Just like the spreadsheet functions =AVERAGE and =MEDIAN, we can either list the individual data values in
the formula, or we can enter the data values into a row or column and use the row or column range in the
formula.

Example 3.4.3 The total cost of textbooks, in dollars, for the term was collected from 36 students. Use a
spreadsheet to find the mean, median, and standard deviation of the sample.

           140 160 160 165 180 220 235 240 250 260 280 285
           285 285 290 300 300 305 310 310 315 315 320 320
           330 340 345 350 355 360 360 380 395 420 460 460

Since we are finding more than one statistic for this data set, it is much more efficient to enter the data
values into a row or column and reference the range in each of the formulas. We enter the data into column
A.

Solution.

For the mean we enter:        For the median we enter:           For the standard deviation we enter:

=AVERAGE(A1:A36)                            =MEDIAN(A1:A36)      =STDEV.S(A1:A36)

and get a result of $299.58.  and get a result of $307.50.       and get $78.68.

The mean and the median are relatively close to each other, so we can expect the distribution to be approx-
imately symmetric with maybe a slight skew to the left, since the mean is smaller. The mean and standard
deviation together tell us that the average cost of textbooks for a term is about $299.58, give or take $78.68.

                                                                                                                                            

In addition to a spreadsheet, we will continue our use of GeoGebra. Let's take a look at how to use
GeoGeogebra to find the mean, median and standard deviation for the last example. We begin just like we
did for making a histogram.
160                                                                       CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

Example 3.4.4 Example 3.4.3 continued: We enter the textbook data into column A of the spreadsheet
in GeoGebra. (Main Menu View Spreadsheet). Next, select the column title of your data, click on the
histogram in the menu bar on the left, and select One Variable Analysis.

Then you will see the histogram. It is always a good idea to check the shape of your distribution before
calculating anything. Notice our histogram matches what we found about the distribution from the mean
and median. It is approximately symmetric or slightly skewed to the left.

Next, we click the summation symbol ( x) in the menu bar on the right. The list of summary statistics
will pop up as you can see in the image below. We see that the mean is $299.58, the median is $307.50 and
the sample standard deviation is $78.68 - just like we found using the spreadsheet formulas.
The statistics we will use are the sample size (n), the mean, median, and the sample standard deviation
(s). The last five entries in the table - min, Q1, median, Q3, and max - together make up the 5-number
summary which we will learn about shortly!

The standard deviation is the measure of variation that we pair with the mean for approximately symmetric

distributions. This pairing should make sense because the standard deviation uses the mean in its calculation.

But what about the median? What measure of variation do we pair with it?  
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION  161

3.4.3 Range

One candidate is the range. The range tells us the spread or width of the entire data set. We calculate the
range as the difference between the maximum and minimum value.

                                                                  Range.

Range = Max - Min

However, the range is not a very good measure of variation since it is very strongly affected by skew and
outliers. Consider, for example, the distribution of full time salaries in the United States. Many people earn
a minimum wage salary, while others like Jeff Bezos (Amazon) and Bill Gates (Microsoft) earn millions (if
not billions!). A range this large does very little to help us get a sense of the spread where most of the data
values lie.

3.4.4 Quartiles and the Interquartile Range

Instead, the measure of variation that we pair with the median is the interquartile range (IQR). The IQR
tells us the width of the middle 50% of data values. By cutting off the lower and upper 25% of data values,
we are able to ignore extreme values and provide a more accurate sense of how spread out the distribution
is.

The IQR is calculated as the difference between the third quartile (Q3) and the first quartile (Q1). Before
we can calculate the interquartile range, though, we need to learn how to find the first and third quartiles.

                                                  Interquartile Range (IQR).

                                                            IQR = Q3 - Q1

As the name implies, quartiles are values that divide the data into quarters. The first quartile (Q1) is
the value that 25% of the data lie below. The third quartile (Q3) is the value that 75% of the data lie
below. As you might have guessed, the second quartile is the same as the median since 50% of the data
values lie below it.

We have seen that the data is split in half by the median so to split it into quarters, we find the median of
each half of the data.

                                                                Quartiles.

    Q1 the median of the lower half of the data
    Q2 is the median of the whole data set
    Q3 is the median of the upper half of the data
    If there is an odd number of data values, we don't use the median in either half

Example 3.4.5 For an even number of data values: Suppose we have measured the height, in inches, of 12
people who identify as female. The data values are listed below. Find the interquartile range.

                                59 60 69 64 70 72 66 64 67 66 63 61

Solution. Just like when finding the median, we must first order the data.

                                59 60 61 63 64 64 66 66 67 69 70 72

Then we divide the data into two halves. In the case of an even sample size, we split the distribution down
the middle. The first 6 data values are the lower half and the next 6 data values are the upper half. Then
we find the median of each. The median of the lower half is Q1 and the median of the upper half is Q3.
162                                                                            CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

                                  Lower Half                  Upper Half

                                  Q1= 61+63 2 =62             Q3= 67+69 2 =68

     59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 64, 66, 66, 67, 69, 70, 72

In this data Q1 = 62 inches, and Q3 = 68 inches. Then we subtract to find the IQR.

                                  IQR = Q3 - Q1 = 68 - 62 = 6 inches

This tells us the that the middle 50% of the women's heights lie within an interval of 6 inches.  

Example 3.4.6 For an odd number of data values: Suppose we added one more height (68 inches) to the
data set from the previous example. We will again find the interquartile range of the heights.

     59 60 61 63 64 64 66 66 67 68 69 70 72

Solution. The data are already in order, but we have an odd number of values. To deal with this we do
not use the median in the upper or lower halves. The lower half will include the values strictly below the
median, and the upper half will include the values strictly above the median.

     Lower Half                                               Upper Half

     Q1= 61+63 2 =62                          Median(Ignore)  Q3= 68+69 2 =68.5

     59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 64, 66 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72

Then the interquartile range is:

                                            IQR = Q3 - Q1 = 68.5 - 62 = 6.5 inches

If the data set is small, we can find the first and third quartiles by hand, but we have also seen that they
are part of the output from GeoGebra. Here is the output for this data.

From the list of summary statistics we can see that = Q1 = 62 and = Q3 = 68.5 inches. Now we can
calculate the interquartile range.

                                                    IQR = 68.5 - 62 = 6.5 inches
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION  163

This is the same value we found by hand.        

It is important to note that we are not using spreadsheets for the five-number summary because they do not
calculate the quartiles in the same way, so they will not give the same results. Now that we have learned
how to find the quartiles we can make a five-number summary and boxplot.

3.4.5 The Five-Number Summary and Boxplots

The five-number summary is made up of the minimum, Q1, median, Q3, and the maximum. These
five values divide the data into quarters. A boxplot, also called a box-and-whisker plot, is a graphical
representation of the five-number summary. Each region of the boxplot contains approximately the same
number of data values, so we can see the spread for each region. We can find the five-number summary
and draw a boxplot by hand or by using GeoGebra. In our last example the five-number summary from
GeoGebra is: 59, 62, 66, 68.5, 72 inches.

                                                     Five-Number Summary.

                                              Minimum, Q1, Median, Q3, Maximum

We will use GeoGebra to find the five-number summary for the next example and then explain how to draw
a boxplot.
Example 3.4.7 Let's continue with the cost of textbook data in dollars from Example 3.4.3. Use GeoGebra
to find the five-number summary for this sample and draw a boxplot by hand.

                       140 160 160 165 180 220 235 240 250 260 280 285
                       285 285 290 300 300 305 310 310 315 315 320 320
                       330 340 345 350 355 360 360 380 395 420 460 460

Solution. As we found before, here is the GeoGebra output. The last five entries of the summary statistics
are the five-number summary. Remember to label all of your statistics with units.

The five-number summary is

                                           Min Q1 Median Q3 Max
                                           $140 $255 $307.50 $347.50 $460

To draw the boxplot, we will first draw a number line that extends a little beyond the minimum and maximum
values, and choose a scale. We decided to draw our number line from $120 to $480, in increments of $40.
164        CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

Then we add a meaningful title and units.
Next, make vertical lines at the first quartile, median and third quartile and connect them to form a box.
This is the middle 50% of the data and you might notice that the width of the box is the IQR. Then, extend
the "whiskers" out to the minimum and maximum values. Note that a boxplot does not have a vertical scale
and the height of the box does not matter. Our boxplot looks like this:

GeoGebra will also draw boxplots for us. We enter and select the data values like we have done before and

select One Variable Statistics. This brings up the graphics window with a histogram by default. Use the

drop-down menu to select the boxplot. We also click on x to show the summary statistics.  

Example 3.4.8 We will continue with our height data, in inches, from the 12 people who identify as women.
Find the five-number summary and create a boxplot using GeoGebra.

Solution.

           59 60 69 64 70 72 66 64 67 66 63 61

Following the steps above we have the following GeoGebra output. The last five entries in the statistics table
are the five-number summary and we have the boxplot on the right.

Here is the five-number summary:

                                              Min Q1 Median Q3 Max
                                              59in 62in 65in 68in 72in

For this data, the two sides of the box and the two whiskers are approximately the same width. This suggests
that the distribution is symmetric. We can verify this by noticing that the mean is approximately equal to
the median.
The boxplot can tell us the shape of the distribution, but we cannot tell how many peaks the data has. For
that we need a histogram. We can see the histogram and boxplot together by selecting the icon that looks
like two rectangles stacked, or an = sign.
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION  165

Now we have a full picture of the data.         

The default boxplot in GeoGebra is called a modified box plot, which shows the data values that are
outliers with an X but requires a few more steps to make by hand. To change from the modified box plot
to a regular box plot, click on the left pointing arrow in the boxplot window (downloaded version) or the
settings wheel (online version) for options, and uncheck "show outliers." The output window below shows
two side-by-side boxplots (the regular boxplot on top and the modified boxplot on the bottom) illustrating
the distribution of the annual salaries for 50 randomly selected full-time workers in the Portland Metro area.

From the upper boxplot we can see that this distribution is skewed to the right and the upper quarter of the
data is very spread out. It is natural to think of the data values as being evenly spread out in each region,
but that is quite often not the case. From the lower boxplot we can see that there are 4 data values that are
considered outliers and how far away the last data value is from the others. This is why it is useful to show
outliers on a boxplot.

3.4.6 Modified Boxplot (Optional)

If you are curious to know how a modified boxplot is made, we will explain it briefly. There is a rule called
the 1.5IQR rule to determine which points are considered outliers. An outlier is a point that is more than
1.5 IQRs away from the middle 50% of the data (the box in the boxplot). We know how to calculate the
IQR and then we multiply that by 1.5. We subtract that from Q1 to find the lower fence and add that
value to Q3 to find the upper fence. Values beyond the fences are considered outliers and are drawn with
an X or a star. Then we draw the whiskers of a modified box plot to the furthest data value inside the fence
166                                                  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS
on each side.

3.4.7 Percentiles

Back when we were finding the median, we mentioned that the median is also called the 50th percentile,
because 50% of the data values lie below it. We can define any percentile as the data value with that
percentage of values below it. Since we have found the quartiles, we can also identify the 25th and 75th
percentiles for our data. Q1 is the 25th percentile because 25% of the data values lie below it and Q3 is the
75th percentile because 75% of the data values lie below it.

Percentiles are used when comparing the growth of children to the population and in the results of standard-
ized tests, such as the SAT test. If a person scored in the 83rd percentile, that means they scored higher
than 83% of the people who took the test.

3.4.8 Comparing Distributions

Box plots and percentiles are particularly useful for comparing data from two populations.
Example 3.4.9 The box plots of service times for two fast-food restaurants are shown below. Compare the
length of time to get served at the two restaurants. Which one should you go to if you are in a hurry?
Solution.

Store 2 has a slightly shorter median service time (2.1 minutes vs. 2.3 minutes), but the service times are

less consistent, with a wider spread of the data.

The 75th percentiles are 2.9 and 5.7 minutes. That means at store 1, 75% of customers were served within

2.9 minutes, while at store 2, 75% of customers were served within 5.7 minutes.

Which store should you go to in a hurry? That depends upon your opinion about luck - 25% of customers

at store 2 had to wait between 5.7 and 9.6 minutes.                                                     

Example 3.4.10 The boxplots below show the 5-number summaries of the birth weights, in kilograms, of

infants with severe idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome (SIRDS)1. The boxplots are separated to show

the birth weights of infants who survived and those that did not. What can we conclude from this data?

Solution.

Comparing the two groups, the boxplot reveals that the birth weights of the infants that died appear to be,
overall, smaller than the weights of infants that survived. In fact, we can see that the median birth weight
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION                                                        167

of infants that survived is about the same as the third quartile of the infants that died. Similarly, we can see

that the 25th percentile of the survivors is larger than the 50th percentile of those that died, meaning that

over 75% of the survivors had a birth weight larger than the median birth weight of those that died.

Similarly, looking at the maximum value for those that died and the third quartile of the survivors, we can

see that over 25% of the survivors had birth weights higher than the heaviest infant that died. The box plots

give us a quick, though informal, way to determine that birth weight is quite likely linked to the survival of

infants with SIRDS.                                                                                   

3.4.9 Z-Scores

Have you ever heard the saying that you can't compare apples and oranges? It turns out that you can -
provided we standardize their measures first!

We will be using the standard score called a Z-score, which is a method commonly used with unimodal and
symmetric distributions (called normal or nearly normal distributions). Z-scores may be used with any
data, but if the distribution is skewed, then the distribution of Z-scores will also be skewed.

To calculate the Z-score for a data value, we find out how far away from the mean it is by subtracting. Then
we divide by the standard deviation to see how many standard deviations that is. Thus, the Z-score of a
data value is the number of standard deviations it is away from the mean.

                                                                 Z-score.

                                                              data value - mean
                                                       Z = standard deviation
    Be sure to calculate the difference first, then divide

If a data value is above the mean, its Z-score will be positive. If a data value is below the mean, its Z-score
will be negative. Therefore, if a data value is one standard deviation above the mean, its Z-score is +1. If it
is 2.5 standard deviations below the mean, its Z-score is -2.5. Note that the units of Z-scores are standard
deviations, not the units of the data values.

We can use Z-scores to determine the relative unusualness of a data value with respect to its own distribution.
That is what allows us to compare two unlike items. The convention in statistics is to say that a data value
is unusual if it is more than 2 standard deviations from the mean, or in other words, if its Z-score is less
than -2 or greater than +2.

Example 3.4.11 The oranges at a local grocery store have a mean diameter of 5.8 inches and a standard
deviation of 1.2 inches. The apples, on the other hand, have a mean diameter of 4.2 inches and a standard
deviation of 0.6 inches.
Ali closes their eyes and selects and apple and an orange. When they look at both pieces of fruit, they seem
small. If the orange has a diameter of 4.2 inches and the apple has a diameter of 3.5 inches, which is smaller
relative to their respective piles of fruit?
To determine which fruit is relatively smaller, Ali can find each of their Z-scores.

                                      ZOrange = 4.2 - 5.8 = -1.33 standard deviations
                                                        1.2

                                       ZApple = 3.5 - 4.2 = -1.17 standard deviations
                                                        0.6

By convention, Z-scores are rounded to two decimal places, so we see that the orange is 1.33 standard
deviations below its mean and the apple is 1.17 standard deviation below its mean. The orange is therefore
smaller relative to its distribution since its Z-score is less than the apple's Z-score.

   1van Vliet, P.K. and Gupta, J.M. (1973) Sodium bicarbonate in idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome. Arch. Disease in
Childhood, 48, 249-255. As quoted on openlearn.open.ac.uk/mod/oucontent/view.php?id=398296&section=1.1.3
168                                                        CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

We can also see from the Z-scores that neither fruit has an unusually small diameter since each piece of fruit
is less than 2 standard deviations from its mean.
We can also find Z-scores using a spreadsheet with this formula:

     =STANDARDIZE(data value, mean, standard deviation)

To verify our apple and orange Z-scores, we would write:
Apple:

     =STANDARDIZE(4.2, 5.8, 1.2)

and we get -1.33 standard deviations

Orange:

     =STANDARDIZE (3.5, 4.2, 0.6)

and we get -1.17 standard deviations

                                                                                                                                            
Example 3.4.12 The mean weight of men over the age of 20 is 195.7 pounds2 with a standard deviation
of 29.8 pounds. The mean weight of domestic cats is 8.6 pounds with a standard deviation of 1.2 pounds.
(The standard deviation for men's weights is estimated. The cat's mean weight is based on ideal cat weight
and the standard deviation is approximate).
At his peak, Andre the Giant, the 7-foot-4-inch French professional wrestler and actor, weighed 520 pounds.
When Georgie the cat was at his peak he weighed 24 pounds. Who was more giant - Andre the Giant or
Georgie the cat?
Since the weights of cats and men cannot be compared directly, we will need to calculate the Z-scores.

        ZAndre = 520 - 195.7 = 10.88 standard deviations.
                         29.8

         ZGeorgie = 24 - 8.6 = 12.83 standard deviations.
                           1.2

Using the standardize function, we would write:

Andre:                                           Georgie:

     =STANDARDIZE (520, 197.5, 29.8)             =STANDARDIZE (24, 8.6, 1.2)

which gives us 10.88 standard deviations.        which gives us 12.83 standard deviations.

Since both Z-scores are greater than 2 standard deviations, both weights are extremely unusual. However,

since the Z-score for Georgie's weight is larger, he is even more giant than Andre the Giant.  

3.4.10 Exercises

Many of the datasets from the Measures of Center section are repeated here so you can use your previous
work to help you.

1. A group of diners were asked how much they would pay for a breakfast in dollars. Their responses were:
                       7.50 25 10 10 7.50 8.25 9 5 15 8 7.25 7.50 8 7 12

          a. Using your mean from Exercise 3.3.7.1, find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what
   22016 CDC Report. cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_039.pdf. The study included all ethnicities but the report

does not say whether transgendered men were included.
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION  169

              the mean and standard deviation tell you about how much the group of diners would pay for a
              meal.

          b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

          c. Calculate the range and IQR for this data.

          d. Create a boxplot for the data.
2. The amount of commercials in an hour of television varies by channel. The total length (in minutes)

      of all commercials from 8 pm to 9 pm for some randomly selected broadcast and cable channels on a
      weekday evening were:

                             10 12.75 7 9 9.75 6.5 12.5 12.5 8.75 17 10.5 2

          a. Using your mean from Exercise 3.3.7.2, find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what
              the mean and standard deviation tell you about how much the group of diners would pay for a
              meal.

          b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

          c. Calculate the range and IQR for this data.

          d. Create a boxplot for the data.
3. You recorded the time in seconds it took for 8 participants to solve a puzzle. The times were:

                                        15.2 18.8 19.3 19.7 20.2 21.8 22.1 29.4

          a. Using your mean from Exercise 3.3.7.3, find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what
              the mean and standard deviation tell you about how much the group of diners would pay for a
              meal.

          b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

          c. Calculate the range and IQR for this data.

          d. Create a boxplot for the data.
4. You weigh 9 Oreo cookies, and you find the weights (in grams) are:

                                   3.49 3.51 3.51 3.51 3.52 3.54 3.55 3.58 3.61

          a. Using your mean from Exercise 3.3.7.4, find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what
              the mean and standard deviation tell you about the weights of these Oreo cookies.

          b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

          c. Calculate the range and IQR for this data.

          d. Create a boxplot for the data.
5. The following table shows the cost of purchasing a car at a local dealership. Some of the cars sold were

      new and some were used.

          a. Find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what the mean and standard deviation tell you
              about how much the cars are selling for.

          b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

          c. Calculate the range and IQR.

          d. Create a boxplot for the data.
170                                          CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

                  Cost  dollars)  Frequency
     (Thousands of
                                         3
                    15                   7
                    20                  10
                    25                  15
                    30                  13
                    35                  11
                    40                   9
                    45                   7
                    50

6. As part of a study of email, a researcher counted the length of 34 emails. The lengths of the emails
      are shown below, rounded to the nearest thousand characters (so a length 0 means that the numbers of
      characters rounded to 0, not that the message was blank).

     a. Find the standard deviation of this data. Explain what the mean and standard deviation tell you
         about the length of the emails.

     b. Calculate the five-number summary for this data.

     c. Calculate the range and IQR.
     d. Create a boxplot for the data.

          Length of an email      Frequency
     (Thousands of characters)
                                         4
                       0                 5
                       1                 2
                       2                 3
                       3                 3
                       4                 1
                       5                 3
                       6                 3
                       7                 0
                       8                 3
                       9                 3
                       10                2
                       11                0
                       12                0
                       13                2
                       14

7. Studies are often done by pharmaceutical companies to determine the effectiveness of a treatment.
      Suppose that a new cancer drug is currently under study. Of interest is the average length of time
      in months patients live once starting the treatment. Two researchers each follow a different set of 40
      cancer patients throughout their treatment. The following data (in months) are collected.
      Researcher 1 Patients (in months):

       3 4 11 15 16 17 22 44 37 16 14 24 25 15 26 27 33 29 35 44
       13 21 22 10 12 8 40 32 26 27 31 34 29 17 8 24 18 47 33 34

     Researcher 2 Patients (in months):

     3 14 11 5 16 17 28 41 31 18 14 14 26 25 21 22 31 2 35 44
     23 21 21 16 12 18 41 22 16 25 33 34 29 13 18 24 23 42 33 29
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION                                           171

a. Find the standard deviation of each group.

b. Calculate the 5-number summary for each group.

c. Calculate the range and IQR for each group.

          d. Create side-by-side boxplots and compare and contrast the two groups.

8. The US Census Bureau, in addition to counting the population of the US every 10 years, conducts yearly
      informational surveys, such as the American Community Survey (ACS). For the 2012 ACS, a randomly
      chosen group of 20 respondents (10 males, 10 females) answered a question about their incomes.
      Income in dollars for people who identify as female:

             1,600 1,200 20,000 25,000 670 29,000   44,000  30,000        5,800  50,000
Income in dollars for people who identify as male:

53,000 70,000 12,800 30,000 4,500 42,000 48,000 60,000 108,000 11,000

a. Find the standard deviation of each group.

b. Calculate the 5-number summary for each group.

c. Calculate the range and IQR for each group.

          d. Create side-by-side boxplots, and compare and contrast the two groups.

9. An experiment compared the ability of three groups of participants to remember briefly-presented chess
      positions. The data are shown below. The numbers represent the average number of pieces correctly
      remembered from three chess positions.

a. Find the standard deviation of each group.

b. Calculate the 5-number summary for each group.

c. Calculate the range and IQR for each group.

d. Create side-by-side boxplots and compare and contrast the two groups.

Non-players  Beginners                              Tournament        Players
      22.1       32.5                                           40.1
      22.3       37.1                                           45.6
      26.2       39.1                                           51.2
      29.6       40.5                                           56.4
      31.7       45.5                                           58.1
      33.5       51.3                                           71.1
      38.9       52.6                                           74.9
      39.7       55.7                                           75.9
      39.7       55.7                                           75.9
      43.2       55.9                                           80.3
      43.2       57.7                                           85.3

10. There is evidence that smiling can attenuate judgments of possible wrongdoing. This phenomenon
      termed the "smile-leniency effect" was the focus of a study by Marianne LaFrance & Marvin Hecht in
      19953. The following data are measurements of how lenient the sentences were for three different types
      of smiles and one neutral control. The same subject was used for all of the conditions so that may affect
      the results. The second column is a continuation of the first column.

a. Find the standard deviation for each type of smile and the neutral control.

b. Calculate the 5-number summary for type of smile and the neutral control.
172                                                                   CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

     c. Calculate the range and IQR for each type of smile and the neutral control.
     d. Create side-by-side boxplots and compare and contrast the four groups.

     False Smile  Felt Smile                  Miserable        Smile  Nuetral Control
           2.5          7                               5.5                      2
           5.5          3                                4                       4
           6.5          6                                4                       4
           3.5         4.5                               5                       3
            3          3.5                               6                       6
           3.5          4                               3.5                     4.5
            6           3                               3.5                      2
            5           3                               3.5                      6
            4          3.5                               4                       3
           4.5         4.5                              5.5                      3
            5           7                               5.5                     4.5
           5.5          5                               4.5                      8
           3.5          5                               2.5                      4
            6          7.5                              5.5                      5
           6.5         2.5                              4.5                     3.5
            3           5                                3                      4.5
            8          5.5                              3.5                     6.5
           6.5         5.5                               8                      3.5
            8           5                                5                      4.5
            6           4                               7.5                     4.5
            6           5                                8                      2.5
            3          6.5                               4                      2.5
            7          6.5                              5.5                     4.5
            8           7                               6.5                     2.5
            4          3.5                               5                       6
            3           5                                4                       6
           2.5         3.5                               3                       2
            8           9                                5                       4
           4.5         2.5                               4                      5.5
           5.5         8.5                               4                       4
           7.5         3.5                               6                      2.5
            6          4.5                               8                      2.5
            9          3.5                              4.5                      3
           6.5         4.5                              5.5                     6.5

11. Make up two data sets with 5 numbers each that have:

     a. The same mean but different standard deviations.

          b. The same standard deviation but different means.
12. Make up two data sets with 7 numbers that each have:

     a. The same IQR but different medians.

     b. Different IQRs but the same medians.

   3LaFrance, M., & Hecht, M. A. (1995) Why smiles generate leniency. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 207-214.
Adapted from onlinestatbook.com, by David M. Lane, et al, used under CC-BY-SA 3.0.
3.4. SUMMARY STATISTICS: MEASURES OF VARIATION  173

13. The side-by-side boxplots show salaries for actuaries and CPAs.
          a. Estimate the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles for CPA and actuary salaries.
          b. Deshawn makes the median salary for an actuary. Kelsey makes the first quartile salary for a
              CPA. Who makes more money? How much more?
          c. What percentage of actuaries make more than the median salary of a CPA?
          d. What percentage of CPAs earn less than all actuaries?

14. Fifty juniors and fifty seniors at a local high school were surveyed to find out how many hours per week
      they spend studying. The side-by-side boxplots the weekly study times for those high school juniors
      and seniors.

          a. Estimate the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles for weekly study time for high school juniors and
              seniors.

          b. Olivia studies the maximum number of weekly study hours for a junior. Lucy studies the first
              quartile weekly study time for a senior. Who studies more, and by how many hours?

          c. What percentage of juniors study between the minimum and median weekly study times for
              seniors?

          d. What percentage of seniors study more than the third quartile weekly study time for juniors?
15. Suppose you buy a new car whose advertised gas mileage is 25 mpg (miles per gallon). After driving the

      car for several months, you find that you are getting only 21.4 mpg. You phone the manufacturer and
      learn that the standard deviation of gas mileage for cars of that model is 1.15 mpg.

          a. Find the Z-score for the gas mileage of your car.

          b. Does it appear that your car is getting unusually low gas mileage? Explain your answer using
              your Z-score.

16. According to a local marathon club, the mean finishing time for a marathon is 274 minutes, with a
      standard deviation of 63 minutes.

          a. If I can run a marathon with a finishing time of 170 minutes, find the Z-score for my marathon
              time.

          b. Is my marathon finishing time of 170 minutes unusually fast? Explain your answer using the
              Z-score.

17. This data set is a sample of the average number of hours per year that a driver is delayed by road
      congestion in 11 cities:
                                       56 53 53 50 46 45 44 43 42 40 36
          a. Find the mean and the standard deviation, including units.
174  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

          b. What is the Z-score for the city with an average delay time of 42 hours per year?
18. In a survey of 12 companies recruiting for recent college graduates, they reported the following numbers

      of job applicants per job posting:

                          123 123 134 127 115 122 125 101 130 143 110 122

          a. Find the mean and standard deviation, including units.

          b. What is the Z score for the company with 143 job applicants per job posting?
19. You scored an 89 on a math test where the class mean and standard deviation are 75 points and 7 points

      respectively. You scored a 65 on an English test where the mean and standard deviation are 53 points
      and 4 points, respectively. In which class did you do better? Explain your answer using Z-scores.
20. The mean running time for comedy movies is 139 minutes, with a standard deviation of 39.7 minutes.
      For action movies, the mean running time is 159 minutes, with a standard deviation of 26.2 minutes.
      A recent comedy movie had a running time of 102 minutes, while an action movie playing at the same
      theatre had a running time of 129 minutes. Which movie is shorter compared to other movies in the
      same genre? Explain your answer using Z-score.
21. Poe, the Clydesdale horse has a world record breaking height of 20.2 hands. All Clydesdale horses have
      a mean height of 16.5 hands and a standard deviation of 1.85 hands. The last Great Dane to hold the
      world record for dog height was Gibson who was 107 cm tall. Great Danes have a mean height of 81 cm
      and a standard deviation of 13 cm. Which animal is taller compared to their respective breed? Explain
      your answer using Z-scores.
3.5. CHAPTER 3 REVIEW  175

3.5 Chapter 3 Review

1. Portland Community College serves nearly 73,000 full-time and part-time students in the greater Port-
      land area at four main campuses (SE, Cascade, Sylvania, and RC). Student Affairs would like to know
      how students get to campus. They randomly select 250 students from each of the four main campus
      and ask them how they got to classes on campus. The following are the results of their survey:
          · Public Transportation: 435
          · Driving: 475
          · Biking: 65
          · Walking: 30

          a. Identify the population and state its size.
          b. Identify the sample and state its size.
          c. What sampling method was used?
          d. What type of data was collected?
          e. Give the statistic for the percentage of students who use public transportation.
2. CNN conducted a survey of 500 American adults. 62% of those surveyed answered yes to the question,
      "Do you favor a law to ban the sale of assault weapons and semiautomatic rifles?" The reported margin
      of error was ±4%.

          a. What population is being studied?
          b. What is the sample?
          c. What type of data is this?
          d. Is the 62% reported in the problem an example of a statistic or a parameter?
          e. What is the confidence interval? Is the confidence interval about the statistic or the parameter?
           f. Explain what the confidence interval tells you.
3. A survey of 265 PCC students found that 23%, plus or minus 4% prefer to study at the library.

          a. What population is being studied?
          b. What type of data was collected?
          c. Is the reported 23% a statistic or a parameter?
          d. What is the margin of error?
          e. What is the confidence interval?
           f. Explain what the confidence interval tells you.
4. Identify the sampling method. Just the name will suffice.

          a. Researchers select every 5th customer who walks into the store to take a survey.
          b. Raffle tickets are distributed and collected in a bag, where they are mixed and ten are drawn for

              prizes.
          c. I asked the shoppers near me in the shoe department what size they wear.
176  CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

          d. An IRS auditor randomly selects 25 taxpayers in each filing status (single, head of household,
              married filing jointly, and married filing separately).

5. Identify the most relevant source of bias in each situation.

          a. An opinion poll is posted on Facebook and Twitter asking how you are most likely to vote for in
              the next election.

          b. Keller Auditorium ask all the people in the front three rows if they enjoyed the Broadway play.

          c. To determine opinions on voter support for a downtown farmers market, a surveyor randomly
              questions people working close to the park where the farmers market would be.

          d. A survey asks people to report the number of hours they work out each week.

          e. A survey randomly calls people on their landlines and ask them if they would support a school
              bond measure in the next election.

6. Identify whether each situation describes an observational study or an experiment. If it is an experiment.

          a. Subjects are asked to run a mile and record their time.

          b. Fifty students were asked to go to a quiet space in the library to memorize a poem. Fifty students
              were asked to go to a noisy location in the cafeteria to memorize the poem. Each student recorded
              how much time it took to memorize the poem.

7. For the clinical trial of a migraine drug, subjects were randomly divided into two groups. The first
      received an inert pill, while the second received the test medicine. Patients were not aware of which
      group they were in. After one month, patients reported how many migraines they experienced.

          a. Which is the treatment group?

          b. Which is the control group (if there is one)?

          c. Is this study blind, double-blind, or neither?

          d. Is this best described as an experiment, a controlled experiment, or a placebo-controlled experi-
              ment?

8. In a recent study1, 380 high risk adolescents involved in the juvenile justice system were recruited to
      test an app designed to increase mindfulness and reduce substance use. Participants were randomly
      and equally assigned to use the app (Rewire) or receive services as usual from the Department of Youth
      Services. Participants were assessed to determine a baseline for substance use at the beginning of the
      study, and were asked to complete follow up assessments after 1 and 3 months. Assessments consisted of
      online surveys asking about substance use, emotion regulation, family demographics, and mindfulness
      practices. Urine samples were collected at each interview to verify self-reported substance use.

          a. Describe the treatment group.

          b. Describe the control group (if there is one).

          c. Is this study blind, double-blind, or neither? Explain

          d. Is this best described as an experiment, a controlled experiment, or a placebo-controlled experi-
              ment?

9. In a 2010 survey, US teens aged 12-18 were asked what their favorite movie genre was. The results are
      shown below.

          · Action: 351

          · Adventure: 171
   1clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04027075?map_cntry=US&map_state=US%3AOR&rank=1
3.5. CHAPTER 3 REVIEW  177

          · Comedy: 651
          · Drama: 389
          · Horror: 287
          · Romance: 107
          · Undecided: 51

          a. What is the implied population?
          b. How many people were sampled?
          c. What type of data is this?
          d. Create a relative frequency bar chart of the results.
          e. Create a pie chart of the results.
           f. Explain the advantages/disadvantages of the two charts.
          g. What is the statistic for the percentage of teens whose favorite movie genre is horror?
10. A survey of 5325 Portland residents was conducted to determine the primary purpose of using TriMet.
      The results are shown below.

          a. How many people use TriMet for personal business?

          b. How many people use TriMet to get to the airport?
11. A group of college students were asked what the price of gas would need to be before they would start

      using public transportation to get to school instead of driving. Their responses in dollars per gallon
      ($/gal) are listed below:

        5.25 5.00 4.25 3.75 5.00 4.50 3.95 3.75 5.75 4.75 3.25 3.75 4.75 5.00 8.95

          a. Find the mean and median. Round to two decimal places and include units.
          b. Based on the mean and median, would you expect the distribution to be symmetric, skewed left,

              or skewed right? Explain.
178                                                                      CHAPTER 3. STATISTICS

          c. Find the standard deviation. Round to two decimal places and include units.

          d. Calculate the z-scores for the responses of $3.25 per gallon and $8.95 per gallon. Are either of
              these values unusual?

          e. Determine the 5-number summary for the data.

           f. What is the range and IQR of the data set? Round to two decimal places and include units.

          g. Use the 5-number summary to construct a box plot.
12. The following is a sample of scores from a recent Math 105 exam:

     32 71 72 73 73 73 76 77 78 78 79 86 88 88 88 94 94 99

     a. Find the mean of the data. Round to one decimal place if necessary.

     b. Find the median of the data. Round to one decimal place if necessary.

     c. Just comparing the mean and the median, do you expect the distribution to be skewed left, skewed
        right, or symmetric. Explain.

     d. Find the standard deviation of the data. Round to one decimal place if needed.

     e. Explain what the mean and standard deviation tell you about the sampled test scores.

     f. Is the score of 99 unusual? Use z-scores to support your claim.

     g. Find the 5-number summary.

     h. Use the 5-number summary to create a box plot.

     i. Create a histogram of the data. Start your scale at 0, and use a bin size of 10.

           j. Describe the shape of the distribution. Be sure to address all three characteristics (modality,
              symmetry, and outliers).

13. The following table shows the cost of purchasing a car at a local dealership. Some of the cars sold were
      new and some were used.

     Cost (Thousands                                    Frequency
          of dollars)
                12                                             6
                15                                             7
                18                                            12
                22                                            10
                30                                            12
                32                                            11
                40                                             6
                45                                             6

     a. Find the mean and standard deviation of the data. Round to two decimal places and include
         units.

     b. Explain what standard deviation tell you about how much cars are selling for at this dealership.
     c. Determine the five-number summary.
     d. What is the range and IQR?
     e. Use the five-number summary to construct a boxplot of the data.
3.5. CHAPTER 3 REVIEW                   179

14. The double box-and-whisker plot2 shows the goals scored per game by two soccer teams during a 25
      game season.

          a. Estimate the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles for Team A and Team B goals.

          b. What is the median number of goals for Team A? Team B?

          c. What percentage of the goals for Team B is more than the maximum number of Team A?

          d. What Team data is more symmetric?

          e. What is the shape of the distribution for Team B?
15. Suppose you buy a new car whose advertised gas mileage is 35 mpg (miles per gallon). After driving

      the car for several months, you find that you are getting only 30.4 mpg. You phone the manufacturer
      and learn that the standard deviation for that model is 1.35 mpg.

          a. Find the z-score for the gas mileage of your car.

          b. Does it appear that your car is getting unusually low gas mileage? Explain your answer using
              your z-score.

16. This data set is a sample of the average number of minutes per week that a driver is delayed by road
      congestion in 13 cities:

                                66 55 53 50 36 45 34 43 52 40 76 45 63

          a. Find the mean and the standard deviation, including units.

          b. What is the z-score for the city with an average delay time of 42 hours per week?

          c. Is an average delay time of 42 hours per week unusual? Explain using the calculated z-score.

2Source: brainly.com/question/11978942
Chapter 4

Probability

Dr. Hilda Geiringer and Probability.
Dr. Hilda Geiringer1 (1893 - 1973) was born in Vienna, Austria, to a
Jewish family. When she was in high school she showed great math-
ematical ability and while many women were discouraged from acad-
emics, her parents supported her so she could attend the University
of Vienna. She earned her Ph.D. in mathematics in 1917. In 1921,
she moved to Berlin, Germany, where she was a research assistant to
Richard von Mises in the Institute of Applied Mathematics (Robertson
& O'Connor, 2020).
Dr. Geiringer was the first woman to teach applied mathematics at a
German university (Manning, 2019) and in 1933, she was nominated
for an assistant professor position. In the same year, however, the Nazi
party took over in Germany and she was dismissed as a result of Nazi
anti-Jewish legislation (Freidenreich, 2020).

After some time in Brussels, Belgium, she fled again to Turkey who welcomed approximately 200 German
scholars. She had to learn Turkish to teach and became a professor with a five-year contract (McNeill,
2019). It was there that she thrived, publishing 18 articles and a calculus textbook. She conducted innova-
tive research in probability theory and Mandelian genetics by configuring recursive equations to study the
distribution of genotypes and blood types (McNeill, 2019).

In 1939, Turkey began replacing Jewish refugees at the university and fearing for her safety again, Dr.
Geiringer had another challenge in moving to the United States. In the U.S. she faced open discrimination
towards women in mathematics and she could only teach at womens colleges. She accepted an unpaid position
at Bryn Mawr College to get a visa to the U.S. (McNeill, 2019) and then settled at Wheaton College in
Norton, Massachusetts.

While Wheaton was not a research institution, she never gave up her research and she published more than
80 articles, reviews and books on pure and applied mathematics (Manning, 2019). In 1953 she wrote, "I
have to work scientifically, besides my college work. This is a necessity for me; I never stopped it since my
student days, it is the deepest need of my life."

Dr. Geiringer is also known for the Geiringer equations that simplify the process of calculating the deforma-
tion of metal in slip-line field theory. In 1956 she was elected professor emeritus by the University of Berlin
with a full salary and she retired from Wheaton in 1959 (Robertson & O'Connor, 2020).

    1Photo: "Hilda Geiringer Portrait Photo"(cropped) from the Marion B. Gebbie Archives and Special Collections, Wheaton
College is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

                                                                     181
182                                                        CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

4.1 Contingency Tables

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Relate Venn diagrams and contingency tables

   · Calculate percentages from a contingency table

   · Calculate "and" empirical probabilities

   · Calculate "or" empirical probabilities

   · Calculate conditional probabilities

   · Determine whether two characteristics are independent
When we looked at categorical data in the previous chapter, it was related to a single variable, or character-
istic of interest, such as favorite movie or car color. To illustrate the data, we made a frequency table and
used it to create a pie chart or bar chart. But what if we want to illustrate the relationship between two
categorical variables? To do this, we can use a contingency table.

4.1.1 Contingency Tables

A contingency table summarizes all the possible combinations for two categorical variables. Each value in
the table represents the number of times a particular combination of outcomes occurs. For example, suppose
we randomly select 250 households from the greater Portland area and ask whether they have a cat and
whether they have a dog. In this case, "have a cat" and "have a dog" are the two variables, and each variable
has two categories: Yes and No. To create the contingency table, we make columns for the categories of one
variable, and rows for the categories of the other variable. We also add a row and column for the subtotals
of each category. Each cell of the resulting table contains the number of outcomes having the characteristics
of the intersecting row and column categories. For our dog and cat example, the table would look like this:

  Cat              Dog                        No Dog            Total
No Cat  Yes Cat and Yes Dog            Yes Cat and No Dog  Yes Cat Total
        No Cat and Yes Dog             No Cat and No Dog   No Cat Total
 Total
            Yes Dog Total                  No Dog Total     Grand total

Suppose that of the 250 households surveyed, 180 said they have a cat, 95 said they have a dog, and 52 said
they have both a cat and a dog. We can use this information to fill in the cells of the table.

                                  Dog  No Dog  Total
                                   52           180
                            Cat
                          No Cat   95           250

                           Total

The first cell we can fill in is the grand total, which is the total number of subjects in the study. In this case,
there are 250 households participating in the survey. The next two cells we can fill in are the total number
of households that have a cat, 180, and the total number of households that have a dog, 95. The final cell
we can fill in from the given information is the intersection of the having a dog column and a having a cat
row, which is 52 households.

Since each row and column must sum to their totals, we can use subtraction to find the missing numbers as
shown below.
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                                             183

                         Cat                  Dog               No Dog            Total
                       No Cat                  52            180 - 52 = 128         180
                                                             155 - 128 = 27
                        Total            95 - 52 = 43                        250 - 180 = 70
                                                                     or
                                               95             70 - 43 = 27          250
                                                             250 - 95 = 155

Now that we have our contingency table completed, notice that the numbers in the central four cells add to
the grand total as shown in the table on the left. The total row and the total column also add to the grand
total as shown in the right table.

  Cat          Dog     No Dog     Total                             Cat      Dog    No Dog   Total
No Cat          52        128      180                            No Cat      52       128    180
                43         27       70                                        43        27     70
 Total          95        155      250                             Total      95       155    250

4.1.2 Contingency Tables and Venn Diagrams

If the subtractions we just did seem familiar, they should! This is very similar to what we did for reporting
data with a Venn diagram. The Venn diagram for this data is shown below. We also subtracted the
intersection from the total of the cat and dog owners to find numbers in the crescent regions.

Notice that the numbers in the four regions of the Venn diagram are the same as the four cells in the center
of the contingency table and add to the grand total.

4.1.3 "And" Statements

Now we can use the contingency table or the Venn diagram to determine the percentage of households that
meet certain conditions. For instance, what percent of those surveyed own a cat and do not own a dog? In
the Venn diagram, this is 128 households in the cat only region.

In the contingency table we see the 128 households at the intersection of the row of households who own a

cat and the column of households who do not own a dog. As a percentage, the total number of households

surveyed,  is  128  =  0.512  or  51.2%  that  have  a  cat  and  no  dog.
               250

                                           Cat          Dog       No Dog     Total
                                         No Cat          52          128      180
                                                         43           27       70
                                          Total          95          155      250

4.1.4 "Or" Statements

How about the percentage of households surveyed that have a cat or a dog? We know from Venn diagrams
that the inclusive or includes the number of households who own a cat only, a dog only, and both a cat and
184                                                                      CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

a dog, or 128 + 52 + 43 = 223 households.  As a percentage of the total surveyed, we get  223  = 0.892 or
                                                                                          250
89.2% of households in the sample have a dog or a cat (or both).

We can get the same answer from the contingency table. by adding the cells for households who have a cat
and not a dog, a dog and not a cat, and the households that have both a cat and a dog. This also gives us
223 households.

There is another way to calculate an or statements from a contingency table. We could add the row and
column totals for having a cat and having a dog, but then we have counted the 52 households in the
intersection twice. We can subtract that number to get 180 + 95 - 52 = 223 households with a dog or a cat,
which we know is 89.2% of those surveyed.

                         Cat               Dog  No Dog            Total
                       No Cat               52     128             180
                                            43      27              70
                        Total               95     155             250

4.1.5 Conditional Statements

Another question we can answer using a contingency table is what percentage of dog owning households also
own a cat? In this case the group that we are interested in isn't every household surveyed (the grand total),
but just those households that own a dog.

                                           Dog No Dog Total

                       Cat 52                   128               180

                       No Cat 43                27                70

                       Total 95                 155               250

We call this a conditional statement because we are only considering the households with a certain condition.

If we focus on the column representing the households that own a dog, we see that there is a total of 95

households with a dog, and that 52 of those 95 households also have a cat.  Therefore,    52     0.547  or
                                                                                          95
approximately 54.7% of the households with a dog also have a cat. Another way to phrase this conditional

statement is, "What percent of households have a cat given they have a dog." You will see the word given

quite a bit in this chapter and that makes the denominator change. It is also possible to find this conditional

percentage using the Venn diagram by taking the number in the intersection and dividing it by the total in

the whole dog circle.

4.1.6 Contingency Tables with More Than Two Categories

When there are only two categories for each variable, like yes/no questions, Venn diagrams and contingency
tables provide basically the same information and can be used interchangeably. A Venn diagram works well
for yes/no variables since a subject is either inside the circle (has the characteristic) or outside the circle
(does not have the characteristic). If we have more than two possibilities for any of the variables, though, we
cannot use a Venn diagram. We can use a contingency table, though. Here is an example where one variable
has four categories and the other has three categories.

Example 4.1.2 910 randomly sampled registered voters from Tampa, FL were asked if they thought workers
who have illegally entered the US should (i) be allowed to keep their jobs and apply for US citizenship, (ii)
be allowed to keep their jobs as temporary guest workers but not be allowed to apply for US citizenship, or
(iii) lose their jobs and have to leave the country. Not sure was also an option (iv). The results of the survey
by political ideology are shown below1. Use the contingency table to answer the questions.
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                                                                  185

           (i) Apply for citizenship             Conservative        Moderate         Liberal      Total
                (ii) Guest worker                        57               120            101        278
                                                        121               113            28         262
            (iii) Leave the country                     179               126            45         350
                   (iv) Not sure                         15                4              1          20
                         Total                          372               363            175        910

a. What percent of the sampled Tampa, FL voters identified themselves as conservatives?

b. What percent of the sampled voters are in favor of the citizenship option?

c. What percent of the sampled voters identify themselves as conservatives and are in favor of the
    citizenship option?

d. What percent of the sampled voters identify themselves as liberal or are in favor of the leaving the
    country option?

e. What percent of the sampled voters who identify as conservatives are also in favor of the citizenship
    option? What percent of moderate and liberal voters share this view?

Solution.

1. To answer this question, we find the conservative column and look to the bottom cell for the total

number of conservative voters and divide that by the total number of voters surveyed. This gives us

372        0.409  or  approximately     41%  of  the  Tampa,    FL  voters   who  identify  as  conservative.
910

2. For this question we find the apply for citizenship row, look across to find the total, and divide this by

the  total  number     of  voters  surveyed.     We   get  278    0.305  or  approximately    31%  of   these  voters    are  in
                                                           910
favor of the citizenship option.

3. For this question we are looking for the cell that is the intersection of those who identify as conservative

and those who are in favor of the citizen option. This cell has 57 voters, so we divide that by the total

number of voters.          This  gives  us  or   57    0.063 or approximately 6.3% of these voters identify as
                                                 910
conservatives and are in favor of the citizenship option.

4. The or in this question is inclusive, so we need to determine the number of voters who identify as
   liberal, who are in favor of the leaving the country option, or both.

            (i) Apply for citizenship                 Conservative       Moderate           Liberal     Total
                 (ii) Guest worker                            57              120              101       278
                                                             121              113              28        262
             (iii) Leave the country                         179              126              45        350
                    (iv) Not sure                             15               4                1         20
                          Total                              372              363              175       910

In terms of the individual cells, the number of voters who have the specified characteristics is the sum

179 + 126 + 101 + 28 + 45 + 1 = 480, which we can divide by the total number of voters surveyed to get

the  percent.     So,  we  have  480    0.527    or   approximately  53%     of  the  voters  identify  as  liberal  or  are  in
                                 910
favor of the leave the country option.

Another way to calculate this is to add the total number who identify as liberal (175 voters) and the
total number who are in favor of the leave the country option (350 voters), then subtract the double
counted cell (45 voters) who are liberal and in favor of the leave the country option: 175+350-45 = 480

5. As we saw before, these are conditional statements. For the first part of this question, we want to focus
   just on those voters who identify as conservatives, and from among that group determine the percent
186                                                                                   CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

     in  favor  of  the  citizenship  option.  We  calculate  that  57     0.153  or  approximately  15%   of  conservative
                                                                    372
     voters are in favor of the citizenship option.

     For the second part, we want to focus on just those voters who identify as moderate, and from among

     that group determine the percent in favor of the citizenship option.                Then  we    have  120    0.33  or
                                                                                                           363
     approximately 33% of moderate voters are in favor of the citizen option.

     Finally, we want to focus on just those voters who identify as liberal, and from among that group

     determine the percent in favor of the citizenship option.             We calculate  101   0.58 or approximately
                                                                                         175
     58% of liberal voters are in favor of the citizenship option. Looking at these three percentages, it is

     clear that support of the citizenship option depends on political ideology. If support of the citizenship

     option were the same across political ideologies, then we would say that favoring the citizenship option

     and political ideology were independent of each other.

                                                                                                                        

4.1.7 Empirical Probability

If our sample is representative of the population, then we can also interpret a percentage we calculate from
a contingency table as a probability, or the likelihood that something will happen. Since a contingency
table is constructed from data collected through sampling or an experiment, we call it an empirical or
experimental probability. This is different from a theoretical probability which we will look at in the next
section.

4.1.8 Finding Empirical Probabilities with a Contingency Table

Suppose that 60% of students in our class have a summer birthday (June, July, or August). Now suppose
everyone's name and birth month are written on slips of paper and thrown into a bag. If we pull a slip of
paper out of the bag at random, what is the probability that the selected student has a summer birthday?
If you think there should be a 60% chance, you are right! The relative frequency of the characteristic of
interest will be equal to its empirical probability. To write this as a probability statement, it would look like

                                               P(summer birthday) = 60%

Probability is a function named P, and the function is applied to what follows in the parentheses. Let's look
at another example where we write probability statements and find empirical probabilities.

Example 4.1.3 A survey of licensed drivers asked whether they had received a speeding ticket in the last
year and whether their car is red. The results of the survey are shown in the contingency table to the right.

                       Red Car        Speeding Ticket               No Speeding Ticket         Total
                    Not Red Car                 15                              135             150
                                                45                              470             515
                          Total                 60                              605             665

Find the probability that a randomly selected survey participant:

a. has a red car.

b. has had a speeding ticket in the last year.

c. has a red car and has not had a speeding ticket in the last year.

   d. has a red car or has had a speeding ticket in the last year.

   1SurveyUSA, News Poll #18927, data collected Jan 27-29, 2012. Example adapted from Open Intro: Advanced High School
Statistics, by Diez et al, used under CC-BY-SA 3.0.
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                                                              187

e. has had a speeding ticket in the last year given they have a red car.

f. who has received a speeding ticket in the last year also has a red car.

g. What do the answers to b and e suggest about the relationship between owning a red car and getting
   a speeding ticket?

Solution.

                                                Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

                   a. Red Car 15                                                135                150

                       Not Red Car                       45                     470                515

                                Total                    60                     605                665

To find P(red car), we divide the number of participants who own a red car by the total number of

people     surveyed:P(red       car)    =  150    0.226  or  22.6%.
                                           665

                                                Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

                   b. Red Car 15                                                135                150

                       Not Red Car                       45                     470                515

                                Total                    60                     605                665

P(speeding ticket), we divide the number of participants who got a speeding ticket in the last year by

the  total  number          of  people  surveyed:  P(speeding  ticket)  =  60     0.09   or  9%.
                                                                           665

                                                Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

                   c. Red Car 15                                                135                150

                       Not Red Car                       45                     470                515

                                Total                    60                     605                665

To find P(red and no ticket) , we find the intersection of the red car category and the no ticket category

and        divide  by  the  total  number  of   participants:  P(red  and  no   ticket)  =  135    0.203  or  20.3%
                                                                                            665

                                                Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

                   d. Red Car 15                                                135                150

                       Not Red Car                       45                     470                515

                                Total                    60                     605                665

To find P(red or ticket), we need to add those who drive a red car and did not have a speeding ticket
(just red), those who had a speeding ticket and do not drive a red car (just ticket) and those who drive
a red car and had a speeding ticket (both), and divide by the total number of participants:

                                P(red and no ticket) = 135 + 45 + 15 = 195  0.293 or 29.3%
                                                               665         665

Recall from our earlier discussion that we could also calculate the or probability as:

              P(red and no ticket) = P(red) + P(speeding ticket) - P(red and speeding ticket)
                                          = 150 + 60 - 15
                                              665 665 665
                                          = 195
                                              665

which gives us the same answer as counting the individual cells.
188                        CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

                  Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

     e. Red Car 15    135                                 150

     Not Red Car  45  470                                 515

     Total        60  605                                 665

     The probability P(speeding ticket given red car) is a conditional probability as we have seen before
     since it is conditional on the given characteristic occurring. In this problem, the given characteristic is
     owning a red car, so we isolate our attention to just the row of 150 red car owners and see how many
     have had a speeding ticket in the last year. Looking at the table, we see that there were 15 red car
     owners who had a speeding ticket in the last year, so we calculate:

     P(speeding ticket given red car) = 15 = 0.10 or 10%
                                                   150

                  Speeding Ticket No Speeding Ticket Total

     f. Red Car 15    135                                 150

     Not Red Car  45  470                                 515

     Total        60  605                                 665

     This question is also asking for a conditional probability, P(red car given speeding ticket), but it is
     phrased more like we would say it. In this case the given characteristic is that the person has received
     a speeding ticket, so we will isolate our attention to just the speeding ticket column. Among the 60
     people who had a speeding ticket in the last year, we see that 15 also drove a red car. Now we can
     calculate the probability:

                                        P(red car given speeding ticket) = 15 = 0.25 or 25%
                                                                                      60

       Notice that compared with part e, when we change the conditional characteristic, we change the
       denominator of the fraction.

   g. In part b, we determined that there was a 9% chance of randomly selecting a participant who had
       received a speeding ticket in the last year. However, in part e we found that there was a 25% chance
       of receiving a ticket in the last year if the person had a red car. This seems to suggest that there is a
       higher likelihood of getting a speeding ticket if you own a red car. This means that getting a speeding
       ticket is dependent on whether the person drives a red car, since that increases the probability of
       getting a ticket. We cannot say, however, whether driving a red car makes you speed or whether people
       who tend to drive faster buy red cars.

                                                                                                                                            

4.1.9 Conditional Probabilities

We have mentioned conditional probabilities, which we find by isolating our attention to the given row or
column. Here is another example of finding conditional probabilities.
Example 4.1.4 A home pregnancy test was given to a sample of 93 cisgender women, and their pregnancy
was then verified by a blood test. The contingency table below shows the home pregnancy test and whether
or not they were actually pregnant as determined by the blood test. Find the probability that a randomly
selected woman in the sample

   a. was not pregnant given the home test was positive.

   b. had a positive home pregnancy test given they were not pregnant.
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                     189

                     Pregnant   Positive Test  Negative Test  Total
                  Not Pregnant          70              4       74
                                         5              14      19
                        Total           75              18      93

Solution. Here are the solutions:

   a. Since we are given the home test result was positive, we are limited to the 75 women in the positive
       test column, of which 5 were not pregnant. This gives:

                     Pregnant   Positive Test  Negative Test  Total
                  Not Pregnant          70              4       74
                                         5              14      19
                        Total           75              18      93

                                 P(not pregnant given positve test) = 5  0.067 or 6.7%
                                                                                   75

b. Since we are given the woman is not pregnant, we are limited to the 19 women in the not pregnant
    row, of which 5 had a positive test. This gives:

                     Pregnant   Positive Test  Negative Test  Total
                  Not Pregnant          70              4       74
                                         5              14      19
                        Total           75              18      93

                                    P(positive test given not pregnant) = 5  0.263 or 26.3%
                                                                                      19

       This result is referred to as a false positive: A positive test result when the woman is not actually
       pregnant.

                                                                                                                                            
In this section we have learned about empirical probability. In the next section we will discuss another kind
of probability that you may be familiar with - theoretical probability.

4.1.10 Exercises

1. A recent survey asked a random sample of PCC students if they are currently experiencing food in-
      security and if they are currently experiencing housing insecurity. Fill in the missing entries of the
      contingency table below.

   Housing Insecure             Food Insecure  Not Food Insecure     Total
Not Housing Insecure                    680                60         760
                                                          460
            Total

2. A recent survey asked a random sample of PCC students if they have purchased food from the cafeteria
      in the last week, and if they purchased their textbooks through the bookstore. Fill in the missing entries
      of the contingency table below.
190                                         CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

       Cafeteria   Bookstore  No Bookstore  Total
     No Cafeteria       630           135    375

          Total                              850

3. A recent survey asked PCC students if they regularly eat breakfast and if they regularly floss their teeth
      Use the completed Venn Diagram to fill in the corresponding contingency table.

                              Breakfast  No Breakfast  Total

                     Floss
                   No Floss

                     Total

4. A recent survey asked PCC students if they used an Apple phone, and if the regularly used a Chromebook
      outside of school. Use the completed Venn Diagram to fill in the corresponding contingency table.

                              Chromebook  No Chromebook       Total

                     Apple
                   No Apple

                      Total

5. Use the following information to complete the contingency table:

          · P(A and B) = 10/75

          · P(A) = 40/75

          · P(not B) = 45/75

                                                                   A Not A Total
                                                         B
                                                      Not B
                                                       Total
6. Use the following information to complete the contingency table:

          · P(A given B) = 30/80

          · P(Not A and Not B) = 10/120

                                                                   A Not A Total
                                                         B
                                                      Not B
                                                       Total
7. A professor gave a test to students in a morning class and the same test to the afternoon class. The
      grades are summarized below.
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                                        191

                                             A B C Total

                         Morning Class 8 18 13 39

                         Afternoon Class 10 4 12 26

                         Total               18 22 25 65

If one student was chosen at random:

a. What is the probability they were in the morning class?

b. What is the probability they earned a C?

c. What is the probability that they earned an A and they were in the afternoon class?

d. What is the probability that they earned an A given they were in the morning class?

          e. What is the probability that they were in the morning class or they earned a B?

8. A professor surveyed students in her morning and afternoon Math 105 class, and asked what their class
      standing was. The class standings are summarized below:

 Morning Class           Freshman            Sophomore      Junior   Senor  Total
Afternoon Class               12                    5           7       8     32
                               5                   13           8       2     28
        Total                 17                   18          15      10     60

If one student was chosen at random:

a. What is the probability they were in the morning class?

b. What is the probability they were a Freshman?

c. What is the probability that they were a Senior and they were in the afternoon class?

d. What is the probability that they were a Sophomore given they were in the morning class?

          e. What is the probability that they were in the morning class or they were a Junior?

9. The contingency table below shows the number of credit cards owned by a group of individuals below
      the age of 35 and above the age of 35.

Between the ages                      Zero   One      Two or more    Total
       of 18-35                         9      5              19       33

    Over age 35                        18     10              20       48
         Total                         27     15              39       81

If one person was chosen at random:

a. What is the probability they had no credit cards?

b. What is the probability they had one credit card?

c. What is the probability they had no credit cards and is over 35?

d. What is the probability they are between the ages of 18 and 35, or have zero credit cards?

e. What is the probability they had no credit cards given that they are between the ages of 18 and
   35?

f. What is the probability they have no credit cards given that they are over age 35?

g. Does it appear that having no credit cards depends on age? Or are they independent? Use
   probability to support your claim.
192                                                                CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

10. The following contingency table provides data from a sample of 6,224 individuals who were exposed to
      smallpox in Boston.2

     Lived          Inoculated   Not Inoculated                    Total
     Died                238             5136                      5374
     Total                 6              844                       850
                         244             5980                      6224

          a. What is the probability that a person was inoculated?
          b. What is the probability that a person lived?
          c. What is the probability that a person died or was inoculated?
          d. What is the probability that a person died given they were inoculated?
          e. What is the probability that a person died given they were not inoculated?
           f. Does it appear that survival depended on if a person were inoculated? Or are they independent?

              Use probability to support your claim.
11. The contingency table below shows the survival data for the passengers of the Titanic.

        Survive     First  Second  Third                           Crew  Total
     Not Survive     203      118    178                            212   711
                     122      167    528                            673  1490
          Total      325      285    706                            885  2201

     a. What is the probability that a passenger did not survive?

     b. What is the probability that a passenger was crew?

     c. What is the probability that a passenger was first class and did not survive?

     d. What is the probability that a passenger did not survive or was crew?

     e. What is the probability that a passenger survived given they were first class?

     f. What is the probability that a passenger survived given they were second class?

     g. What is the probability that a passenger survived given they were third class?

          h. Does it appear that survival depended on the passenger's class? Or are they independent? Use
              probability to support your claim.

12. The following table shows the utility patents granted for a specific year.

     United States  Corporation  Government                        Individual      Total
         Foreign          45%           2%                              8%          55%
           Total          41%           1%                              3%          45%
                          86%          11%                              3%         100%

     a. What is the probability that a patent is foreign and from the government?

     b. What is the probability that a patent is from the U.S. and from a corporation?

     c. What is the probability that a patent is foreign or from the government?

     d. What is the probability that a patent is from the U.S. given it is from an individual?

       e. What is the probability that a patent is foreign given it is from the government?

2Data taken from Mostly Harmless Probability & Statistics by Rachel Webb
4.1. CONTINGENCY TABLES                                                                   193

13. There is a 15% chance that a shopper entering a computer store will purchase a computer, a 25% chance
      they will purchase a game/software, and there is a 10% chance they will purchase both a computer and
      a game/software.

          a. Create a contingency table for the information.

                         Game/Software          No Game/Software             Total

  Computer
No Computer

      Total

          b. What is the probability that a shopper will not purchase a computer and will not purchase a
              game/software?

          c. What is the probability that a shopper will purchase a computer or purchase a game/software?

          d. What is the probability that a shopper will purchase a game/software given they have purchased
              a computer?

          e. What is the probability that a shopper will purchase a game/software given they did not purchase
              a computer?

           f. Does it appear that purchasing a game/software depends on whether the shopper purchased a
              computer? Or are they independent? Use probability to support your claim.

14. A fitness center coach kept track over the last year of whether members stretched before they exercised,
      and whether or not they sustained an injury. Among the 400 members, 322 stretched before they
      exercised, 327 did not sustain an injury, and 270 both stretched and did not sustain an injury.

          a. Create a contingency table for the information.

                                        Injury  No Injury             Total

                            Stretched
                         Not Stretched

                               Total

b. What is the probability that a member sustained an injury?

c. What is the probability that a member sustained an injury and did not stretch?

d. What is the probability that a member stretched or did not sustain an injury?

e. What is the probability that a member sustained an injury given they stretched?

f. What is the probability that a member sustained an injury given they did not stretch?

          g. Does it appear that sustaining an injury depends on whether the member stretches before exer-
              cising? Or are they independent? Use probability to support your claim.

15. Among the 95 books on a bookshelf, 72 are fiction, 28 are hardcover, and 87 are fiction or hardcover.

          a. Create a contingency table for the information.

                                     Hardcover  Paperback             Total

                           Fiction
                         Nonfiction

                             Total

b. What is the probability that a book is non-fiction and paperback?
194                              CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

          c. What is the probability that a book is fiction given it is hardcover?
16. After finishing the course, among the 32 students in a Math 105 class, 25 could successfully construct a

      contingency table, 27 passed the class, and 29 could successfully construct a contingency table or passed
      the class.

          a. Create a contingency table for the information.

              Contingency Table  No Contingency Table  Total

       Pass
     No Pass

       Total

     b. What is the probability that a student passed and could not successfully construct a contingency
         table?

     c. What is the probability that a student passed given they could not successfully construct a con-
         tingency table?
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY  195

4.2 Theoretical Probability

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Write the sample space for theoretical probability situations
   · Identify certain and impossible events
   · Calculate the theoretical probability of a complement
   · Determine the difference between empirical and theoretical probability
   · Explain the Law of Large Numbers
   · Identify independent and dependent events
   · Calculate "and" theoretical probabilities
   · Identify overlapping and disjoint sets
   · Calculate "or" theoretical probabilities
   · Calculate probability values for simple games

As we saw in the last section, the probability of a specified event is the chance or likelihood that it will
occur. We calculated empirical or experimental probabilities using contingency tables. In this section, we
will focus on theoretical probability and compare the two types.

4.2.1 Basic Probability Concepts

Let's begin with a brief introduction to some of the language and basic concepts of theoretical probability.

4.2.2 Experiment

If you roll a die, pick a card from a deck of playing cards, or randomly select a person and observe their hair
color, you are conducting an experiment.

4.2.3 Events and Outcomes

The result of an experiment is an outcome. An event is any particular group of outcomes, like rolling a
three or a five on a die. An event can be a simple event, which is a single outcome, or a combination of
outcomes, called a compound event.

4.2.4 Sample Space

The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes. For example, if we roll a six-sided die, the sample
space S is the set S = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Example 4.2.2 If we roll an eight-sided die, describe the sample space and give at least two examples of
simple events and compound events.
Solution. The sample space is the set of all possible outcomes, or equivalently, all simple events: S =
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
196                                                                   CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

Examples of simple events are rolling a 1, rolling a 5, rolling a 6, and so on. Examples of compound events

include rolling an even number, rolling a 5 or a 3, and rolling a number that is at least 4.  

4.2.5 Equally Likely Outcomes

When the outcomes of an experiment are equally likely, we can calculate the probability of an event as the
number of ways it can happen out of the total number of outcomes.

                                         Theoretical Probability.

                 P(E) =     number of outcomes corresponding to the event E

                                        total number of equally-likely outcomes

We can write the result as a simplified fraction or as a decimal or percent.

Example 4.2.3 Write the sample space for the sum of two fair six-sided dice and determine whether the
outcomes are equally likely.

Solution. The sample space for the sum of two fair six-sided dice is S = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. The
different sums, however, are not equally likely. If we look at a table of the different possible outcomes when
rolling two dice, we see that there are 36 possible combinations. We will summarize this in a table by listing
each outcome in the sample space. Then we find the probabilities by counting the number of ways each sum
can occur and dividing it by 36.

                 1                   2   3    4                    5               6

     1 1+1=2 1+2=3 1+3=4 1+4=5 1+5=6 1+6=7

     2 2+1=3 2+2=4 2+3=5 2+4=6 2+5=7 2+6=8

     3 3+1=4 3+2=5 3+3=6 3+4=7 3+5=8 3+6=9

     4 4 + 1 = 5 4 + 2 = 6 4 + 3 = 7 4 + 4 = 8 4 + 5 = 9 4 + 6 = 10

     5 5 + 1 = 6 5 + 2 = 7 5 + 3 = 8 5 + 4 = 9 5 + 5 = 10 5 + 6 = 11

     6 6 + 1 = 7 6 + 2 = 8 6 + 3 = 9 6 + 4 = 10 6 + 5 = 11 6 + 6 = 12

                                         Sum  Probability
                                           2       1/36
                                           3       2/36
                                           4       3/36
                                           5       4/36
                                           6       5/36
                                           7       6/36
                                           8       5/36
                                           9       4/36
                                          10       3/36
                                          11       2/36
                                          12       1/36

From the probability table we can see that rolling a sum of 7 has the highest probability and rolling a 2 or

a 12 have the lowest probabilities.                                                           

Example 4.2.4 Suppose we roll a fair six-sided die. Calculate the probability of:

1. rolling a 6.

2. rolling a number that is at least 4.

3. rolling an even number.
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY                                                                                                              197

4. rolling a 5 or a 3.

Solution. Recall that the sample space is S = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Since each of the outcomes in the sample space
is equally likely, we can find the probability of each event by counting the number of outcomes corresponding
to the event and dividing by 6, the total number of equally likely outcomes.

1.  There is only one way to roll a 6, so P(rolling                 a  6) =  1  or approximately 16.7% There is a 16.7% chance
                                                                             6
    of rolling a 6.

2. In probability we will often come across the phrases "at least" and "at most." At least means that

    value or greater. At most means that value or less. Since we are looking for the probability of rolling

    a number that is at least 4, we need the number of outcomes that are 4 or greater. There are 3 values

    that   meet  this  condition:      4,  5,   and  6.    The  probability     is  P(rolling   a  number  that  is  at  least  4)  =  3  =  1
                                                                                                                                       6     2
    or 50%

3.  Half   of  the   numbers    on  a  die   are    even,  so   we  calculate:      P(rolling   an  even   number) =     3  =  1  or  50%
                                                                                                                         6     2

4.  There   are  two   ways     to  roll  a  5  or  a  3,  so  P(rolling  a  5  or  a  3) =  2  =   1  or  approxiamtely    33.3%.     There
                                                                                             6      3
    is a 33.3% chance of rolling a 5 or a 3.

                                                                                                                                            
Example 4.2.5 Suppose you have a bag containing 14 sweet cherries and 6 sour cherries. If you pick a
cherry at random, what is the probability it will be sweet?

Solution. Each of the cherries are equally likely to be selected since our selection is random and we can
assume there is no way to distinguish one cherry from another. This means that the probability of selecting
a sweet cherry will be equal to the number of sweet cherries in the bag dived by the total number of cherries
in the bag. Since there are 14 sweet cherries and a total of 20 cherries in the bag, we have:

                                                     P(sweet) = 14 = 7 or 70%
                                                                    20 10

There is a 70% chance of selecting a sweet cherry from the bag.                                                                              

4.2.6 Certain and Impossible Events

A probability is always a value between 0 and 1, or from 0% to 100%. If the probability of an event is 0
there are no outcomes that correspond with that event and we say it is impossible. If the probability of an
event is 1 then every outcome corresponds to that event and we say it is certain.
Example 4.2.6

   a. What is the probability of rolling an odd or even number on a six-sided die?

   b. What is the probability of rolling an 8 on a six-sided die?

Solution.

a. Since all the numbers are either even or odd, this event includes all of the outcomes in the sample

    space.     This  event  is  certain.     P(odd     or  even)    =  6  =  1  or  100%
                                                                       6

b.  Since 8 is not one of the outcomes in the sample space, the event is impossible.                                 P(roll an 8) =       0  =
                                                                                                                                          8
    0 or 0%

                                                                                                                                             
198                                           CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

4.2.7 Complementary Events

Just as we saw in the logic chapter, the complement of an event A means A does not happen. We can refer
to the complement as not A or AC. For example, consider the experiment of rolling a six-sided die and the
simple event A = rolling a 6. The complement of event A is everything in the sample space that is not a 6:
AC = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Recall that we can illustrate the complement using a Venn diagram as shown below.

Notice that the outcomes from set A and the outcomes from set AC will together equal the universal set,
which is the sample space in probability. The probabilities must add up to 1 or 100%. Therefore, we can
use subtraction to find the probability of a complement.

                                                    Complement of an Event.

                                                           P(AC) = 1 - P(A)

Example 4.2.7 If you roll an eight-sided die, what's the probability you don't get a 6?
Solution. Not rolling a 6 is the complement of rolling a 6, which is easier to calculate. Since there are 8
possible numbers to roll, we have:

     P(not rolling a 6) = 1 - P(rolling a 6) = 1 - 1 = 7 or 0.875
                                                                88

There is an 87.5% chance of not rolling a 6.                        

4.2.8 Experimental vs. Theoretical Probability

Now that we have calculated experimental and theoretical probabilities, we can compare them. When we
flip a fair coin, we say there is a 50% chance of getting heads. This is a theoretical probability because there
are two equally likely outcomes - heads and tails - so we expect to get heads half of the time. But if you
flip a coin, say 100 times, will you get heads exactly 50 times? Maybe, but you are more likely to get some
number around 50 times. The number of heads you actually observe out of the total number of times you
flip the coin is the experimental probability.

Example 4.2.8 The table shows the numbers that came up after rolling a six-sided die 10 times. What is
the experimental probability of rolling a 6? What is the theoretical probability of rolling a 6?

                                        Roll 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                     Outcome 3 1 4 6 6 6 1 3 5 1

Solution. To find the experimental probability of rolling a 6, it would be helpful to change this into a
frequency table. We list all the possible outcomes and count how many times each occurred.
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY                                                                                                       199

                                                   Outcome          Frequency
                                                        1                  3
                                                        2                  0
                                                        3                  2
                                                        4                  1
                                                        5                  1
                                                        6                  3

According to our frequency table, we see that a 6 was rolled three times, so the experimental probability of

rolling  a  6  is  P(roll  6)  =  3   or  30%.
                                  10
Theoretically, however, we would expect the number 6 to come up 1 out of 6 times since there are 6 equally

likely  outcomes.  Thus,       the    theoretical  probability  of  rolling  a  6  is  P(roll  6)  =  1  or  approximately  16.7%  
                                                                                                      6

4.2.9 The Law of Large Numbers

As we saw in the previous example, theoretical and experimental probabilities are not necessarily equal.
However, experimental probability will eventually approach theoretical probability as we conduct more and
more trials. This phenomenon is called the Law of Large Numbers. This means if you flip a fair coin
a small number of times, the experimental probability is likely to be different each time and could be very
different from the theoretical probability. But if you flip a coin a large number of times, the experimental
probability becomes very close to the theoretical probability of 50%. The Law of Large Numbers is extremely
powerful in that it allows us to approximate the theoretical probability of complex events - like changes in
beliefs and opinions, likelihood of natural disasters, climate change effects - through repeated sampling and
simulation.

4.2.10 Probability of Compound Events

Now that we have the basics in place, let's look at some compound probability problems that we will be
studying in this course.

4.2.11 "And" Probabilities

As we saw with truth tables, the event A and B refers to an event where both A and B occur. These events
may occur at the same time or they could happen in a sequence such as A and then B. How we calculate
the theoretical probability of the event A and B (or A and then B) depends on whether the two events are
independent or dependent.

4.2.12 Independent and Dependent Events

Two events A and B are independent if the probability of B occurring is the same whether or not A occurs.
If the probability of B is affected by the occurrence of A, then we say that the events are dependent.

Coin flips and die rolls are common examples of independent events - flipping heads does not change the
probability of flipping heads the next time, nor does rolling a six change the probability that the next roll
will be a six.

Another type of event is a selection event, such as randomly selecting or drawing items from a bag, etc.
These are also independent if we draw with replacement. By replacing the item, we reset the probability
back to what it was before we made the selection. Since the probability of each subsequent selection is the
same as the first selection, the events are independent.
200  CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

If we draw without replacement, however, like selecting multiple people for a committee, we change the
total number of possible outcomes, thereby changing the probability of subsequent selections. Therefore, if
we draw without replacement, the events will be dependent.
Example 4.2.9 Determine whether the following events are independent or dependent.

   a. Flipping a fair coin twice and getting heads both times.

   b. Selecting a president and then a vice president at random from a pool of five equally qualified individ-
       uals.

   c. The event that it will rain in Portland tomorrow and the event that it will rain in Beaverton tomorrow.

   d. Wearing your lucky socks and getting an A on your exam.

Solution.

   a. The probability of getting heads on the first flip is 0.5 or 50%. After flipping heads, the probability
       of getting heads on the second flip is still 0.5 or 50%. Since the probability of flipping heads on the
       second flip did not change because we flipped heads on the first flip, the events are independent.

   b. Since two different people will be put in the role of president and vice president, we are drawing without
       replacement and the events are therefore dependent.

   c. If it is raining in Portland it is more likely that it will rain in Beaverton, so the events are dependent.

   d. Although there may some sort of placebo effect at play in terms of confidence and persistence, the
       socks you wear do not have a direct effect on how well you do on your exam, so these events are
       independent.

                                                                                                                                            
To calculate "and" probabilities we multiply, but we need to determine whether the events are independent or
dependent. If they are independent, then we can multiply the individual probability of each event because
one does not affect the other. If the events are dependent, then we need to multiply by the conditional
probability based on what has previously happened. Here is a summary of this.

                                                                  "And".

    Probabilities If events A and B are independent, then P(A and B) = P(A) · P(B)
    If events A and B are dependent, then P(A and B) = P(A) · P(B given A)

The probability of B given A is called a conditional probability since it depends, or is conditional, on A
occurring. We saw examples of conditional probability when we looked at contingency tables in the previous
section.
Example 4.2.10 Suppose you have a bag containing 6 red Legos, 4 green Legos, and 3 black Legos. We
will make exactly two lego selections from the bag. What is the probability of selecting:

   a. two red Legos in a row if we put the first red Lego back in the bag?

   b. two red Legos in a row if we don't put the first Lego back in the bag?

   c. a red Lego and then a green Lego if we do not put the red Lego back in the bag?

Solution.

   a. Since the outcomes are equally likely, the probability of selecting a red Lego is the number of red Legos
       divided by the total number of Legos, or P(red) = 136 .
       If we replace the red Lego we selected (selections are independent), we go back to having 6 red Legos
       in the bag of 13 Legos total. Therefore,
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY  201

                                              P(red and then red) = P(red) · P(red)
                                                                         =6·6
                                                                             13 13
                                                                          0.213 or 21.3%

b. If we do not replace the first red Lego (selections are dependent), then on our second draw there will
    only be 5 red Legos remaining, and 12 Legos in total. Therefore,

                                 P(red and then red) = P(red) · P(red given red taken out)
                                                            =6·5
                                                               13 12
                                                             0.192 or 19.2%

c. The probability of selecting a red Lego on the first draw is the same as in parts a and b. Since we are
   not putting the red Lego back into the bag, we will have only 12 Lego left in total, of which 4 are green.
   Therefore,

                                  P(red and then green) = P(red) · P(green given red taken out)
                                                                =6·4
                                                                   13 12
                                                                = 6 ·1
                                                                   13 3
                                                                 0.154 or 15.4%

                                                                                                                                            
Let's look at an example where we repeat an event many times.
Example 4.2.11 Suppose there is a 6% chance you will receive a citation if you ride the MAX train without
a ticket. What is the probability that you get away without a single citation if you ride without purchasing
a ticket for 20 days this month?
Solution. The first thing we want to recognize is that this question is essentially asking for the probability
of no citation and no citation and no citation.... twenty times (one for each day you ride without buying a
ticket). Since the outcomes are connected by an "and", we know we will be multiplying the probabilities. In
this case the the outcomes are independent (you are not more or less likely to get a citation if you already
received a citation). Therefore,

                               P(no citation in 20 rides) = P(no citation on a single ride)20
                                                                 = (1 - 0.06)20
                                                                 = (0.94)20
                                                                  0.290 or 29.0%

                                                                                                                                            

4.2.13 "Or" Probabilities

The event A or B refers to an event that includes the outcomes of A or B or both. We have seen the
202  CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

inclusive "or" both in terms of sets and logic, and in terms of contingency tables. The way we calculate the
probability of A or B depends on whether the events have characteristics that are overlapping or disjoint.

4.2.14 Overlapping or Disjoint Sets

Recall that disjoint means the same thing as not overlapping. Just like we saw in the logic and sets
chapter, the set diagram on the left shows overlapping sets and the set diagram on the right shows disjoint
sets.

To apply this to probability, we will look at an example of events that have overlapping characteristics, such
as color and shape.
Example 4.2.12 A prize machine is filled with 10 yellow erasers, 6 green erasers, 4 red pencil sharpeners, 8
yellow pencil sharpeners, and 5 red bouncy balls. Each prize is inside a plastic sphere, and the spheres are
well mixed in the prize machine. Each game will get you just one prize. Determine the probability of

   a. getting a yellow prize.

   b. getting a red or yellow prize.

   c. getting a prize that is yellow or an eraser.

Solution.

   a. Since yellow is a single event, we just need to know how many prizes there are in total, and how
       many of the prizes are yellow. The yellow prizes include the 10 yellow erasers and the 8 yellow pencil
       sharpeners.

                                                         P(yellow) = 18
                                                                         33

                                                                       0.545 or 54.5%

   b. For a red or yellow prize, the set of red and the set of yellow do not overlap. They are disjoint sets, so
       we will add the probability of getting a red prize to the probability of getting a yellow prize.

                                                  P(red or yellow) = P(red) + P(yellow)
                                                                        = 9 + 18
                                                                           33 33
                                                                        = 27
                                                                           33
                                                                         0.818 or 81.8%

   c. To find the probability of getting a prize that is yellow or an eraser, we need to be careful because
       these are overlapping sets. There are two ways to calculate this, and it is a lot like what we did with
       contingency tables. The first way is to add all the items separately, being careful not to double count.
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY                                                     203

           P(yellow or eraser) = P(yellow eraser) + P(yellow pencil sharpener) + P(green eraser)
                                     = 10 + 8 + 6
                                        33 33 33
                                     = 24
                                        33
                                      0.727 or 72.7%

The second way is to count the total of yellow items and the total of erasers, but the yellow erasers
are in both sets, or the overlap. We would be counting them twice and so we subtract their joint
probability.

P(yellow or eraser) = P(yellow) + P(eraser) - P(yellow and eraser)

                         = 18 + 16 - 10
                             33 33 33

                         = 24
                             33

                          0.727 or 72.7%

                                                                                                                                            
Here is a summary of how we found the "or" probabilities.

                                                        "Or" Probabilities.

    If the sets are disjoint, P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)
    If the sets are overlapping, P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B)-P(A and B)

We could also use the overlapping formula as a general formula, because in the case of disjoint sets, there is
no intersection and P(A and B) = 0. Here is another example with overlapping events.

Example 4.2.13 What is the probability of rolling two fair dice and getting a pair or a sum of 6?

Solution. For complicated events it's a good idea to list all of the outcomes. Here we list them in a table.
Looking at the table of outcomes, we see that there are 36 in total. Six outcomes that are pairs lie along
the upper-to-lower diagonal that goes through 3 + 3 = 6. There are 5 outcomes that add to 6 along the
lower-to-upper diagonal line that also goes through 3 + 3 = 6. That outcome is both a pair and a sum of 6,
so the events are overlapping.

1  2                          3  4                                         5  6

1 1+1=2 1+2=3 1+3=4 1+4=5 1+5=6 1+6=7

2 2+1=3 2+2=4 2+3=5 2+4=6 2+5=7 2+6=8

3 3+1=4 3+2=5 3+3=6 3+4=7 3+5=8 3+6=9

4 4 + 1 = 5 4 + 2 = 6 4 + 3 = 7 4 + 4 = 8 4 + 5 = 9 4 + 6 = 10

5 5 + 1 = 6 5 + 2 = 7 5 + 3 = 8 5 + 4 = 9 5 + 5 = 10 5 + 6 = 11

6 6 + 1 = 7 6 + 2 = 8 6 + 3 = 9 6 + 4 = 10 6 + 5 = 11 6 + 6 = 12

As in the last example, there are two ways to do this.
If we add all of the pairs and sums of 6 without double counting, we get:

P(pair or sum of 6) = P(pair) + P(sum of 6 that haven't been counted)
                          =6+4
                             36 36
204                                                   CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

                                                  = 10
                                                      36

                                                   0.278 or 27.8%

To use the subtraction method, we need to add the probability of rolling a pair to the probability of rolling
a sum of 6 and subtract the overlap. Thus we have:

     P(pair or sum of 6) = P(pair) + P(sum of 6) - P(pair and a sum of 6)

                               =6+5-1
                                  36 36 36

                               = 10
                                  36

                                0.278 or 27.8%

Now that we have looked at empirical and theoretical probability, we will be able to use them for something

very important in the next section - expected value.                       

4.2.15 Exercises

1. A ball is drawn randomly from a jar containing 6 red marbles, 2 white marbles, and 5 yellow marbles.
      Find the probability of:

          a. Drawing a white marble.
          b. Drawing a red marble.
          c. Drawing a green marble.
          d. Drawing two yellow marbles if you draw with replacement.
          e. Drawing first a red marble then a white marble if marbles are drawn without replacement.
2. Compute the probability of tossing a fair six-sided die and getting:

          a. an even number.
          b. a number less than 3.
3. Compute the probability of rolling a fair 12-sided die and getting:

          a. a number other than 8.
          b. a 2 or 7.
4. A fair six-sided die is rolled twice. What is the probability of getting:

          a. a 6 on both rolls?
          b. a 5 on the first roll and an even number on the second roll?
5. Suppose that 21% of people own dogs. If you pick two people at random, what is the probability that
      neither own a dog?
6. At some random moment, you look at your digital clock and note the minutes reading.

          a. What is probability the minutes reading is 15?
          b. What is the probability the minutes reading is 15 or less?
4.2. THEORETICAL PROBABILITY  205

7. What is the probability of flipping a fair coin three times

          a. and getting a head each time?

          b. not getting a head at all?
8. What is the probability of rolling two fair six-sided dice

          a. and getting a sum greater than or equal to 7?

          b. getting an even sum or a sum greater than 7?
9. A box contains four black pieces of cloth, two striped pieces, and six dotted pieces. A piece is selected

      randomly and then placed back in the box. A second piece is selected randomly. What is the probability
      that:

          a. both pieces are dotted?

          b. the first piece is black, and the second piece is dotted?

          c. one piece is black, and one piece is striped?
10. Compute the probability of rolling five fair six-sided dice (each side has equal probability of landing

      face up on each roll) and getting:

          a. a 3 on all five dice.

          b. at least one of the die shows a 3.
11. If you pick a card from a standard deck of 52 cards, what is the probability of getting

          a. a 7?

          b. a club?

          c. a spade or a club?

          d. a diamond or a 5?
12. A box of chocolates contains 7 dark chocolate pieces and 3 milk chocolate pieces (and no others). If

      you randomly pick 2 pieces and eat each chocolate after choosing it, what is the probability of choosing
      at least one dark chocolate? Write the probability in all three forms.
13. A bag contains 3 green marbles, 4 red marbles, and 5 blue marbles (and no others). If you randomly
      pull out three marbles all at once, what is the probability that you choose 3 blue marbles? Write the
      probability in all three forms.
14. A bag contains 3 green marbles, 4 red marbles, and 5 blue marbles (and no others). If you randomly
      pull out a marble and put the marble back 3 times, what is the probability that you pull out a blue
      marble all 3 times? Write the probability in all three forms.
15. A bag contains 3 green marbles, 4 red marbles, and 5 blue marbles (and no others). If you randomly
      pull out three marbles all at once, what is the probability that you choose at least 1 blue marble? Write
      the probability in all three forms.
206                                                                        CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

4.3 Expected Value

Objectives

Students will be able to:

   · Make a probability model

   · Calculate the expected value for a probability model

   · Determine whether a game is fair

Expected value is one of the useful probability concept we will discuss. It has many applications, from
insurance policies to making financial decisions, and it's one thing that the casinos and government agencies
that run gambling operations and lotteries may hope most people never learn about.

4.3.1 Expected Value

The expected value is the average gain or loss of an event if the procedure is repeated many times. To help
get a better understanding of what expected value is and how it is used, consider the following scenario:

You are commissioned to design a game for a local carnival. Your proposed game will have players roll a
six-sided die. If it comes up 6, they win $10. If not, they get to roll again. If they get a 6 on the second roll,
then they win 3. If they do not get a 6 on the second roll, they lose. With the game design complete, you
now need to decide how much the carnival game owner should charge players in order to make a profit over
the long run.

To make a profit, the carnival needs to know how much they will pay in winnings, on average, over the long
run and charge more than that. In other words, they must charge more than the expected value of the game.

One way to organize the outcomes and probabilities is with a probability model. A probability model or
probability distribution is a table listing the possible outcomes and their corresponding probabilities. The
outcomes will be the amounts a player can win, and we will calculate the probabilities using what we have
learned about theoretical probability.

As we have seen with complements, probabilities in a probability distribution must add to 1, so that is
important to check. Here is the probability model for the carnival game:

Outcome ($ won)                 Rolling Event                              Probability
          $10              Roll a 6 on the first roll
           $3           Roll not a 6 on the first roll                  P(roll   a  6)  =  1
                         and a 6 on the second roll                                        6
           $0           Roll not a 6 on the first roll
                       and not a 6 on the second roll   P(roll  not  a  6  then  roll   a  6)  =  5  ·  1  =  5
                                                                                                  6     6     36

                                                        P(roll  not  a  6  then  not    a  6)  =  5  ·  5  =  25
                                                                                                  6     6     36

Think of the expected value as a weighted average. We could take the average of $10, $3, and $0, but they
are not all equally likely. It is much more likely to win $0 than to win $10. So, to find the average, we
multiply each outcome by the chance it will happen and add the products together.

                                                           Expected Value.

    Multiply each outcome by its probability and add up the products

In this case we have:
4.3. EXPECTED VALUE                                                               207

Expected winnings = $10( 1 ) + $3( 5 ) + $0( 25 ) = $2.08
                                     6  36           36

This tells us that over the long run, players can expect to win $2.08 per game. This also means that the
carnival owner will be paying out an average of $2.08 per game! Since the carnival owner would rather not
lose money by paying players over the long run we need to make sure to charge players enough to offset the
average payout.

If the carnival owner charges exactly $2.08 to play, the game is considered a fair game since the expected
winnings would be $0. In a fair game, the player isn't expected to win anything, nor is the owner expected
to earn anything over the long run. However, if the carnival owner charges the player more than $2.08 to
play, they will earn money over the long run.

Suppose you suggest charging $5 to play. We can determine the net winnings by subtracting the $5 the
player has to pay from their expected winnings. This gives us:

                     Net player winnings = $2.08 - $5 = -$2.92

This means that over the long run, players can expect to lose an average of $2.92 each game they play,
and the carnival owner can expect to earn an average of $2.92 per game over the long run. Here's another
example.

Example 4.3.2 Pick4 is a game by the Oregon Lottery that costs $1 to play. In this game you pick 4
numbers in a specific pattern. If you get the exact sequence, you can in theory earn a lot of money. Suppose
that the payouts are as follows. Determine the player's expected net winnings.

                          Prize ($)     Probability
                             $250           1/417
                             $500          1/1833
                            $1000          1/1667
                            $1500          1/2500

Solution. This table is not quite a complete probability distribution since it is missing one important
outcome: when the player loses. In that case the prize is $0. We need to add a line for this. The prize for
this missing outcome is $0, and since losing is the complement to winning something, the probability will be:

                     P(Win $0) = 1 - ( 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 )
                                             417 1833 1667 2500

                                   = 1 - 0.0039

                                   = 0.9961

Adding this information to the table gives a complete probability distribution. Now we can see that players
are going to lose more than 99% of the time, so the expected value will be heavily weighted toward winning
$0.

                          Prize ($)     Probability
                             $250           1/417
                             $500          1/1833
                            $1000          1/1667
                            $1500          1/2500
                               $0          0.9961

Expected winnings = $250( 1 ) + $500( 1 ) + $1000( 1 ) + $1500( 1 ) + $0(0.9961)
                     417  1833              16773                2500
208                                       CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

                                    = $2.07

Therefore, the player's expected winnings are $2.07, on average, over the long run. To find the expected net
winnings, we subtract the cost to play. Since it costs $1 to play,

                      Net Expected Winnings = $2.07 - $1.00 = $1.07.

Assuming the given payouts are correct, this would be one game you would want to play for investment

purposes since you can expect to earn $1.07 per game, on average, over the long run. Play a million times,

and you just might become a millionaire!                                                          

In general, if the expected value of a game is negative, it is not a good idea to play, since in the long run you
will lose money. It would be better to play a game with a positive expected value (good luck trying to find
one!), although keep in mind that even if the average winnings are positive it could be the case that most
people lose money and one very fortunate individual wins a great deal of money.

Not surprisingly, the expected value for casino games is always negative for the player, and therefore positive
for the casino. It must be positive for the casino, or they would go out of business! Players just need to
keep in mind that when they play a game repeatedly, they should expect to lose money. That is fine so long
as you enjoy playing the game and think it is worth the cost, but it would be wrong to expect to come out
ahead.

Expected value is not only used to determine the average amount won and lost at casinos and carnivals,
it also has applications in business and insurance, just to name a few. Let's look at a couple of those
applications.

Example 4.3.3 For 3 months, a coffee shop tracked their morning sales of coffee, between 6am and 10am.
The following results were recorded:

                      Number of cups sold 145 150 155 160 170

                      Probability         0.15 0.22 0.37 0.19 0.07

How many cups of coffee should they expect to sell each morning?

Solution. In this case the table tells us that 15% of the time they sell 145 cups of coffee between 6am and
10am, 22% of the time they sell 150 cups, 37% of the time they sell 155 cups, 19% of the time they sell 160
cups, and 7% of the time they sell 170 cups. Since the highest probability is associated with 155 cups, the
expected value should lie somewhat close to this.
To find the expected number of coffees sold, we multiply each number of cups of coffee by its respective
probability and then add the products.

     Expected number of coffees sold = 145(0.15) + 150(0.22) + 155(0.37) + 160(0.19) + 170(0.07)
                                                = 154.4 cups of coffee

This means that over the long run, the coffee shop can expect, on average, to sell around 154 cups of coffee

each morning. This is an important tool for businesses since it helps inform them how much stock they

should keep on hand.                                                                              

Example 4.3.4 On average, a 40-year-old man in the US has a 0.242% chance of dying in the next year1.
An insurance company charges $275 annually for a life insurance policy that pays a $100,000 death benefit.
What is the expected value for the insurance company on this policy?

Solution. The first thing we want to do is organize the probabilities and outcomes in a probability distri-
bution table. There are two outcomes - either the policy holder dies, and the insurance company pays the
benefit, or the policy holder does not die, and they do not pay anything.
The probability of paying the death benefit is equal to the chance of the person dying in the next year, and
the probability of paying nothing is equal to the complement of the chance of dying in the next year.
4.3. EXPECTED VALUE                                                         209

                        Insurance payout     Probability
                               $100000           0.00242
                                   $0
                                          1-0.00242=0.99758

Then we can calculate:

                                Expected Payout = $100000(0.00242) + $0(0.99758) = $242

So, the expected payout for the insurance company is $242, but they are charging $275 for the policy. Their
net revenue would be

                        Net Value to Insurance Company = $275 - $242 = $33

The insurance company is making, on average, $33 per policy per year. It shouldn't be too surprising because

there are overhead costs and the insurance company can only afford to offer policies if they, on average, make

money on them. But how much money should they make? As a consumer it is important to know about

expected value.                                                             

4.3.2 Exercises

1. A bag contains 3 gold marbles, 6 silver marbles, and 28 black marbles. Someone offers to play this
      game: You randomly select on marble from the bag. If it is gold, you win $3. If it is silver, you win $2.
      If it is black, you lose $1.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. What is your expected value if you play this game?
2. A bag contains 5 red marbles, 8 blue marbles, and 15 green marbles. Someone offers to play this game:

      You randomly select one marble from the bag. If it is blue, you win $3. If it is red, you win $2. If it is
      green, you lose $1.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. What is your expected value if you play this game?
3. A friend devises a game that is played by rolling a single six-sided fair (each side has equal probability

      of landing face up, once rolled) die once. If you roll a 6, he pays you $3; if you roll a 5, he pays you
      nothing; if you roll a number less than 5, you pay him $1.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. Compute the expected value for this game.

          c. Should you play this game?
4. A friend devises a game that is played by rolling a single six-sided fair (each side has equal probability

      of landing face up, once rolled) die once. If you roll a 1, he pays you $5; if you roll a 2, he pays you
      nothing; if you roll a number more than 2, you pay him $2.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. Compute the expected value for this game.

          c. Should you play this game?
   1According to the estimator at numericalexample.com/index.php?view=article;&ampid=91
210  CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

5. A company wants to offer a 2-year extended warranty in case their product fails after the original
      warranty period but within 2 years of the purchase. They estimate that 0.7% of their products will
      fail during that time, and it will cost them $350 to replace a failed product. If they charge $48 for the
      extended warranty, what is the company's expected profit or loss on each warranty sold?

6. A company wants to offer a 3-year extended warranty in case their product fails after the original
      warranty period but within 3 years of the purchase. They estimate that 0.5% of their products will
      fail during that time, and it will cost them $400 to replace a failed product. If they charge $60 for the
      extended warranty, what is the company's expected profit or loss on each warranty sold?

7. An insurance company estimates the probability of an earthquake in the next year to be 0.0013. The
      average damage done by an earthquake it estimates to be $60,000. If the company offers earthquake
      insurance for $100, what is their expected value of the policy?

8. An insurance company estimates the probability of a flood in the next year to be 0.0002. The average
      damage done by a flood is estimated to be $70,000. If the company offers flood insurance for $3000,
      what is their expected value of the policy?

9. You purchase a raffle ticket to help out a charity. The raffle ticket costs $5. The charity is selling 2000
      tickets. One of them will be drawn and the person holding the ticket will be given a prize worth $4000.
      Compute the expected value for this raffle.

10. You purchase a raffle ticket to help out a charity. The raffle ticket costs $10. The charity is selling 1000
      tickets. One of them will be drawn and the person holding the ticket will be given a prize worth $3000.
      Compute the expected value for this raffle.

11. At the local fair there is a game in which folks are betting where a chicken will poop on a 5 by 5-foot
      grid. (There are 25, 1 by 1 squares to choose from) You can buy a 1 by 1-foot square for $10 and if the
      chicken poops on your square you win $100. Find the expected value for this game.

12. At the local fair there is a game in which folks are betting where a chicken will poop on a 4 by 4-foot
      grid. (There are 16, 1 by 1 squares to choose from) You can buy a 1 by 1-foot square for $15 and if the
      chicken poops on your square you win $125. Find the expected value for this game.

13. Create a problem using the concept of expected value. Possible topics include insurance policies, financial
      decisions, gambling and lotteries. Determine the expected value of the situation you created.
4.4. CHAPTER 4 REVIEW                                                           211

4.4 Chapter 4 Review

1. A professor gave a test to students in a morning class and the same test to the afternoon class. The
      grades are summarized below.

                                           ABC               Total
                                                               32
                       Morning Class 14 11 7                   28
                                                               60
                       Afternoon Class 11 13 4

                       Total               25 24 11

If one student was chosen at random, find each probability:

          a. P(in the afternoon class)

          b. P(earned an A)

          c. P(earned a B and was in the afternoon class)

          d. P(earned a C given the student was in the morning class)

          e. P(is in the morning class given that the student earned a B)
2. A professor gave a test to students in a science class and in a math class during the same week. The

      grades are summarized below.

                                           ABC               Total
                                                               38
                       Science Class 7 18 13                   27
                                                               65
                       Math Class 10 8 9

                       Total               17 26 22

If one student was chosen at random, find each probability:

          a. P(in the math class)

          b. P(earned a B)

          c. P(earned an A and was in the math class)

          d. P(earned a B given the student was in the science class)

          e. P(is in the math class given that the student earned a B)
3. Four Cable Channels (2, 6, 8, 12) have Drama series, Sitcoms, Game Shows, and News. The number of

      each type of show is listed in the table below. Complete the table and use it to answer the questions.

     Type              Channel 2  Channel 6  Channel 8       Channel 12  Total
   Drama                     5          2          4                       15
   Sitcom                    6                     7                3      25
Game Show                               4          3                4      15
    News                     3          2                           3      10
     Total                                                                 65

a. P(Sitcom or Game Show)
b. P(Drama and Channel 8)
c. P(Channel 8 or Channel 2)
d. P(Drama given that it is on Channel 6)
212                                                          CHAPTER 4. PROBABILITY

          e. Given that the show is a sitcom, find the probability it is on channel 12.

           f. Find the probability that a show is a game show, given that the show is on channel 2.
4. Four Cable Channels (3, 5, 7, 13) have Reality shows, Crime dramas, Cooking Shows, and Community

      Programming. The number of each type of show is listed in the table below. Complete the table and
      use it to answer the questions.

          Type   Channel 3             Channel 5  Channel 7  Channel 13  Total
        Reality        6                                8           6
         Crime         2                     1                      2      11
       Cooking         5                     5          9                  83
     Community                               8          4
                       15                    21         25
          Total

          a. P(Reality or Crime Show)
          b. P(Cooking and Channel 3)
          c. P(Channel 3 or Channel 13)
          d. P(Community Program given that it is on Channel 5)
          e. Given that the show is a crime show, find the probability it is on channel 3.
           f. Find the probability that a show is a cooking show, given that it is on channel 7.
5. A ball is drawn randomly from a jar containing 12 red marbles, 8 white marbles, and 5 yellow marbles.
      Find the probability of:

          a. Drawing a red marble.
          b. Not drawing a white marble.
          c. Drawing a yellow or red marble.
          d. Drawing a blue marble.
          e. Drawing two red marbles if you draw with replacement.
           f. Drawing first a red marble then a yellow marble if marbles are drawn without replacement.
6. A ball is drawn randomly from a jar containing 18 black marbles, 4 purple marbles, and 9 blue marbles.
      Find the probability of:

          a. Drawing a black marble.
          b. Not drawing a purple marble.
          c. Drawing a blue or purple marble.
          d. Drawing a yellow marble.
          e. Drawing two black marbles if you draw with replacement.
           f. Drawing first a blue marble then a black marble if marbles are drawn without replacement.
7. What is the probability of flipping a coin four times

     a. and getting a head each time?
     b. not getting a head at all?
4.4. CHAPTER 4 REVIEW  213

8. What is the probability of flipping a coin 7 times

          a. and getting all tails?

          b. getting all heads?
9. According to a survey by Pew Research in 2020, 68% of U.S. adults say the federal government is doing

      too little to protect water quality. (+/- 1.6%)1 If you pick two adults at random, what is the probability
      that

          a. Both of them think the government is doing too little to protect water quality.

          b. Neither of them thinks the government is doing too little to protect water quality.
10. According to a national AP-NORC Survey, 95% of U.S. adults think changes are needed in the criminal

      justice system (+/- 3.7%).2 If you pick 3 people at random, what is the probability that

          a. All of them support criminal justice reform.

          b. None of them support criminal justice reform
11. A bag contains 2 black marbles, 4 orange marbles, and 20 yellow marbles. Someone offers to play this

      game: You randomly select one marble from the bag. If it is black, you win $3. If it is orange, you win
      $2. If it is yellow, you lose $1.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. What is your expected value if you play this game?

          c. Should you play this game?
12. A friend devises a game that is played by rolling a single six-sided die once. If you roll a 6, he pays you

      $10; if you roll a 5, he pays you nothing; if you roll a number less than 5, you pay him $1.

          a. Make a probability model for this game.

          b. Compute the expected value for this game.

          c. Should you play this game?
13. A company wants to offer a 2-year extended warranty in case their product fails after the original

      warranty period but within 2 years of the purchase. They estimate that 1.5% of their products will
      fail during that time, and it will cost them $450 to replace a failed product. If they charge $55 for the
      extended warranty, what is the company's expected profit or loss on each warranty sold?
14. You purchase a raffle ticket to help out a charity. The raffle ticket costs $10. The charity is selling 2000
      tickets. One of them will be drawn and the person holding the ticket will be given a prize worth $8000.
      Compute the expected value for this raffle.

   1pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/04/21/how-americans-see-climate-change-and-the-environment-in-7-cha

rts
   2apnorc.org/projects/Pages/Widespread-Desire-for-Policing-and-Criminal-Justice-Reform.aspx
Chapter 5

Democracy

Dr. Graciela Chichilnisky and Social Choice.
Dr. Graciela Chichilnisky1 is a professor of Economics and Mathe-
matical Statistics at Columbia University. She holds Ph.D. degrees
in Mathematics and Economics from MIT and the University of Cal-
ifornia Berkeley.
Dr. Chichilnisky applied algebraic topology to voting theory and
the theory of social choice. She accounted for not only the order
of voting preference but also the intensity of preference among the
alternatives (Chichilnisky, 1980). Due to her innovative work in this
area, continuous social choice has become an international subdisci-
pline.
More recently, Dr. Chichilnisky combined her research in math and
economics to focus on climate change. Dr. Chichilnisky acted as
the lead author on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
which received the 2007 Nobel Prize for its work in deciding world
policy with respect to climate change, and she worked extensively on
the Kyoto Protocol, creating and designing the carbon market that
became international law in 2005 (Siegle, 2010).
As a world-renowned economist, she is the creator of the formal theory of Sustainable Development (Siegle,
2010). Her pioneering work uses innovative market mechanisms to create Green Capitalism.
Dr. Chichilnisky is the CEO and Co-founder of Global Thermostat2, a company in which she co-invented a
"Carbon Negative Technology" that captures CO2 from the air and transforms it into profitable assets such
as biofuels, food, beverages, polymers, and valuable building materials (Chichilnisky, 2018).

Dr. Chichilnisky taught previously at Harvard, Essex and Stanford Universities. She was elected one of the
Ten Most Influential Latinos in the U.S. She is a frequent political and economic speaker on CNN, ABC, BBC
TV News, and Bloomberg News, as well as a frequent keynote speaker at leading international conferences
and universities. Her two most recent books are "Reversing Climate Change: How Carbon Removals Can
Resolve Climate Change and Fix the Economy" and "The Economics of Climate Change". Dr. Chichilnisky
is also the author of "Saving Kyoto", which won the American Library Association's 2010 Outstanding
Academic Title of the Year and the American Geographical Society's Book of the Month Award in October
2009.

    1Photo: ©Michael Timmons. All rights reserved, used with permission.
   2globalthermostat.com

                                                                     215
216                CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5.1 Apportionment

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Explain the historical context of the formation of the U.S Government, including colonization, slavery
       and the Three-fifths Compromise, and how they relate to systemic inequality today
   · Apportion representatives using Hamilton's method
   · Apportion representatives using Jefferson's method
   · Apportion representatives using Webster's method
   · Apportion representatives using the Hill-Huntington Method

5.1.1 Historical Context for This Chapter

In this chapter we are going to study some of the math used in the United States government today. In
doing this, it is very important to acknowledge the Native American genocide and race-based chattel slavery
which are often left out of math textbooks.

We are including this history to show how racist policies, laws and practices like segregation, racial profiling,
police brutality, mass incarceration, redlining and voter suppression continue to this day to limit the freedoms,
rights and economic prospects of African Americans. With the COVID-19 pandemic and the death of George
Floyd by a police officer, there is greater awareness of systemic racism than ever before.

5.1.2 Formation of the United States

Scholars estimate that people have lived in the Americas for over 20,000 years (Worrall, 2018). By the time
Columbus arrived, more than 50 million people were living in the Americas and around 10 million Indegenous
people were living in the area that would become the United States (History.com Editors, 2018).

The first colonists arrived in America in 1607 and African people who had been violently separated from
their families and homeland were brought to Jamestown in 1619 as slaves. Slave labor was used on tobacco
and cotton plantations, for domestic work and even as part of the labor for building the White House. The
system of slavery was an integral part of the United States economic and political system (How Slavery
Helped Build a World Economy, 2003).

At the same time, white settlements kept encroaching on the homeland of Native Americans. Many treaties
were signed and then violated. For example, in 1785, the Treaty of Hopewell was signed with the Cherokees
in Georgia, which set a boundary on white settlement, but there were already colonists past that border.

The U.S. government was officially formed in 1787. During the Constitutional Convention, the framers
were tasked with making decisions on the three branches of government and how people (or those considered
to be people) would be represented. At that time only white men with property were allowed to vote. Women
were also considered to be property of their husband at the time.

In creating the Legislative Branch of government, it was decided that Congress would be made up of the
Senate and the House of Representatives. Representation for the Senate would be equal with two senators
per state. To account for the different sizes of the states, the representation in the House of Representa-
tives would be proportional to the state's population, but there was a controversy over how to count the
population.
5.1. APPORTIONMENT  217

During the Constitutional Convention, the northern and southern states were at odds on whom to count.
The South wanted more representation in Congress which would also increase their power, so they argued
to count slaves as part of their population. The southern states did not want to count slaves for taxation,
however, because that would result in them paying more taxes.

Slaves were considered property, not humans, and they were not citizens. Therefore, they did not have the
right to vote or participate in government. The anti-slavery North wanted to count only free people, which
included free Blacks. This led to the Three-Fifths Compromise that determined three out of every five
slaves would be counted toward a state's population and taxation (Clayton, 2015).

It is also important to note that there are about 4 million U.S. Citizens who live in the territories of Guam, the
Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico who do not have representatives or senators.
They pay federal taxes like Social Security and Medicare but not Federal Income tax.

5.1.3 What is Apportionment?

The number of representatives each state gets is based on its population, so once the framers decided how
to count the population, they had to figure out how to divide up the representatives. This math problem is
called apportionment.
Apportionment is the problem of dividing up a fixed number of things among groups of different sizes. In
the United States, there is a certain number of representatives as stated in the constitution, currently 435,
and they need to be divided fairly among the 50 states. Since the states are different sizes, and we cannot
use fractions of people, this is not an easy task. In addition, the population in each state may change over
time. Every 10 years after the census is taken, the representatives are reapportioned.
The apportionment problem comes up in a variety of non-political areas too. Here are the rules for appor-
tionment in general.

                                                       Apportionment rules.

        1. The things being divided up can exist only in whole numbers.

        2. We must use all of the things being divided up, and we cannot use any more.

        3. Each group must get at least one of the things being divided up.

        4. The number of things assigned to each group should be at least approximately proportional to
            the population of the group. (Exact proportionality isn't possible because of the whole number
            requirement, but we should try to be close.)

In terms of the apportionment of the United States House of Representatives, these rules imply:

    1. We can only have whole representatives (a state can't have 3.4 representatives).

    2. We can only use the 435 representatives available.

    3. Every state gets at least one representative.

    4. The number of representatives each state gets should be approximately proportional to the state
       population. This way, the number of constituents each representative has should be approximately
       equal.

We will look at four ways of solving the apportionment problem, developed by different people: Hamilton,
Jefferson, Webster, and the Huntington-Hill method that is used today. We will continue to look at U.S.
history throughout this section including Hamilton, Jefferson and Webster's relationship to slavery.
218                                                          CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5.1.4 Hamilton's Method

Alexander Hamilton (1755 - 1804) was raised in St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands by a poor family. He was
motivated by his low socioeconomic status to work himself into a higher social standing. He eventually came
to the colonies and worked himself into circles of wealth and influence. While Hamilton wasn't pro-slavery
and considered himself an abolitionist, when choosing between his societal status and moral obligation, he
chose the former.

He wed Elizabeth Schuyler, who was from a prominent family who owned slaves. He was involved with the
transactions of slaves for his in-laws which further muddled his anti-slavery stance. Furthermore, Hamilton
also traded and sold slaves as part of his duties for the Continental Army.

Alexander Hamilton proposed the method that now bears his name. His method was approved by Congress
in 1791 but was vetoed by President Washington. It was later adopted in 1852 and used through 1910. He
begins by determining, to several decimal places, how many people each representative should represent (the
divisor).

                                                        Hamilton's Method.

        1. Determine how many people each representative should represent. Do this by dividing the total
            population of all the states by the total number of representatives. This answer is called the
            divisor.

        2. Divide each state's population by the divisor to determine how many representatives it should
            have. Record this answer to several decimal places. This answer is called the quota.

            Since we can only allocate whole representatives, Hamilton resolved the whole number problem
            as follows:

        3. Cut off all the decimal parts of all the quotas (but don't forget what the decimals were). This
            is the initial apportionment and will always be less than or equal to the total number of
            representatives. Add up the whole numbers.

        4. If the total from Step 3 is less than the total number of representatives, assign the remaining
            representatives, one each, to the states whose decimal parts of the quota were largest, until the
            desired total is reached.

            Make sure that each state ends up with at least one representative.

Let's see how this works in an example.

Example 5.1.2 A new state is named after George Floyd, killed by the police in Minneapolis, Minnesota
in 2020. Floyd has three counties: King, Garner and Taylor. They are named after African Americans who
were also victims of police brutality. Rodney King was brutally beaten by four white police officers and
Eric Garner and Breonna Taylor were killed by the police. The Floyd State House of Representatives has
41 members. If the legislature wants to divide this representation along county lines (which is not required,
but let's pretend they do), let's use Hamilton's method to apportion them. The populations of the counties
are as follows:

                                         County  Population
                                          King      162,310
                                                    538,479
                                         Garner     197,145
                                         Taylor     897,934
                                          Total

Step 1: First, we divide the total population by the number of representatives to find the divisor: 897934/41 =
21900.82927.
Step 2: Now we determine each county's quota by dividing the county's population by the divisor: For
example, for King, we take 162, 310/21, 900.82927 which equals 7.4111.
5.1. APPORTIONMENT                                                                             219

                            County   Population   Quota
                             King       162,310   7.4111
                                        538,479   24.5872
                            Garner      197,945   9.0017
                            Taylor      897,934
                             Total

Step 3: Removing the decimal parts of the quotas gives our initial apportionment and we add those numbers
up.

                    County   Population   Quota    Initial
                     King       162,310   7.4111      7
                                538,479   24.5872     24
                    Garner      197,945   9.0017      9
                    Taylor      897,934               40
                     Total

Step 4: We need 41 representatives, and right now we only have 40. The remaining one goes to the county
with the largest decimal part, which is Garner:

                    County  Population  Quota     Initial  Final
                     King      162,310  7.4111       7        7
                               538,479  24.5872              25
                    Garner     197,945  9.0017     24+1       9
                    Taylor     897,934               9       41
                     Total                           40

Our final apportionment is King: 7, Garner: 25, Taylor: 9, for a total of 41 representatives.  

Example 5.1.3 We will use Hamilton's method again, to apportion 75 seats for a new state of Lewis, which
has five counties. Lewis and its counties are named for civil rights leaders John Lewis, Rosa Parks, Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Ella Baker, Daisy Bates and Roy Wilkins.

Solution. Step 1: The divisor is 1, 052, 567/75 = 14, 034.22667.
Step 2: Determine each county's quota by dividing its population by the divisor:

                            County   Population   Quota
                             Parks       49,875   3.5538
                              King      166,158   11.8395
                             Baker       82,888   5.9061
                             Bates      626,667   44.6528
                            Wilkins     126,979   9.0478
                             Total
                                       1,052,567

Step 3: Remove the decimal part of each quota and add up the initial apportionment:

                    County   Population   Quota    Initial
                     Parks       49,875   3.5538      3
                      King      166,158   11.8395     11
                     Baker       82,888   5.9061      5
                     Bates      626,667   44.6528     44
                    Wilkins     126,979   9.0478      9
                     Total                            72
                               1,052,567

Step 4: We need 75 representatives and we only have 72, so we assign the remaining three, one each, to the
three counties with the largest decimal parts, which are Baker, King, and Bates in that order:
220                                                                       CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

                  County   Population   Quota    Initial                  Final
                   Parks       49,875   3.5538      3                        3
                    King      166,158   11.8395                             12
                   Baker       82,888   5.9061    11+1                       6
                   Bates      626,667   44.6528   5+1                       45
                  Wilkins     126,979   9.0478    44+1                       9
                   Total                                                    75
                             1,052,567              9
                                                    72

Our final apportionment is Parks: 3, King: 12, Baker: 6, Bates: 45, and Wilkins: 9 for a total of 75

representatives.

Note that even though Parks County's decimal part is greater than .5, it isn't big enough to get an additional

representative, because three other counties have greater decimal parts.                                 

Hamilton's method obeys something called the Quota Rule. The Quota Rule isn't a law, but an idea that
some people think is a good one.

                           Quota Rule.

     The Quota Rule says that the final number of representatives a state gets should be within one of
     that state's quota. Since we're dealing with whole numbers for our final answers, that means that
     each state should either go up to the next whole number above its quota, or down to the next whole
     number below its quota.

5.1.5 Problems with Hamilton's Method

After using Hamilton's method for many years, three paradoxes happened, on separate occasions, where
unfair things happened in new apportionments. This led to other methods being needed.

The Alabama Paradox is named for an incident that happened during the apportionment that took place
after the 1880 census. (A similar incident happened ten years earlier involving the state of Rhode Island, but
the paradox is named after Alabama.) The post-1880 apportionment had been completed, using Hamilton's
method and the new population numbers from the census. Then it was decided that because of the country's
growing population, the House of Representatives should be made larger. That meant that the apportionment
would need to be done again, still using Hamilton's method and the same 1880 census numbers, but with
more representatives. The assumption was that some states would gain another representative and others
would stay with the same number they already had (since there weren't enough new representatives being
added to give one more to every state). The paradox is that Alabama ended up losing a representative in
the process, even though no populations were changed, and the total number of representatives increased.

The New States Paradox happened when Oklahoma became a state in 1907. Oklahoma had enough
population to qualify for five representatives in Congress. Those five representatives would need to come
from somewhere, though, so five states, presumably, would lose one representative each. That happened,
but another thing also happened: Maine gained a representative (from New York).

The Population Paradox happened between the apportionments after the census of 1900 and of 1910.
In those ten years, Virginia's population grew at an average annual rate of 1.07%, while Maine's grew at
an average annual rate of 0.67%. Virginia started with more people, grew at a faster rate, grew by more
people, and ended up with more people than Maine. By itself, that doesn't mean that Virginia should gain
representatives or Maine shouldn't, because there are lots of other states involved. But Virginia ended up
losing a representative to Maine.
5.1. APPORTIONMENT  221

5.1.6 Jefferson's Method

"All men are created equal," are words penned by our third president and Founding Father, Thomas Jefferson
(1743 - 1826), in the preamble to the Constitution. However, over the course of his life, Jefferson owned
around 600 slaves. Among these hundreds of slaves, Jefferson fathered at least six children with one of his
slaves, Sally Hennings.

Over his lifetime and his writings, Jefferson wrestled with his conscience regarding slavery, which can be
seen in documents such as drafts of the Constitution before its final version. In the end, his personal and
monetary gain surpassed that of his concern for the enslaved.

Thomas Jefferson proposed a different method for apportionment. After Washington vetoed Hamilton's
method, Jefferson's method was adopted, and used in Congress from 1791 through 1842. Jefferson, of course,
had political reasons for wanting his method to be used rather than Hamilton's. Primarily, his method favors
larger states, and his own home state of Virginia was the largest at the time. He would also argue that it's
the ratio of people to representatives that is the critical thing, and apportionment methods should be based
on that.

The first three steps of Jefferson's method are the same as Hamilton's. He found the same divisor and the
same quota and cut off the decimal parts in the same way, giving the same initial apportionment that is less
than the required total.

What changes is how Jefferson assigned the remaining representatives. He said that since we ended up with
an answer that is too small, our divisor must have been too big. He changed the divisor by making it smaller
and looked at the new total. He would raise or lower the divisor until he found one that produced the
required total. This is a trial and error process that takes some patience.

                                                        Jefferson's Method.

    The first three steps are the same as Hamilton's

        1. Determine how many people each representative should represent. Do this by dividing the total
            population of all the states by the total number of representatives. This answer is called the
            divisor.

        2. Divide each state's population by the divisor to determine how many representatives it should
            have. Record this answer to several decimal places. This answer is called the quota.

        3. Cut off all the decimal parts of all the quotas (but don't forget what the decimals were). This
            is the initial apportionment and will always be less than or equal to the total number of
            representatives. Add up the whole numbers.

        4. If the total from Step 3 was less than the total number of representatives, reduce the divisor
            and recalculate the quota and allocation. If you lower it too far, increase it. Continue doing
            this until the total in Step 3 is equal to the total number of representatives. The divisor you
            end up using is called the modified divisor. This is a trial-and-error process.

Example 5.1.4 We'll return to the state of Floyd and apply Jefferson's method. We begin, as we did with
Hamilton's method, by finding the quotas with the original divisor, 21,900.82927.
Steps 1-3 are the same as Hamilton's Method. Since we will be using different divisors, we will write the
divisor at the bottom of the population column to be clear what we are dividing each number in that column
by. You can also write it above that column if you prefer.
222                                                                         CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     County                                 Population    Quota    Initial
      King                                      162,310   7.4111      7
                                                538,479   24.5872     24
     Garner                                     197,145   9.0017      9
     Taylor                                     897,934               40
      Total
     Divisor                               ÷21,900.82927

We need 41 representatives, and this divisor gives only 40. We must reduce the divisor until we get 41
representatives. Let's try 21,500 as the divisor
Step 4:

     County                                Population     Quota    Initial
      King                                    162,310     7.5493      7
                                              538479      25.0455     25
     Garner                                   197,145     9.1695      9
     Taylor                                   897,934                 41
      Total                                  ÷21,500
     Divisor

That worked and our final apportionment is King: 7, Garner: 25, and Taylor: 9.

Notice that with the new, lower divisor, the quota for Garner County (the largest county in the state)

increased by much more than those of King County or Taylor County.

In this example, we got lucky and found the modified divisor on the first try. If we still had 40, we would

reduce the divisor more. If we had more than 41, we would need to raise it. We will show how to do the

trial-and-error part in the next example.                                       

Example 5.1.5 We'll apply Jefferson's method for Lewis. The original divisor of 14,034.22667 gave these
results:

     County                                 Population    Quota     Initial
      Parks                                     49,875    3.5538       3
       King                                     166,158   11.8395      11
      Baker                                     82,888    5.9061       5
      Bates                                     626,667   44.6528      44
     Wilkins                                    126,979   9.0478       9
      Total                                                            72
     Divisor                                  1,052,567
                                           ÷14,034.22667

We need 75 representatives and we only have 72, so we need to use a smaller divisor. Let's try lowering it to
13,500:

     County                                Population     Quota    Initial
      Parks                                    49,875     3.6944      3
       King                                   166,158     12.3080     12
      Baker                                    82,888     6.1399      6
      Bates                                   626,667     46.4198     46
     Wilkins                                  126,979     9.4059      9
      Total                                                           76
     Divisor                                 1,052,567
                                             ÷13,500

We got a total of 76 representatives which is too many, so we lowered it too far. We need a divisor that's
greater than 13,500 but less than 14,034.22667. Let's try 13,700:
5.1. APPORTIONMENT                                                                              223

                        County   Population   Quota    Initial
                         Parks       49,875   3.6405      3
                          King      166,158   12.1283     12
                         Baker       82,888   6.0502      6
                         Bates      626,667   45.7421     45
                        Wilkins     126,979   9.2685      9
                         Total                            75
                        Divisor    1,052,567
                                   ÷13,700

Using a modified divisor of 13,700 gives us exactly 75 representatives. Note there is usually more than one
modified divisor that will work.
This can take a lot of writing, so in practice, we can write this all out in one table. With each try we are
dividing the population by the new divisor to get the new quotas.

County    Population    Quota    Initial  2nd Quota    2nd Try  3rd Quota                Final
 Parks        49,875    3.5538      3        3.6944         3      3.6405                   3
  King        166,158   11.8395     11       12.3080       12     12.1283                  12
 Baker        82,888    5.9061      5        6.1399         6      6.0502                   6
 Bates        626,667   44.6528     44       46.4198       46     45.7421                  45
Wilkins       126,979   9.0478      9        9.4059         9      9.2685                   9
 Total                              72                     76                              75
Divisor     1,052,567                       ÷13,500               ÷13,700
         ÷14,034.22667

Notice, in comparison to Hamilton's method, that although the results were the same, they came about in

a different way, and the outcome was almost different. Bates County (the largest) almost went up to 46

representatives before King (which is much smaller) got to 12. Although that didn't happen here, it can.

Divisor-adjusting methods like Jefferson's are not guaranteed to follow the quota rule.         

5.1.7 Webster's Method

Daniel Webster (1782-1852) was a lawyer, congressman, Senator of Massachusetts and also served as the U.S.
Secretary of State. He was from the North and did not own slaves. He was an opponent of slavery extension
and he spoke against annexing Texas and against going to war with Mexico. He argued, however, that no
law was needed to prevent the further extension of slavery in new states and he supported the Compromise
of 1850, which disappointed his abolitionist supporters (History.com Editors, 2018b).

Webster proposed a method similar to Jefferson's in 1832. It was adopted by Congress in 1842 but replaced
by Hamilton's method in 1852. It was then adopted again in 1911. The difference is that Webster rounded
the quotas to the nearest whole number rather than dropping the decimal parts. If that didn't produce the
exact number of representatives, he adjusted the divisor like in Jefferson's method. (In Jefferson's case, the
first adjustment will always be to make the divisor smaller. That is not always the case with Webster's
method because some numbers may be rounded up.)

                                                         Webster's Method.

    Steps 1-2 are the same as Hamilton and Jefferson

        1. Determine how many people each representative should represent. Do this by dividing the total
            population of all the states by the total number of representatives. This answer is called the
            divisor.

        2. Divide each state's population by the divisor to determine how many representatives it should
            have. Record this answer to several decimal places. This answer is called the quota.
224                                                                          CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     3. Round all the quotas to the nearest whole number (but don't forget what the decimals were).
        This is the initial apportionment. Add up the whole numbers.

     4. If the total from Step 3 is less than the total number of representatives, reduce the divisor and
        recalculate the quota and allocation. If the total from step 3 is larger than the total number of
        representatives, increase the divisor and recalculate the quota and allocation. Continue doing
        this until the total in Step 3 is equal to the total number of representatives. The divisor we end
        up using is called the modified divisor. This is a trial-and-error process.

Let's see how Webster's method works in this example:
Example 5.1.6 We will look at Floyd again, with an initial divisor of 21,900.82927 and 41 representatives:

                                County    Population    Quota    Initial
                                 King         162,310   7.4111      7
                                              538,479   24.5872     25
                                Garner        197,145   9.0017      9
                                Taylor        897,934               41
                                 Total
                                Divisor  ÷21,900.82927

This time Garner is the only county with a decimal of 0.5 or higher, so it gets rounded up. This gives the

required total, so we're done.                                                                              

Example 5.1.7 Let's look at Lewis again, with an initial divisor of 14,034.22667 and 75 representatives:

                                County    Population    Quota    Initial
                                 Parks        49,875    3.5538      4
                                  King        166,158   11.8395     12
                                 Baker        82,888    5.9061      6
                                 Bates        626,667   44.6528     45
                                Wilkins       126,979   9.0478      9
                                 Total                              76
                                Divisor     1,052,567
                                         ÷14,034.22667

This is one too many, so we need to increase the divisor. Let's try 14,100:

                                County   Population     Quota    Initial
                                 Parks       49,875     3.5372      4
                                  King      166,158     11.7843     12
                                 Baker       82,888     5.8786      6
                                 Bates      626,667     44.4445     44
                                Wilkins     126,979     9.0056      9
                                 Total                              75
                                Divisor    1,052,567
                                           ÷14,100

This gives us exactly 75, so we're done. This is how it would look all in one table:

     County    Population                Quota          Initial  2nd Quota   2nd Try
      Parks        49,875                3.5538            4        3.5371        4
       King        166,158               11.8395           12       11.7843      12
      Baker        82,888                5.9061            6        5.8786        6
      Bates        626,667               44.6528           45       44.4445      44
     Wilkins       126,979               9.0478            9        9.0056        9
      Total                                                76                    75
     Divisor     1,052,567                                         ÷14,100
              ÷14,034.22667
5.1. APPORTIONMENT  225

                                                                                                                                            

Like Jefferson's method, Webster's method carries a bias in favor of larger states but rounding the quotas to
the nearest whole number greatly reduces this bias. Notice that Bates County, the largest, is the one that
gets a representative trimmed because of the increased quota.

Also, like Jefferson's method, Webster's method does not always follow the quota rule, but it follows the
quota rule much more often than Jefferson's method does. In fact, if Webster's method had been applied
to every apportionment of Congress in all of U.S. history, it would have followed the quota rule every single
time.

5.1.8 Land Rights, Citizenship and Voting Rights

In 1830 the Indian Removal Act was signed by President Jackson. The Act relocated Native Americans
to land west of the Mississippi and the forced journey is known as the Trail of Tears. To learn more, here
is a link to an online museum exhibit with a timeline of Native American history and artifacts1.

Toward the end of the Civil War, slaves were freed by Abraham Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation
on January 1st, 1863, but it was not until June 19th, 1865 that the last group of slaves in Texas learned they
had been freed. This is now celebrated as Juneteenth2. You can read more about the timeline of slavery in
this Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia3.

Although they were technically free, Black people still faced unequal and unjust treatment. After Black
men were granted the right to vote in 1869, voter suppression laws like poll taxes and literacy tests were
implemented barriers to voting (American Civil Liberties Union, 2020).

In 1887, the Dawes Act was passed, which allotted Native American land to individuals and 60 million
acres were taken by the government or non-Indian homesteaders (Indian Land Trust Tenure Foundation,
2020). This act also provided citizenship under certain restrictions which theoretically allowed native men to
vote. All women were granted the right to vote in 1920, but the barriers enacted for men of color applied to
women of color as well. You can read more about voting rights and suppression in this online timeline4.

5.1.9 Huntington-Hill Method

In 1920, no new apportionment was done, because Congress couldn't agree on the method to be used. They
appointed a committee of mathematicians to investigate, and they recommended the Huntington-Hill Method.
They continued to use Webster's method in 1931, but after a second report recommending Huntington-Hill,
it was adopted in 1941 and is the method of apportionment still used today.

The Huntington-Hill Method is similar to Webster's method, but attempts to minimize the difference in the
percentage of how many people each representative will represent.

                                                    Huntington-Hill Method.

    The first two steps are the same as the previous methods

        1. Determine how many people each representative should represent. Do this by dividing the total
            population of all the states by the total number of representatives. This answer is called the
            divisor.

        2. Divide each state's population by the divisor to determine how many representatives it should
            have. Record this answer to several decimal places. This answer is called the quota.

   1http://recordsofrights.org/themes/4/rights-of-native-americans
   2juneteenth.com/history.htm
   3https://www.ferris.edu/htmls/news/jimcrow/timeline/slavery.htm
   4https://www.carnegie.org/topics/topic-articles/voting-rights/voting-rights-timeline/
226                                                                     CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

       3. Cut off the decimal part of the quota to obtain the lower quota, which we'll call n. Compute
             n(n + 1), which is the geometric mean of the lower quota and one value higher.

       4. Instead of using 0.5 to round like we are used to, we use the geometric mean. If the quota is as
          large or larger than the geometric mean, round up; if the quota is smaller than the geometric
          mean, round down. This is the initial allocation. Add up the resulting whole numbers.

       5. If the total from Step 4 is less than the total number of representatives, reduce the divisor and
          recalculate the quota and allocation. If the total from step 4 is larger than the total number of
          representatives, increase the divisor and recalculate. Continue doing this until the total is equal
          to the exact number of representatives. The divisor we end up using is called the modified
          divisor. This is a trial-and-error process.

5.1.10 What is the Geometric Mean?

Let's look at why Hill and Huntington decided to use the geometric mean for rounding instead of the
arithmetic mean of 0.5, which is halfway between two numbers. By calculating some geometric means and
looking at them in a table we can see a pattern:

Table  5.1.8  Geometric  Mean Pattern          

                         n                       n(n+ 1)

                         1             (1(1 + 1) = 1(2)  1.414

                         2             (2(2 + 1) = 2(3)  2.449

                         3             (3(3 + 1) = 3(4)  3.464

                         4                     (4(4 + 1) = 4(5)  4.472

                         ...                     

                         10            (10(10 + 1) = 10(11)  10.488

                         ...                     
                         100 (100(100 + 1) = 100(101)  100.499

Notice that each geometric mean is between n and n + 1. For smaller numbers, the decimal part is less than
0.5 and as n gets larger, the decimal part gets closer and closer to 0.5. This gives smaller states a chance to
round up before larger states. That's how the Hill-Huntington method reduces the bias toward larger states
and makes it more fair for smaller states.

Now let's see how to use the geometric mean in an example.

Example 5.1.9 Again, we will practice with Floyd, with an initial divisor of 21,900.82927 and 41 represen-
tatives:

       County    Population    Quota           Lower Quota  Geometric Mean     Initial
        King         162,310   7.4111                   7     7(8)  7.48          7
                     538,479   24.5872                 24      24(25)  24.49      25
       Garner        197,945   9.0017                   9         9(10)  9.49     9
       Taylor        897,934                                                      41
        Total
       Divisor  ÷21,900.82927

Notice that for Garner, the quota of 24.5872 is above the geometric mean of 24.49, so we round up to 25.

This gives the required total, so we're done.                                                                  

Example 5.1.10 Again, here is Lewis, with an initial divisor of 14,034.22667:
5.1. APPORTIONMENT                                                                          227

County                Population    Quota    Lower Quota  Geometric Mean     Initial
 Parks                    49,875    3.5538            3     3(4)  3.46          4
  King                    166,158   11.8395          11      11(12)  11.49      12
 Baker                    82,888    5.9061            5     5(6)  5.48          6
 Bates                    626,667   44.6528          44      44(45)  44.50      45
Wilkins                   126,979   9.0478            9         9(10)  9.49     9
 Total                                                                          76
Divisor                 1,052,567
                     ÷14,034.22667

We end up with 76 which is too many, so we need to increase the divisor. Let's try 14,100:

County               Population     Quota    Lower Quota  Geometric Mean     2nd Try
 Parks                   49,875     3.5372            3            3.46           4
  King                  166,158     11.7843          11           11.49          12
 Baker                   82,888     5.8786            5            5.48           6
 Bates                  626,667     44.4445          44           44.50          44
Wilkins                 126,979     9.0056            9            9.49           9
 Total                                                                           75
Divisor                1,052,567
                       ÷14,100

This time Bates had a quota less than its geometric mean, so it did not get rounded up and we have exactly

75 representatives.

In both these cases, the apportionment produced by the Huntington-Hill method was the same as those from

Webster's method, but that will not always be the case.                                               

In 1980, two mathematicians, Peyton Young and Mike Balinski, proved what we now call the Balinski-Young
Impossibility Theorem.

                     Balinski-Young Impossibility Theorem.

The Balinski-Young Impossibility Theorem shows that any apportionment method which always
follows the quota rule will be subject to the possibility of paradoxes like the Alabama, New States,
or Population paradoxes. In other words, we can choose a method that avoids those paradoxes, but
only if we are willing to give up the guarantee of following the quota rule.

Example 5.1.11 Consider a small country with 5 states, two of which are much larger than the others. We
need to apportion 70 representatives. Apportion the representatives using both Webster's method and the
Huntington-Hill method.

                                    State    Population
                                      A         300,500
                                      B         200,000
                                      C          50,000
                                      D          38,000
                                      E          21,500

Solution. Step 1: The total population is 610,000. Dividing this by the 70 representatives gives the divisor:
8714.286.
Step 2: Dividing each state's population by the divisor gives the quotas.
228                                                    CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

               State      Population   Quota
                  A          300,500  34.48361
                  B          200,000  22.95082
                  C           50,000  5.737705
                  D           38,000  4.360656
                  E           21,500  2.467213
                             610,000
               Total
              Divisor      ÷8714.286

Webster's Method
Step 3: Using Webster's method, we round each quota to the nearest whole number using the rounding rule
of 0.5 or higher to round up.

               State   Population    Quota    Initial
                  A       300,500   34.48361     34
                  B       200,000   22.95082     23
                  C        50,000   5.737705     6
                  D        38,000   4.360656     4
                  E        21,500   2.467213     2
                          610,000                69
               Total
              Divisor   ÷8714.286

Step 4: Adding these up only gives us 69 representatives, so we adjust the divisor down. We try 8,700, which
gives us 70 representatives. Notice that State A, the largest state, is the one that got rounded up the second
time.

               State   Population    Quota    Initial
                  A       300,500   34.54023     35
                  B       200,000   22.98851     23
                  C        50,000   5.747126     6
                  D        38,000   4.367816     4
                  E        21,500   2.471264     2
                          610,000                70
               Total      ÷8,700
              Divisor

Huntington-Hill Method
Step 3: Using the Huntington-Hill method, we cut off the decimal to find the lower quota, then calculate the
geometric mean based on each lower quota. If the quota is less than the geometric mean, we round down; if
the quota is more than the geometric mean, we round up.

      State   Population   Quota    Lower     Geometric   Initial
                                    Quota        Mean
         A       300,500  34.48361              34.49638     34
         B       200,000  22.95082     34       22.49444     23
         C        50,000  5.737705     23       5.477226     6
         D        38,000  4.360656     6        4.472136     4
         E        21,500  2.467213     4        2.44949      3
      Total      610,000               2                     70
     Divisor   ÷8714.286

These allocations add up to 70. Notice that this allocation is different than that produced by Webster's

method. In this case, state E, which is smaller, got one more seat and state A got one less.  

In this section we have learned four different methods of apportionment used in U.S. history, intertwined
5.1. APPORTIONMENT                                                                    229

with the U.S. treatment of women, Native Americans and Black people. In the next section we will continue
with our brief history of voting rights and look at different methods used for voting.

5.1.11 Exercises

Exercise Group. In exercises 1-14, determine the apportionment using

a. Hamilton's Method

b. Jefferson's Method

c. Webster's Method

d. Huntington-Hill Method

 1. A college offers tutoring in Math, English, Chemistry, and Biology. The number of students enrolled
        in each subject is listed below. If the college can only afford to hire 15 tutors, determine how many
        tutors should be assigned to each subject.

                    Math English Chemistry Biology

                    330                  265          130             70

2. Reapportion the previous problem if the college can hire 20 tutors.

3. The number of salespeople assigned to work during a shift is apportioned based on the average
      number of customers during that shift. Apportion 20 salespeople given the information below.

                         Shift     Morning       Midday    Afternoon         Evening
                  Avereage number       95          305         435             515

                     of customers

4. Reapportion the previous problem if the store has 25 salespeople.

5. Three people invest in a treasure dive, each investing the amount listed below. The dive results in
      36 gold coins. Apportion those coins to the investor.

                                                      Aisha Basir Carlos
                                                       $7,600 $5,900 $1,400

6. Reapportion the previous problem if 37 gold coins are recovered.
7. A small country consists of four states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature has

      116 seats, apportion the seats.

                                   A          B       C          D

                       33,700 559,500 141,300 89,100

8. Reapportion the previous problem with 124 seats.

9. A small country consists of five states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature has
      119 seats, apportion the seats.

                    A                    B       C         D              E

                    810,000 473,000 292,000 594,000 211,000

10. Reapportion the previous problem with 126 seats.

11. A small country consists of six states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature has 200
      seats, apportion the seats.

                    A                 B       C       D       E           F

                    3,411 2,421 11,586 4,494 3,126 4,962
230                                                                       CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     12. Reapportion the previous problem with 180 seats

     13. A small country consists of six states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature has 250
           seats, apportion the seats.

     A         B     C                                     D        E        F
                                                                 356,500  382,500
     82,500 84,600 96,000 98,000

     14. Reapportion the previous problem with 240 seats.

15. A small country consists of three states, whose populations are listed below.

                  A     B                                     C

                  6,000 6,000 2,000

          a. If the legislature has 10 seats, use Hamilton's method to apportion the seats.
          b. If the legislature grows to 11 seats, use Hamilton's method to apportion the seats.
          c. Explain what happened in part b. What do you think would be a fair solution?
          d. Try Jefferson's method for 11 seats. Does that solve the problem?
16. A small country consists of three states, whose populations are listed below.

                  A     B                                     C

                  10,000 10,000 1,000

          a. If the legislature has 10 seats, use Hamilton's method to apportion the seats. Which rule is not
              met in this case?

          b. If the legislature grows to 11 seats, use Hamilton's method to apportion the seats.

          c. If there could only be 10 seats, what do you think would be a fair solution?
17. A state with five counties has 50 seats in their legislature. Using Hamilton's method, apportion the

      seats based on the 2010 census, then again using the 2020 census. Explain what happened in 2020
      apportionment. Do you think it is fair?

      County   2000 Population                                2010 Population
     Douglass          60,000                                         60,000
                       31,200                                         31,200
       Parks           69,200                                         72,400
        King           81,600                                         81,600
     Du Bois          118,000                                        118,400
       Lewis

18. A state with five counties has 62 seats in their legislature. Using Hamilton's method, apportion the
      seats based on the 2010 census, then again using the 2010 census. Explain what happened in 2020
      apportionment. Do you think it is fair?

     County    2000 Population                                2010 Population
      Gray             75,000                                         83,200
     Castile           89,000                                         89,000
     Brown             32,500                                         32,500
     Taylor           153,000                                        153,000
      Floyd           109,000                                        112,000

19. A school district has two high schools: Clatsop, serving 1715 students, and Siletz, serving 7364. The
      district could only afford to hire 13 guidance counselors.

     a. Determine how many counselors should be assigned to each school using Hamilton's method.
5.1. APPORTIONMENT  231

          b. The following year, the district expands to include a third school, Cayuse, serving an additional
              2989 students. Based on the divisor from above, how many additional counselors should be hired
              for Cayuse?

          c. After hiring that many new counselors, the district recalculates the reapportion using Hamilton's
              method. Determine the outcome.

          d. Explain what happened in the new apportionment. Do you think the outcome from part c is fair?
              Why or why not.

20. A school district has two middle schools: Tubman, serving 451 students, and Blackshear, serving 176.
      The district could afford to hire 8 art teachers.

          a. Determine how many art teachers should be assigned to each school using Hamilton's method.

          b. The following year, the district expands to include a third school, Banneker, serving 231 additional
              students. Based on the divisor from above, how many additional art teachers should be hired for
              the new school?

          c. After hiring that many new art teachers, the district recalculates the reapportion using Hamilton's
              method. Determine the outcome.

          d. Explain what happened in the new apportionment. Do you think the outcome from part c is fair?
              Why or why not.
232                                                                        CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5.2 Voting Methods

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Read a voter preference schedule for ranked choice voting
   · Calculate the minimum number of votes to win a majority
   · Find the winner of an election using the plurality method
   · Find the winner of an election using the instant runoff method
   · Find the winner of an election using the Borda count method
   · Find the winner of an election using the pairwise (Condorcet) method

5.2.1 Voting Rights

Now that we have studied how to apportion the number of representatives for each state, along with a brief
history of the U.S. government, we want to look at how representatives and other public officials are elected.
There are also many other situations where a group consensus is needed, and some type of voting occurs.
You may be most familiar with systems where you get one vote and the candidate with the most votes wins.
However, there are many other ways of determining a winner. We will look at several voting methods in this
section.

For an election using any of these methods to be fair, each person must have an equal right to vote and an
equal ability to exercise that right. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 prohibited any election practice that
denies the right to vote based on race, but key portions of the law have been invalidated since then. Voter
suppression continues today in different forms such as purging voter rolls, eliminating polling places and
voter identification laws, which can also affect transgender people.

The John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act was passed in the U.S. House of Representatives in
2019 to restore elements of the Voting Rights Act and make it possible to enforce the law. It has not been
taken up in the Senate, though. Follow this link if you would like to read a more detailed timeline of voting
rights1.

5.2.2 Ranked Choice Ballots

To use some of the methods we are going to study, we need to know more than just each person's first choice.
We also need to know their 2nd and 3rd choices, and so on. A ballot where each person ranks all of the
choices in order of their preference is called a ranked choice ballot.

The image to the right shows an example of a
ranked choice ballot2. Ranked choice ballots can
be used in elections by mail or in person at polling
places. Let's see how to tally the results from a
ranked choice election.

    1aclu.org/voting-rights-act-major-dates-history
5.2. VOTING METHODS                                                                                          233

Example 5.2.2 Students are voting for their class president and the candidates are Omar (O), Ana (A),
and Helena (H). They have ranked the candidates according to their preference.

            Vien Ana Marv Tasha Eve Omar Lupe Dave Helena Jimmy

1st choice A            A  O  H                       A  O  H  O                 H  A

2nd choice O            H  H  A                       H  H  A  H                 A  H

3rd choice H            O  A  O                       O  A  O  A                 O  O

                                                                                                             

5.2.3 Preference Schedule

To simplify this data, we create a preference schedule which combines all the people who voted with the
exact same ranking. For example, Tasha, Lupe, and Helena, all voted in the same way, HAO. So, we will list
that combination once, with the number 3 at the top of that column. Three students also voted for AHO,
and OHA. One student voted for the ranking AOH. Below is the preference schedule.

Number of voters 1 3 3 3                                 Notice that by totaling the vote counts across the
                                                         top of the preference schedule we can see the total
1st choice         AAOH                                  number of votes cast: 1 + 3 + 3 + 3 = 10 total votes.

2nd choice         OHHA

3rd choice         HOAO

5.2.4 Plurality Method

The voting method you may be most familiar with in the United States is the plurality method. In the
plurality method, the candidate with the most first-choice votes is declared the winner.

There is a difference between a majority and a plurality. For a majority, a candidate must have over 50% of
the votes. There are some states that require a majority in order to win an election. In more cases, though,
only a plurality is required, which means having more votes than any other candidate. If a tie occurs without
using ranked choice voting, then a new run-off election would be required.

Example 5.2.3 In our election from above, we had this preference table:

                           Number of voters 1 3 3 3

                              1st choice                 AAOH

                              2nd choice                 OHHA

                              3rd choice                 HOAO

For the plurality method, we only look at the 1st choice row. Totaling them up:

· Ana: 1 + 3 = 4 votes

· Omar: 3 votes

· Helena: 3 votes

Ana is the winner using the plurality voting method.

Notice that Ana won with 4 out of 10 votes, or 40% of the votes, which is a plurality of the votes, but not a

majority.                                                                                                    

2"Ranked Choice Ballot", Copyright 2020 Ranked Choice Voting Resource Center is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
234                                                CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5.2.5 How Many Votes are Needed to Win?

If we know how many voters there are, we can calculate the minimum number of votes needed for a majority
win.

Continuing Example 5.2.3 from above, there are 10 voters, so we divide that by 2 or multiply by 0.5 to find
50%. Then we use the next whole number to get just over 50%.

10 ÷ 2 = 5. Then we add one and get 6 votes.

Exactly half of the votes would be a tie, so we go to the next whole number. A candidate would need 6 out
of 10 votes to win a majority. If there was an odd number of voters we would divide by 2 and get a decimal.
Let's say there were 13 voters:

13 ÷ 2 = 6.5. Then we go to the next whole number and get 7 votes. Votes have to be a whole number and
rounding a decimal up also gives us just over 50%.

Whether we end up with a decimal or not, we always use the next whole number after dividing by 2.

A candidate can win a plurality with fewer votes than the majority, as long as they have more than any
other candidate. It depends on the rule for a particular election.

5.2.6 Insincere Voting

In a system with only two major political parties like the United States, it can be nearly impossible for
third-party candidates to break through. You may feel like you would be wasting your vote if you voted for
a third-party candidate. Consider this example.

Example 5.2.4 Here is a two-party election with preferences shown below. It is a close race, but candidate
B would win.

                        Number of voters 96 100

                        1st choice  AB

                        2nd choice  BA

Suppose a third candidate, C, entered the race, and a segment of voters sincerely want to vote for that third
candidate. Here is the new preference schedule.

                        Number of voters 96 90 10

                        1st choice  ABC

                        2nd choice  BAB

                        3rd choice  CCA

The ten people who prefer candidate C are in a bind because if they vote for C, then A will win, but they

prefer B over A. It is likely that they will vote for B, their second choice, to keep A from winning.  

Situations like this can lead to insincere voting. Insincere voting is when a person doesn't vote according
to their actual preference for strategic purposes. In the case above, a person who wants to vote for a third-
party candidate realizes it would take a vote away from their major party candidate. Not wanting to see
their party lose the election, they vote for the major party candidate.

5.2.7 Instant Runoff Method

The Instant Runoff Method is a modification of the plurality method that attempts to address the issue
of insincere voting.
The voting is done with ranked choice ballots and a preference schedule is generated. Then we tally all
5.2. VOTING METHODS                                                                        235

the first-choice votes. The candidate with the least first-place votes is eliminated, but any votes for that
candidate are transferred to the voters' next choice. The process continues until one candidate has a majority.
We will show you how it works with an example.

Example 5.2.5 Consider the preference schedule below, in which a committee is choosing a chairperson.
The candidates are labeled A, B, C, D, and E for simplicity. Here is the preference schedule:

                     Number of voters 3 5 1 5 7 2 1

                     1st choice             BCCBDAE

                     2nd choice             CABDCED

                     3rd choice             AEBCABB

                     4th choice             DDEAECA

                     5th choice             EBAEBDC

Let's start by tallying the first-choices.

A: 2           B: 3 + 5 = 8                 C: 5 + 1 = 6         D: 7                E: 1

If this was a plurality election, B would be the winner with 8 first-choice votes.

Round 1  We make our first elimination. Choice E has the fewest first-place votes, so we eliminate E from
Round 2  the election. To transfer the 1 vote, we look at the person who voted for E in the last column.
Round 3  Their second choice was D, so we transfer that one vote to D, who will now have 8 votes:

         A: 2        B: 8                   C: 6                       D: 7 + 1 = 8  E: 1

         There are 24 votes in total, so a majority would be 13 votes. Since no candidate has the majority,

         we eliminate the next candidate with the fewest votes, which is A. We look at the column for

         the two people who chose A. Their second choice was E, who is already eliminated. Their third

         choice is B, so their 2 votes are transferred to B, for a total of 10:

         A: 2        B: 8 + 2 = 10          C: 6                       D: 8          E: 1

         Now C has the fewest votes, and there are two columns for C in the preference schedule. Five

         people who voted for C chose A second, then E (who have already been eliminated), then D. So,

         we transfer their 5 votes to D. One person who voted for C selected B as their second choice, so

         their one vote goes to B. Then we tally the votes for each remaining candidate.

         A: 2        B: 10 + 1 = 11 C: 6                               D: 8 + 5 = 13 E: 1

         Now we can see that D is the winner of the instant runoff method with 13 votes. We can stop

         this method earlier if a candidate reaches a majority.

                                                                                                                                            

The Instant Runoff Method is similar to the idea of holding runoff elections, but since every voter's order of
preference is recorded on the ballot, the runoff can be computed quickly without requiring a second costly
election. It also makes it safe to vote for a third-party candidate knowing that your vote will go to your
second choice if your first choice can't win.

This voting method is used in several places around the world, including the election of members of the
Australian House of Representatives, statewide elections in Maine, and local elections in Benton County,
Oregon (Ranked Choice Voting Resource Center, 2020).

5.2.8 Borda Count (Point System)

Borda Count is another voting method, named for Jean-Charles de Borda, who developed the system in
1770. In this method, points are assigned to each candidate based on their ranking; 1 point for last choice, 2
points for second-to-last choice, and so on. The point values are totaled, and the candidate with the largest
point total is the winner. We'll show you how to do it in the next example.
236                                                                                CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

Example 5.2.6 A group of PCC students are getting together for a student leadership conference and they
need to decide where to meet. Their members are from four campuses: Sylvania, Rock Creek, Cascade and
Southeast. The votes for where to hold the conference were:

                   Number of voters                31                  25             10           14
                         1st choice             Sylvania          Rock Creek      Southeast     Cascade
                        2nd choice             Southeast                           Cascade    Rock Creek
                        3rd choice            Rock Creek            Cascade        Sylvania    Southeast
                        4th choice              Cascade             Sylvania     Rock Creek     Sylvania
                                                                   Southeast

Now we will add a column on the left side of the table for the points. Then we multiply the points by the
number of voters who put each candidate in that rank,

             Points  Number of voters                      31               25          10              14
                4           1st choice                  Sylvania       Rock Creek   Southeast        Cascade
                3          2nd choice                  Southeast                     Cascade       Rock Creek
                2          3rd choice                 Rock Creek         Cascade     Sylvania       Southeast
                1          4th choice                   Cascade          Sylvania  Rock Creek        Sylvania
                                                                        Southeast

We will start with Sylvania in the bottom row and move up. They have one point times 14 voters, 2 points
times 25 + 10 voters, 3 points times zero, and 4 points times 31 voters. Multiplying and then adding gives
us a total of 208 points for Sylvania. You can see the calculation below and we will do the same thing for
each campus:

    · Sylvania: 1 · 14 + 2 · 35 + 3 · 0 + 4 · 31 = 208 points
    · Rock Creek: 1 · 10 + 2 · 31 + 3 · 14 + 4 · 25 = 214 points
    · Cascade: 1 · 31 + 2 · 0 + 3 · 35 + 4 · 14 = 192 points
    · Southwest: 1 · 25 + 2 · 14 + 3 · 31 + 4 · 10 = 186 points

Using the Borda count method, Rock Creek is the winning location.                                                         

Note that Sylvania would have won with the plurality method. Borda count is sometimes described as a
consensus-based voting system, since it can be used to choose a more broadly acceptable option over the one
with the most first-choice support. This is a different approach than plurality and instant runoff voting that
focus on first-choice votes; Borda Count considers every voter's entire ranking to determine the outcome.

Because of this consensus behavior, Borda Count, or some variation of it, is commonly used in awarding
sports awards. Variations are used to determine the Most Valuable Player in baseball, to rank teams in
NCAA sports, and to award the Heisman trophy.

5.2.9 Pairwise Comparison: Copeland's Method

Another method, called pairwise comparison, the Condorcet method or Copeland's method, attempts
to be fair by looking at each pair of candidates separately.

In this method, we look at each pair as if they were the only two candidates running and determine which of

the two is more preferred. In Copeland's method, the more preferred candidate is awarded 1 point. If there

is  a  tie,  each  candidate  is  awarded  1  point.  After  all  the  pairwise  comparisons  are  made,  the  candidate  with
                                           2
the most points, and hence the most pairwise wins, is declared the winner.

Variations of Copeland's Method are used in many professional organizations, including election of the Board
of Trustees for the Wikimedia Foundation that runs Wikipedia.
5.2. VOTING METHODS                                                                 237

Example 5.2.7 Consider our class president example from the beginning of the chapter. Determine the
winner using Copeland's Method.

                                    Number of voters 1 3 3 3

                                    1st choice  AAOH

                                    2nd choice  OHHA

                                    3rd choice  HOAO

We need to look at each pair of candidates to see which would win in a one-to-one comparison. First, we
will systematically list all of the pairs of candidates:

· Helena vs. Omar

· Helena vs. Ana

· Ana vs. Omar

Next, comparing Helena with Omar, we see that 6 voters, those marked in bold in the table below, would
prefer Helena over Omar. Note that Helena doesn't have to be the voter's first choice - we're imagining that
Ana wasn't in the race. The other 4 people chose Omar over Helena.

                              Number of voters 1 3 3 3

                                    1st choice  A A OH

                                    2nd choice  OH H A

                                    3rd choice  HOAO

Based on this comparison of Helena vs. Omar, Helena wins 1 point.
Next, comparing Helena with Ana, the 6 voters in the last two columns prefer Helena to Ana, so Helena
gets one point. Lastly, we compare Ana with Omar. The 1 voter in the first column prefers Ana, as do the
3 voters in the second column. The 3 voters in the third column prefer Omar, but the 3 voters in the last
column would choose Ana. So, altogether 1 + 3 + 3 = 7 voters prefer Ana over Omar. Ana gets 1 point.
To summarize, we write how many voters prefer each candidate ignoring all other candidates:

· Helena-6 vs Omar-4 (Helena gets 1 point)

· Helena-6 vs Ana-4 (Helena gets 1 point)

· Ana-7 vs Omar-3 (Ana gets 1 point)

Ana has a total of 1 point and Helena has 2 points, so Helena is the winner under Copeland's Method. This

method gave us a different winner than the plurality method where Ana won, because more people preferred

Helena to Ana, even though they didn't choose Helena for their first choice.        

Now that we've seen an example of each voting method, let's run through each method for the same scenario.

Example 5.2.8 Consider an advertising team voting to choose one of four different slogans, labeled A, B,
C and D. Determine the winner using each method we have learned.

                              Number of voters 5 3 6 4 2

                                    1st choice  DACBA

                                    2nd choice  ACBDD

                                    3rd choice  CBAAC

                                    4th choice  BDDCB

Solution. Plurality Method: We tally the first-place votes:

A: 3 + 2 = 5                  B: 4              C: 6                          D: 5

C wins the plurality method.

Instant Runoff Method: We start with the plurality tallies. Then we look for the slogan with the least
238                                                                      CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

first-choice votes, and that is B. Looking in the preference schedule at the 4 people who voted for B, we see
their second choice is D. So we transfer those 4 votes to D, which now has 9.

A: 5                B: 4                            C: 6                     D: 5 + 4 = 9

Now A has the least number of votes with 5, so we look at the voters who chose A for their first choice.

There are two columns, so three of those votes will be transferred to C and 2 will be transferred to D.

A: 5                B: 4                            C: 6 + 3 = 9             D: 9 + 2 = 11

D is the winner of the instant runoff method.

Borda Count: We add a column on the left for the points, starting with 1 point for last place and counting

up. Then we multiply the points by the number of votes and add them all up.

                    Points Number of voters 5 3 6 4 2

                    4                  1st choice   DACBA

                    3                  2nd choice   ACBDD

                    2                  3rd choice   CBAAC

                    1                  4th choice   BDDCB

· A: 1 · 0 + 2 · 10 + 3 · 5 + 4 · 5 = 55 points
· B: 1 · 7 + 2 · 3 + 3 · 6 + 4 · 4 = 47 points
· C: 1 · 4 + 2 · 7 + 3 · 3 + 4 · 6 = 51 points
· D: 1 · 9 + 2 · 0 + 3 · 6 + 4 · 5 = 47 points

A is the winner of the Borda count method.
Pairwise Comparison:

First we list all the possible pairs:               Then we count the number of voters who would choose

· A vs B                                            each candidate if they were the only two in the race.

· A vs C                                            · A-10 vs B-10

· A vs D                                            · A-14 vs C-6

· B vs C                                            · A-11 vs D-9

· B vs D                                            · B-4 vs C-16

· C vs D                                            · B-13 vs D-7

                                                    · C-9 vs D-11

Totaling one point for each win and half a point for each tie gives us:

· A has 2.5 points

· B has 1.5 points

· C has 1 point

· D has 1 point

A is the winner of the pairwise comparison method.                                                       

5.2.10 Which Method is the Most Fair?

To see a very simple example of how difficult voting can be, consider the election below:
5.2. VOTING METHODS                                                               239

                     Number of voters 5 5 5

                     1st choice             ACB

                     2nd choice             BAC

                     3rd choice             CBA

Notice that in this election: 10 people prefer A to B, 10 people prefer B to C, and 10 people prefer C to A.

No matter whom we choose as the winner,  2  of voters would prefer someone else!  This scenario is called
                                         3
Condorcet's Voting Paradox. In this situation, there is no fair resolution. There are many additional

paradoxes and fairness criteria that are explained in David Lippman's original version of Math in Society3.

Since it is not possible to have one method that is fair in every situation, it is important to decide which
method is the most fair for any given situation.

5.2.11 Primaries and Sequential Voting

For many public offices in the U.S., a sequence of two public votes is held: a primary election and the general
election. For non-partisan offices like sheriff and judge, in which political party affiliation is not declared,
the primary election is usually used to narrow the field of candidates.

For partisan positions, typically, either the top two candidates receiving the most votes move forward, or
the top candidate from each party will move forward. This is called sequential voting - a process in which
voters cast totally new ballots after each round of eliminations. Sequential voting has become quite common
in television, where it is used in reality shows like The Voice.

In some states a closed primary is used, in which only voters of each party can vote for that party's
candidates. In other states, an open primary is used, where voters can pick the party whose primary they
want to vote in. In other states, caucuses are used, which are meetings of the political parties, only open to
party members. Closed primaries are often disliked by independent voters, who like the flexibility to change
which party they are voting in. Open primaries have the disadvantage of raiding, though, where a voter
could vote in their non-preferred party's primary with the intent of selecting a weaker opponent for their
preferred party's candidate.

Regardless of the primary type, the general election is the main election. While rules vary state-to-state, for
an independent or minor party candidate to get listed on the ballot, they typically have to gather a certain
number of signatures to petition for inclusion.

In the next section we will look at a different type of election for the President of the United States.

5.2.12 Exercises

1. To decide on a new website design, the designer asks people to rank three designs that have been created
      (labeled A, B, and C). The individual ballots are shown below. Create a preference table.
      ABC, ABC, ACB, BAC, BCA, BCA, ACB, CAB, CAB, BCA, ACB, ABC

2. To decide on a movie to watch, a group of friends all vote for one of the choices (labeled A, B, and C).
      The individual ballots are shown below. Create a preference table.
      CAB, CBA, BAC, BCA, CBA, ABC, ABC, CBA, BCA, CAB, CAB, BAC

Exercise Group. In exercises 3-18, complete the following:

   a. How many voters voted in this election?

   b. How many votes are needed for a majority?

    3Math in Society: Voting Theory, by David Lippman
240                                                                  CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

c. Find the winner under the plurality method.
d. Find the winner under the Instant Runoff Voting method.
e. Find the winner under the Borda Count Method.
f. Find the winner under Copeland's method.

     3. The planning committee for a renewable energy trade show is trying to decide where to hold their
           next trade show in. The votes are shown below.

     Number of voters                  9          19           11           8
           1st choice              Buffalo     Atlanta      Chicago     Buffalo
          2nd choice               Atlanta     Buffalo      Buffalo     Chicago
          3rd choice               Chigaco     Chicago      Atlanta     Atlanta

     4. A non-profit agency is electing a new chair of the board. The votes are shown below.

     Number of voters                 11        5              10        4            3
           1st choice              Abdulla  Cantos            Beck   Cantos       Abdulla
          2nd choice               Cantos     Beck          Cantos   Abdulla
          3rd choice                        Abdulla         Abdulla    Beck         Beck
                                     Beck                                         Cantos

     5. A group of students is deciding which class to take together. The votes are shown below.

     Number of voters      2           1           2            3           2         2
           1st choice     Art         Art      Biology      Biology     Calculus  Calculus
          2nd choice   Biology     Calculus                 Calculus              Biology
          3rd choice   Calculus    Biology        Art                      Art
                                               Calculus        Art      Biology      Art

     6. A professional psychology association is deciding where to hold their next conference. The votes
           are shown below.

     Number of voters       3           2           7            3                     6           5
           1st choice    Alaska      Alaska    Barbados     Barbados              California  California
          2nd choice   Barbados    California               California                        Barbados
          3rd choice   California  Barbados      Alaska                             Alaska
                                               California     Alaska              Barbados      Alaska

     7. The Hillsboro City Council has an election with three candidates, D, E, F. The votes are:

                       Number of voters 5 4 3 7 2 10

                       1st choice              DDEEF F

                       2nd choice              EFFDE D

                       3rd choice              FEDFD E

     8. The Vancouver mayor's race has three candidates, G, H, I. The votes are:

                       Number of voters 12 6 14 3 15 1

                       ast choice              GGHH I I

                       2nd choice              H I I GGH

                       3rd choice              I HG I HG

     9. The Beaverton City Council has an election for one open position. There are four candidates (labeled
           A, B, C, and D for convenience). The preference schedule for the election is:
5.2. VOTING METHODS                                                                            241

                     Number of voters 120 50 40 90 60 100

                     1st choice  C BDAA D

                     2nd choice  D CACD B

                     3rd choice  B ABBC A

                     4th choice  A DCDB C

10. Portland City Council has an election for one open position. There are four candidates (labeled E,
      F, G, H for convenience). The preference schedule for the election is:

                     Number of voters 11 8 3 9 16 14 9

                     1st choice  E HHG E F F

                     2nd choice  F GEF G H G

                     3rd choice  H FGH H E E

                     4th choice  G EFE F GH

11. The Portland mayor's race has four candidates, I, J, K, L. The votes are:

                     Number of voters 21 18 9 14 5 12 11 2

                     1st choice  I KKL J I K J

                     2nd choice  L I JKIK L I

                     3rd choice  J L I I KL I L

                     4th choice  K JLJLJ JK

12. A Reynolds School Board position has four candidates, M, N, O, P. The votes are:

Number of voters 16 2 12 15 34 22 32 13 11

                     1st choice  MNN P O MM O N

                     2nd choice  OOP OMP NMO

                     3rd choice  PMO N N O P P M

                     4th choice  NPMM P N O N P

13. The Gresham mayor's race has four candidates, Q, R, S, T. The votes are:

                     Number of voters 11 4 15 18 14 5 13 10

                     1st choice  QSQ T RS S R

                     2nd choice  RT S S QQQ T

                     3rd choice  SRT Q TTR S

                     4th choice  TQR R S RT Q

14. The Parkrose School Board has an election for an open position with four candidates, U, V, W, X.
      The votes are:

Number of voters 16 21 15 5 3 11 9 8 22

                     1st choice  U W X V X XWU V

                     2nd choice  X X V XWU V VW

                     3rd choice  V U UWV V X X U

                     4th choice  W V WU UWUWX

15. A Multnomah county commissioner's race has five candidates, A, B, C, D, E. The votes are:

                     Number of voters 12 14 21 18 19 23

                     1st choice  BCEEAB

                     2nd choice  AABACD

                     3rd choice  DEABBC

                     4th choice  EBCCDE

                     5th choice  CDDDEA
242              CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     16. The Oregon State governor's race has five candidates, F, G, H, I, J. The votes are:

     Number of voters 16 12 9 21 17 11 6

     1st choice  F FH I GGJ

     2nd choice  I GIFH JF

     3rd choice  G HG J I FH

     4th choice  J J JH F IG

     5th choice  H I FG J H I

     17. A Washington county commissioner's race has five candidates, K, L, M, N, O. The votes are:

     Number of voters 22 19 13 26 14 5 17 11

     1st choice  KMKO L LNN

     2nd choice  M L L K NKO L

     3rd choice  L N N N MOK K

     4th choice  N O M L KMM O

     5th choice  O K OMONL N

     18. A Clackamas county commissioner's race has five candidates, P, Q, R, S, T. The votes are:

     Number of voters 31 16 29 52 16 18 11 13 12

     1st choice  RRPQTT S S S

     2nd choice  SQR SQS TQP

     3rd choice  TTTR SQRTR

     4th choice  P SQTPRPRT

     5th choice  QP S PRPQPQ
5.3. THE POPULAR VOTE, ELECTORAL COLLEGE AND ELECTORAL POWER  243

5.3 The Popular Vote, Electoral College and Electoral Power

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Calculate the number of electors per state
   · Determine the winner of the popular vote
   · Determine the winner of the electoral college
   · Calculate the electoral power of each state

5.3.1 Choosing the U.S. President

In the last section we talked about equal voting rights and studied several voting methods. To choose
the President of the United States, we use another method, called the Electoral College. The Founders,
with their newfound freedom from Britain, wanted to create a democracy where citizens could participate
in choosing their president. Prior to the Electoral College, there were three options proposed (Best, 2004;
Clayton, 2015). They were

   1. Congress would elect the president

   2. State Legislatures would vote and elect the president

   3. The people would elect a president by popular vote

The first option of having Congress do this work was declined as this would alter the balance of power among
the three separate branches of government. The idea to have State Legislatures also failed as there wouldn't
be the separation between having an independent Federal Government and State Governments.

The popular vote means a candidate must win a plurality of all the votes cast for president, regardless of
which state the voters live in. The popular vote was decided against as the Founders didn't think all citizens
would be informed enough about the candidates to make an educated decision (Clayton, 2015).

Instead, the Electoral College was decided upon and, in this system, each state was given a certain number
of electoral votes. Each state got an equal two votes for the two senate seats. This gave smaller states a leg
up as they would have at least these votes. In addition, each state would be given more votes based on their
population, equal to their representation in the House (Clayton, 2015). The District of Columbia, which is
not a state, also gets 3 electoral votes. A candidate must win a majority of the electoral votes to win the
U.S. presidency. If no candidate has a majority of electoral votes then a contingent election would be held
by the U.S. House of Representatives between the three candidates with the most electoral votes.

The 4 million U.S. Citizens who live in the U.S. territories of Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern
Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico cannot vote in the presidential elections and do not have any electors for
the U.S. President. Additionally, there are U.S. Nationals in American Samoa and other territories that
cannot vote. You can learn more about residents of these territories in this Census Bureau Report1. We will
also reiterate that voter suppression still exists and elections will not be truly fair until all of its forms
are eliminated.

As stated in the Constitution, the U.S. currently has 435 representatives in the House. They each serve
2-year terms, while the two senators from each state serve 6-year terms.

   1https://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/12statab/outlying.pdf
244                                                                  CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

Example 5.3.2 How many electoral votes are there in the U.S. Electoral College?

Solution. 100 + 435 + 3 = 538

By adding all the U.S. Senators, Representatives and 3 for Washington, D.C., we have a total of 538 electoral

votes.                                                                                            

Example 5.3.3 How many electoral votes does a candidate need to win to become the President of the

United States?

Solution. 538 ÷ 2 = 269 then add one to get over 50%, which is 270.

A candidate needs 270 electoral votes to win the U.S. Presidency.                                 

Example 5.3.4 The number of people who voted in the presidential election in 2016 was 136,452,150
(Ballotpedia, n.d.). How many votes would be needed to win a majority of the popular vote?

Solution. 136, 452, 150 ÷ 2 = 68, 226, 075 then go to the next whole number which is 68,226,076.

A candidate would need 68,226,076 votes to win the popular vote.                                  

Example 5.3.5 There were approximately 230,931,921 eligible voters at the time of the 2016 election
(McDonald, 2016). What percentage of eligible voters voted?

Solution. 136, 452, 150 ÷ 230, 931, 921 = 0.591

About 59% of all the eligible voters voted in the 2016 election.                                  

If you are interested in the 2016 election voting rates by race, Hispanic origin and age, you can find them in
this Census Bureau Report2.

5.3.2 How Electoral Votes are Determined

While each state has a set number of electoral votes based on the formula above, the federal government
gave states the control of how they distribute and cast their electoral votes (Paiva, 2011). In 48 states, the
candidate with the most votes wins all of that state's electoral votes, often called winner-takes-all. In
essence, a candidate could win with barely a majority of the popular vote in that state and the entire state's
votes goes to that individual (Clayton, 2015). In 2 states, Maine and Nebraska, however, they use a district
plan where instead of winner-takes-all, they use proportionality. This means that they award electoral
votes by how individual districts vote. Each district gives their electoral vote to the winner of their district
and the remaining two votes go to the candidate that won statewide.

There is a movement to change from the Electoral College to the popular vote. One way this is happening
is through the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact3. States who adopt this compact agree to
award their electoral votes to the winner of the national popular vote. If states and/or D.C. with at least
270 electoral votes adopt this compact, then the winner of the popular vote would win the electoral college
and the presidency. At this time there are 196 electoral votes in states and D.C. who have enacted the bill
and the bill has passed one or two legislative houses in additional states with 88 electoral votes.

After citizens cast their votes by mail or on election day on the first Tuesday in November, electors gather
in December and are responsible for casting the votes for their state. Electors cannot be elected officials and
are chosen by their parties. Electors are expected to vote in alignment with the state they represent, but
there have been faithless electors in the past. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in July of 2020 that states can
penalize electors who do not vote according to the law of the state.

To see how the electoral college and popular votes work, we will look at a made-up country with a smaller
number of states.

Example 5.3.6 Consider this country with 4 states. The rules for the number of senators and electors
are the same as the U.S. government. Each state will get 1 representative for every 40,000 residents. For
simplicity we will ignore any remainders.

   2https://www.census.gov/newsroom/blogs/random-samplings/2017/05/voting_in_america.html
   3https://www.nationalpopularvote.com/
5.3. THE POPULAR VOTE, ELECTORAL COLLEGE AND ELECTORAL POWER                                 245

  State  Population     Number of     Number of       Number of
                     Representatives   Senators         Electors
  Small     154,600
Medium      262,340
            581,135
  Large     862,070
  Huge

a. Determine the number of electors for each state and the total for the country.
b. How many electoral votes are needed to win the presidential election?
c. Determine which candidate wins the popular vote and the electoral college vote.
d. Write down all the possible combinations of states that would win the election based on the electoral

    college.
e. What is the fewest number of individual votes needed to win the Electoral College?
f. What is the smallest percentage of the population that you can win the Electoral College with?

Solution.

   a. To find the number of electors for each state, we first divide each state population by 40,000 to
       determine the number of representatives they will have. We will drop the decimal remainders, similar
       to Hamilton's method.

  State  Population               Number of           Number of                  Number of
                              Representatives          Senators                    Electors
  Small     154,600   154, 600 ÷ 40, 000 = 3.865  3
Medium      262,340   262, 340 ÷ 40, 000 = 6.559  6
            581,135  581, 135 ÷ 40, 000 = 14.528  14
  Large     862,070  862, 070 ÷ 40, 000 = 21.552  21
  Huge

  State  Population      Number of     Number of      Number of
                      Representatives   Senators        Electors
  Small     154,600                           2
Medium      262,340              3            2
            581,135              6            2
  Large     862,070             14            2
  Huge                          34

Then we will add the number of representatives and the senators for each state.

  State  Population      Number of     Number of      Number of
                      Representatives   Senators        Electors
  Small     154,600                           2              5
Medium      262,340              3            2              8
            581,135              6            2             16
  Large     862,070             14            2             23
  Huge     1,860,145            21            8             52
 Totals                         44

Now we can add up the total of all the electors from each state and we have:
5 + 8 + 16 + 23 = 52 electors.
246                                      CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

b. To find out how many electoral votes are needed to win the presidential election, we calculate a majority
    of 65 electors.

    52 ÷ 2 = 26, add one to get 27 votes.

   27 electoral votes are needed to win the presidential election in this state.

c. To find the winner for each method, we need the results of an election. In our example, there are 2
    candidates for the president, Candidate A and Candidate B. When a candidate wins in a state, they
    get all the electoral votes for that state. Given the votes for each candidate below, determine who wins
    the popular vote and who wins the electoral college vote.

       State    Votes for     Votes for  Number of Electoral  Number of Electoral
              Candidate A   Candidate B        Votes for A          Votes for B
       Small
     Medium        56,259        98,341
                  130,082       132,258
       Large      278,177       302,958
       Huge       546,555       315,515
      Totals

     First, we will add up all the votes for each candidate in their columns. Next, we will look at each
     state individually to determine which candidate wins each state. Candidate B has more votes in Small,
     Medium and Large, so Candidate B gets all of the electoral votes in those states. Candidate A won
     Huge, so they get all of those electoral votes. We enter zero for the candidate who does not win in each
     state. Then we add up the electoral vote columns. Here is the completed table.

       State    Votes for     Votes for  Number of Electoral  Number of Electoral
              Candidate A   Candidate B        Votes for A          Votes for B
       Small                                           0                    5
     Medium        56,259        98,341                0                    8
                  130,082       132,258                0                    16
       Large      278,177       302,958                23                   0
       Huge       546,555       315,515                23                   29
      Totals     1,011,073      849,072

     Now we can see that Candidate A wins the popular vote with 1,011,073 votes compared to 849,072 for
     Candidate B. But Candidate B wins the Electoral College with 29 electoral votes. So, Candidate B
     becomes the President of the United States.

     There have been 5 U.S. presidential elections where the winner of the popular vote was not the winner
     of the electoral college. In all the other elections, the two methods agreed and would have elected the
     same candidate.

     Try calculating the results if these were the votes instead:

       State    Votes for     Votes for  Number of Electoral  Number of Electoral
              Candidate A   Candidate B        Votes for A          Votes for B
       Small
     Medium        56,259        98,341
                  131,200       131,140
       Large      278,177       302,958
       Huge       546,555       315,515
      Totals
5.3. THE POPULAR VOTE, ELECTORAL COLLEGE AND ELECTORAL POWER               247

  State    Votes for     Votes for  Number of Electoral   Number of Electoral
         Candidate A   Candidate B        Votes for A           Votes for B
  Small                                           0                     5
Medium        56,259        98,341                8                     0
             131,200       131,140                0                     16
  Large      278,177       302,958                23                    0
  Huge       546,555       315,515                31                    21
 Totals     1,012,191      847,954

   This time Candidate A won Medium and Huge. That gave them the electoral vote victory. Note that
    the race in Medium was very close, and we only changed 1,118 votes or 0.06% of the votes to Candidate
   A which gave them the Electoral College.

    Opponents of the Electoral College system say that it causes candidates to focus on a few swing states,
    rather than campaigning equally in all states.

d. Let's look at which combinations of states the candidates could seek to win with.

    Since 27 electoral votes are needed, we will list all the winning combinations starting with the smallest
    number of states to win. We see that a candidate must win either Huge or Large, because Small and
    Medium together are not enough votes to win.

          Combination   Small, 5    Medium, 8  Large, 16  Huge, 23  Total
         Huge + Small        5                                 23     28
       Huge + Medium                       8        16         23     31
         Huge + Large        5                                 23     39
Huge + Small + Medium                      8        16         23     36
Huge + Medium + Large        5             8        16         23     47
  Huge + Small + Large       5                      16         23     44
Large + Small + Medium       5             8        16                29
                                           8                   23     52
            All States

   From the table we find there are 8 different ways to win the electoral college and candidates should
   definitely campaign in Large and Huge.

e. To find the fewest number of individual votes a candidate could win with; let's look at the table above.
   The combination of states with the fewest electoral votes is Huge and Small with 28 electoral votes.
   Let's see how many votes would be needed to win those two states.
   For Huge:
   862, 070 ÷ 2 = 431, 035, then go to the next whole number and get 431,036.
   For Small:
   154, 600 ÷ 2 = 77, 300, then go to the next whole number which is 77,301.
   431, 036 + 77, 301 votes = 508, 337 votes
   Let's also consider the next larger combination of 29 electoral votes: winning Small, Large and Medium,
   because their populations are smaller than the Huge state.
   We found above that Small can be won with a bare majority of 77,301 people.
   For Medium:
   262, 340 ÷ 2 = 131, 170, then go to the next whole number which is 131,171.
   For Large:
   581, 135 ÷ 2 = 290, 567.5, then go to the next whole number which is 290,568.
   77, 301 + 131, 171 + 290, 568 votes = 499, 040 votes
   A candidate can win with 499,040 votes in the combination of the Small, Large and Medium state.
248                                                CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

    f. The smallest number of votes to win the electoral college is 499,040. What percentage of the population
       is that? We will divide by the total population to get

       499, 040 ÷ 1, 860, 145 = 0.2683.
       If a candidate had the right combination of states in this made up country, they could win the Electoral
       College with only 26.8% of the vote.

                                                                                                                                            
People who support the Electoral College often say it protects small states. People who oppose the Electoral
College often say that each person's vote should count equally as in the popular vote. Next we will look at
electoral power to understand the impact of the Electoral College on people in small and large states.

5.3.3 Electoral Power

Electoral power is the value of a person's vote in one state compared to another state. A related topic
is voting power, which is the probability of any one person influencing an election. If you are interested in
voting power, you can look up the Banzhaf Power Index. To calculate the electoral power, we will calculate
a ratio of electoral votes for a given number of people. We could use any number, so we will choose the
number of people that each representative represents, which is our divisor of 40,000 people.

Example 5.3.7 Using the same fictional country, use the table below to calculate the electoral power of
each state.

  State  Population       Number of     Number of  Number of   Electoral Votes Per
                       Representatives   Senators    Electors      40,000 people
  Small     154,600
Medium      262,340
            581,135
  Large     862,070
  Huge

First, we fill in the number of representatives, senators and electoral votes for each state that we found earlier.
Then we will calculate the number of electoral votes per 40,000 people.
To do that, divide the number of electors by the number of representatives, since they each represent ap-
proximately 40,000 people. The results are shown in the table below. Note this is approximate because we
cut off the decimal remainders when calculating the number of representatives.

  State  Population       Number of     Number of  Number of   Electoral Votes Per
                       Representatives   Senators    Electors      40,000 people
  Small     154,600                            2          5          5 ÷ 3  1.67
Medium      262,340               3            2          8          8 ÷ 6  1.33
            581,135               6            2         16         16 ÷ 14  1.14
  Large     862,070              14            2         23         23 ÷ 21  1.10
  Huge                           21

Are you surprised to see that the smallest states have the highest electoral power? That is part of the design
of the electoral college. The founders from small states were concerned that their votes would not matter,
so every state gets 2 senators added to the number of representatives. For a state with few representatives,
those 2 extra electoral votes make a big difference. For a large states, the extra 2 electoral votes don't make
a very big difference.
You may have noticed a pattern when dividing to find the electoral power. Each time we divided the number
of electoral votes by that number minus two. We can write that pattern as n-2 n . Using GeoGebra to graph
that pattern this is what we see.
5.3. THE POPULAR VOTE, ELECTORAL COLLEGE AND ELECTORAL POWER  249

The minimum number of electors is three, since each state gets at least one representative in the apportion-
ment process. The smallest states and Washington, D.C. have 3 electors and the greatest electoral power on
the left side of the graph. The largest states like California, Florida and Texas have the least electoral power
on the right side of the graph.
Let's say instead each state had equal electoral power by removing the 2 extra electoral votes or by using
the popular vote. Then the graph would look like this.

Now that we have studied the popular vote, the Electoral College and electoral power, we leave it up to you

to choose which method you think is best.                     

5.3.4 Exercises

1. How is the U.S. President selected?
2. How many electors are there in the U.S. Electoral College?
3. How many U.S. Senators represent each state?
4. What is the length of a term of a U.S. Senator?
5. How many Representatives serve in the U.S. House of Representatives?
6. What is the length of a term of a U.S. Representative?

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 7-10, use the rules of the U.S. government to
complete the table and determine the following:
250                                           CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

a. The total number of electors in the state.
b. The number of electoral votes needed for a majority and win a presidential election.

     7. In this country there is one representative for every 50,000 residents.

       State     Population     Number of     Number of                           Number of
                             Representatives   Senators                             Electors
     Gandhi         450,000
     Mandela        150,000
     Gbowee         600,000

       Total

     8. In this country there is one representative for every 75,000 residents.

       State     Population     Number of     Number of                           Number of
                             Representatives   Senators                             Electors
     Johnson        225,000
      Rivera        450,000
       Milk         750,000
       Total

     9. In this country there is one representative for every 40,000 residents.

         State   Population     Number of     Number of                           Number of
                             Representatives   Senators                             Electors
        Tamez       280,000
        Teters      200,000
     Herrington     400,000
        Osawa       360,000
         Total

     10. In this country there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

       State     Population     Number of     Number of                           Number of
                             Representatives   Senators                             Electors
     Johnson        120,000
     Jackson        480,000
                    720,000
        Cox         420,000
     Browne

       Total

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 11-14, use the rules of the U.S. government (assume
that all of a state's electoral votes go to the candidate who received the majority of the votes in that state)
to complete the table and determine the following:

   a. The winner of the popular vote in the country and the percentage of votes they won.
   b. The winner of the electoral college who becomes the president and the percentage of electoral votes

       they won.

    11. In this country from problem 7, there is one representative for every 50,000 residents.
5.3. THE POPULAR VOTE, ELECTORAL COLLEGE AND ELECTORAL POWER                                  251

    State      Votes for    Votes for  Number of    Number of
             Candidate A  Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
   Gandhi                              Votes for A  Votes for B
  Mandela        216,000      234,000
  Gbowee          37,500      112,500
Total Votes      489,450      110,550

12. In this country from problem 8, there is one representative for every 75,000 residents.

  State        Votes for    Votes for  Number of    Number of
             Candidate A  Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
Johnson                                Votes for A  Votes for B
 Rivera          115,650      109,350
  Milk           235,800      214,200
  Total          117,750      632,250

13. In this country from problem 9, there is one representative for every 40,000 residents.

    State      Votes for    Votes for  Number of    Number of
             Candidate A  Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
   Tamez                               Votes for A  Votes for B
   Teters         95,480      184,250
Herrington       104,200       95,800
   Osawa         203,600      196,400
Total Votes       46,080      313,920

14. In this country from problem 10, there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

    State      Votes for    Votes for  Number of    Number of
             Candidate A  Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
  Johnson                              Votes for A  Votes for B
  Jackson         52,440       67,560
                 418,080       61,920
     Cox         319,680      400,320
  Browne         350,280       69,270
Total Votes

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 15-18, use the rules of the U.S. government to
complete the table and determine the following:

   a. The state that has the most electoral power
   b. The state that has the least electoral power

    15. In this country from problem 7, there is one representative for every 50,000 residents.
252                                                     CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

       State     Population       Number      Number    Number       Electoral
                                       of          of       of       Votes per
     Gandhi         450,000                                       50,000 people
     Mandela        150,000  Representatives  Senators  Electors
     Gbowee         600,000

     16. In this country from problem 8, there is one representative for every 75,000 residents.

       State     Population       Number      Number    Number       Electoral
                                       of          of       of       Votes per
     Johnson        225,000                                       50,000 people
      Rivera        450,000  Representatives  Senators  Electors
       Milk         750,000

     17. In this country from problem 9, there is one representative for every 40,000 residents.

         State   Population       Number      Number    Number       Electoral
                                       of          of       of       Votes per
        Tamez       280,000                                       50,000 people
        Teters      200,000  Representatives  Senators  Electors
     Herrington     400,000
        Osawa       360,000

     18. In this country from problem 10, there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

       State     Population       Number      Number    Number       Electoral
                                       of          of       of       Votes per
     Johnson        120,000                                       50,000 people
     Jackson        480,000  Representatives  Senators  Electors
                    720,000
        Cox         420,000
     Browne

19. For the country in problem 7, determine all the possible combinations of states that would win the
      electoral college. What is the minimum number of votes needed to win the electoral college?

20. For the country in problem 8, determine all the possible combinations of states that would win the
      electoral college. What is the minimum number of votes needed to win the electoral college?

21. For the country in problem 9, determine all the possible combinations of states that would win the
      electoral college. What is the minimum number of votes needed to win the electoral college?

22. For the country in problem 10, determine all the possible combinations of states that would win the
      electoral college. What is the minimum number of votes needed to win the electoral college?
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT                                                        253

5.4 Gerrymandering and How to Measure It

Objectives

Students will be able to:
   · Determine fair representation based on the proportion of each party in a state
   · Explain what gerrymandering is and how packing and cracking work
   · Calculate the efficiency gap for a given map
   · Calculate the percentage of the population that each seat represents
   · Determine the number of seats that the efficiency gap represents and whether a map is fair
   · Draw district boundaries to form a gerrymandered map and a fair map

5.4.1 Forming State Legislative Districts

As we saw in Section 5.1 the U.S.
House of Representatives has
435 seats that are re-apportioned
among the states every 10 years
after the census. For exam-
ple, in Oregon we currently have
5 legislative districts as shown
in this map1. After the 2020
census is finished, that number
could change. It has been pro-
jected that Oregon may get a 6th
representative due to population
growth from 2010 to 2020.

After a reapportionment, it is up to each state government to divide their population into equal districts
which each elect their representative to the U.S. House. Each representative should represent approximately
the same number of people, but their areas may not be the same. Due to different population densities in
urban and rural areas, you can see in the map of Oregon that the districts are not geographically equal.

Currently in most states, the state legislature draws the district boundaries. That means the party in power
is in charge of drawing the new districts and they could redraw the lines to help their own party. This is
called gerrymandering. Gerrymandering, pronounced, "Jerrymandering," is when districts are drawn to
the political advantage of those drawing the boundaries.

    1"Oregon congressional districts" by National Atlas of the United States of America is in the Public Domain
254                                                   CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

Gerrymandering got its name from Elbridge Gerry,
the governor of Massachusetts who signed a bill
in 1812 that created the unusual district pictured
here that looked like a salamander2. It gave then
Democrat-Republicans a bigger state Senate major-
ity, even though the Federalist party got more votes
statewide.

Here are some current well-
known gerrymanders. This one
is called Pennsylvania's "Goofy
Kicking Donald Duck"3

This one is called Ohio's "Lake
Erie Monster"4.

Gerrymandering has occurred by both parties. Gerrymandering by race is illegal due to the Voting Rights
Act of 1965, so people of color cannot be spread out to dilute their vote. Groups with similar interests may
want to be put together to form voting blocks, but that is controversial. Gerrymandering by political party
has been the subject of many lawsuits and Supreme Court cases. One of the challenges is how to measure
gerrymandering to prove that it has occurred. The measurement must be easy to explain and understand
in court.
Several ways to measure gerrymandering have been proposed. Some of the first methods used geometry
to measure how compact a district is, rather than the sprawling salamander. But it has been shown that
being compact does not equate with fairness. More recent methods use computer simulations to determine

    2"The Gerry-Mander" by Elkanah Tisdale (1771-1835), Originally published in the Boston Centinel, 1812 is in the Public
Domain

    3"Pennsylvania US Congressional District 7 (since 2013).tif" by Wikimedia Commons contributors, Wikimedia Commons,
the free media repository. is in the Public Domain

    4"Ohio US Congressional District 9 (since 2013).tif" by Wikimedia Commons contributors, Wikimedia Commons, the free
media repository. is in the Public Domain
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT                                                                               255

whether a certain map is an extreme outlier compared to other possible maps, or measure something called
partisan bias5.

In this book we will focus on the efficiency gap, proposed in 2015 by Nicholas Stephanopoulos and Eric
McGhee. The efficiency gap is a measure of the advantage one party has over the other party due to the
partisanship of the voters in each district.

Later in this section we will learn how to calculate and interpret the efficiency gap. First, let's look at how
we can tell whether a map is fair or not.

5.4.2 Proportionality and Fairness

For a map to be fair, we would expect the portion of seats that a political party wins in an election to be
about the same as the portion of that party in the state. This is called proportionality. For example, if a
state is 50:50 Democrat to Republican, they should each get about half of the seats. There is nothing in the
constitution that guarantees proportionality, but this is a basic measure of fairness. Let's look at a couple
of examples using fractions and decimals.

Example  5.4.2     If  a  state    with  6  seats  is  1  Republican  and  2  Democrat,  how  many  seats  would  each  party
                                                       3                   3
have if the representation was proportional?

We will multiply the total number of seats by fraction that each party represents.

Republicans:  6·   1   =  6  ·  1  =  6  =  2  seats.
                   3      1     3     3
                2      6     2     12
Democrats:  6·  3  =   1  ·  3  =  3     =  4  seats.

In this case the Republicans should have 2 seats and the Democrats should have 4 seats. The numbers won't

usually work out so nicely so let's look at another example.                                                            

Example 5.4.3 If a state with 8 seats is 55% Republican and 45% Democrat, how many seats would each
party have if the representation was proportional?

Solution. We will multiply the total number of seats by the decimal portion that each party represents.

Republicans: 8(0.55) = 4.4  4 seats.

Democrats: 8(0.045) = 3.6  4 seats.

By rounding, the most fair combination would be Democrats with 4 seats and Republicans with 4 seats.

This is not completely proportional, though, because we can't assign fractions of seats.                                

Now that we can tell whether a map is fair, let's see how gerrymandering works.

5.4.3 How to Gerrymander

There are two main ways to gerrymander a map, by packing and cracking. Packing is when all the people
of one political party are packed into a district. Since a party only needs a plurality or majority to win, all
those extra votes would be surplus. Cracking dilutes a party's votes by spreading out the voters so they
can't win as many districts.

   5projects.fivethirtyeight.com/partisan-gerrymandering-north-carolina
256  CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

Here is a small sample map to see how this works. In this
fictitious state, we have 35 people and 5 districts. So we
will need 7 people in each district. You can see how they
are spread out in the map, with Republicans denoted by
R's and Democrats marked with D's. To keep it simple,
we are only looking at two parties and they will need a
majority to win an election. We are also assuming that all
voters will vote and that they vote according to their party
which may not always be the case.

                                                                                     Figure 5.4.4 A simplified state map
Before we draw a fair map, let's try gerrymandering it for Democrats and then for the Republicans.
Example 5.4.5

We will first try to advantage the Democrats. There are
7 people in each district, so a party needs 4 votes to win
the election. We will draw the lines to put 4 Democrats in
each district along with 3 Republicans to spread them out
by cracking. Here is our map.
We were able to get 4 Democrats and 3 Republicans in
districts 1, 2, 3 and 5. The Republicans will win in district
4 because it will be 5-2, but if the 5th Republican had been
in another district, the map would have been more fair. As
it is drawn, the population is 17:18 but the seats are 1:4,
which does not seem fair.

                                                                                     Figure 5.4.6 The map gerrymandered in
                                                                                     favor of Democrats

                                                                                                                                            

5.4.4 The Efficiency Gap

To try to measure how unfair the map is, let's learn how to calculate the efficiency gap. First, we will tally
the votes in the table below, and note how the election results would turn out by using bold numbers for
the party with more voters in each district. For example, there are 4 D's and 3 R's in district 1, so the
Democrats would theoretically win that district.
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT                                                257

          District            D Votes          R Votes  D Surplus Votes  R Surplus Vote
              1                    4                3
              2                    4                3
              3                    4                3
              4                    2                5
              5                    4                3
                                  18               17
           Total

Election Results:

· Democrats win 4 seats
· Republicans win 1 seat

Next, we will calculate how many votes would be extra over the amount needed to win the election. These
are the surplus votes. In this example, with 7 voters, the majority of a district is 4 votes, so we will
subtract 4 from each winning side. From each losing side, all of the votes are considered surplus because
they did not go toward electing a candidate of their party. Then we add all the surplus votes for each party.

          District            D Votes          R Votes  D Surplus Votes  R Surplus Vote
              1                    4                3         4-4=0                3
              2                    4                3         4-4=0                3
              3                    4                3         4-4=0                3
              4                    2                5              2
              5                    4                3         4-4=0           5-4=1
                                  18               17              2               3
           Total                                                                   13

The difference between the surplus votes as a percentage of the population is the efficiency gap. As a formula
it is written:

Party A Surplus Votes - Party B Surplus Votes
                            Total Votes

To get a positive result, we put the larger number first and we have

13-2 35 = 11 35  0.314 or 31.4%.

The efficiency gap is 31.4%. To understand what this percentage means, we compare it with the percentage
that each district represents in the state. Since our state has 5 districts, each one is 20% of the population.
Here's how we got that by dividing or as a fraction of the state.

100% ÷ 5  districts  =  20%,  or,  1  =  0.20  or  20%
                                   5

In this case, the efficiency gap is worth more than one full seat, which suggests that the Democratic party
has at least one extra seat than they would with proportional representation.

Example 5.4.7
258                                                                         CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

For another example, we will take the same map and ger-
rymander it for the Republicans. This time we will pack
as many Democrats as we can into the middle, and then
use cracking to form the rest of the districts, trying to get
4 R's in as many as we can. Here is the map.

                                                               Figure 5.4.8 The map gerrymandered in
                                                               favor of Republicans

Now, let's fill in our table:

             District          D Votes  R Votes       D Surplus Votes  R Surplus Vote
                 1                  3        4                   3          4-4=0
                 2                  7        0                                   0
                 3                  3        4              7-4=3           4-4=0
                 4                  2        5                   3          5-4=1
                 5                  3        4                   2          4-4=0
                                   18       17                   3               1
              Total                                             14

Election Results:

· Democrats win 1 seat

· Republicans win 4 seats

To calculate our efficiency gap,
Total Votes Party A Surplus Votes - Party B Surplus Votes = 35 14-1 = 35 13  0.371 or 37.1%.
This shows the opposite unfairness where the population is 17:18 but the seats are 4:1. We can calculate the

number of seats that the efficiency gap is worth by dividing 37.1% by 20%.

37.1% ÷ 20% = 1.855

The efficiency gap is worth approximately 1.9 seats.

Stephanopoulos and McGhee gave a guideline of around 8% or less for the efficiency gap and this one is

37.1%. The Republicans have at least one extra seat than they would if the seats were proportional to the

population.                                                                            

Example 5.4.9
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT                                                              259

Now we will try to create a fair map and see what the efficiency
gap is. There is an odd number of districts and the population
is 17:18 so it might be challenging to make it fair.
With this map, we tried to have two districts that favored De-
mocrats, two that favored Republicans, and one that might go
either way. Since there is one extra Democrat, the population is
17:18 and the seats are 2:3

                                                                        Figure 5.4.10 A more fair map

Let's see how the efficiency gap comes out in this situation:

District              D Votes  R Votes  D Surplus Votes                 R Surplus Vote
    1                      3        4              3
    2                      4        3                                        4-4=0
    3                      4        3         4-4=0                               3
    4                      3        4         4-4=0                               3
    5                      4        3
                          18       17              3                         4-4=0
 Total                                        4-4=0                               3
                                                                                  9
                                                   6

Election Results:

· Democrats win 3 seats

· Republicans win 2 seats

The efficiency gap is
Total Votes Party A Surplus Votes - Party B Surplus Votes = 35 9-6 = 353  0.0857 or 8.57%.
This gap is much smaller than in our gerrymandered examples and near the 8% guideline. Due to the odd

number of seats and even distribution of the parties, this is as small as we can get the efficiency gap in this

situation. It is much less than 20%, which is one seat.

8.57% ÷ 20% = 0.4285

The efficiency gap is worth less than half a seat or about 0.43 seats.                                 

There are still many court cases in progress alleging gerrymandered maps so it seems like a new solution is

needed. Some alternatives are appointing independent commissions to draw the lines, or changing the system
altogether with proportional representation 6. The statisticians at FiveThirtyEight used a web application

to draw new lines in all of the states according to six different measures. You can read about it in this article
7.

5.4.5 Exercises

1. When does redistricting of state districts happen?
2. Who determines where the district lines are drawn?
3. What are the two rules for drawing district lines?
4. What are the two ways to gerrymander?

   6fairvote.org/fair_representation#what_is_fair_voting
   7fivethirtyeight.com/features/hating-gerrymandering-is-easy-fixing-it-is-harder
260                                                                      CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5. If a state with 7 seats is 62% Republican and 38% Democrat, how many seats would each party have if
      the representation was proportional?

6. If a state with 12 seats is 43% Republican and 57% Democrat, how many seats would each party have
      if the representation was proportional?

7. If a state with 3 seats is 4/5 Republican and 1/5 Democrat, how many seats would each party have if
      the representation was proportional?

8. If a state with 9 seats is 3/8 Republican and 5/8 Democrat, how many seats would each party have if
      the representation was proportional?

9. If a state with 11 seats is 52% Republican, 40% Democrat and 8% Green Party, how many seats would
      each party have if the representation was proportional?

10. If a state with 18 seats is 31% Republican, 58% Democrat and 11% Progressive Party, how many seats
      would each party have if the representation was proportional?

Exercise Group. For each map in problems 11-20, complete the following:

a. How many votes are needed for a majority?
b. How many seats are won by each party?
c. Calculate the efficiency gap.
d. Calculate the percentage of the state that each district represents.
e. Calculate how many district seats the efficiency gap is worth.
f. Explain whether you think the map is fair and why or why not.

 11. This state has 4 districts with 7 people in each district.

     12. This state has 4 districts with 9 people in each.
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT              261

13. This state has 5 districts with 5 people in each.
14. This state has 5 districts with 7 people in each.
15. This state has 5 districts with 9 people in each.
262                                                          CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     16. This state has 5 districts with 11 people in each.
     17. This state has 6 districts with 5 people in each.
     18. This state has 6 districts with 7 people in each.
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT                                        263

19. This state has 6 districts with 9 people in each.
20. This state has 6 districts with 11 people in each.

Exercise Group. For each map in problems 21-24, draw your own districts to find

   a. The most seats you can win for the Democrats.
   b. The most seats you can win for the Republicans.
    21. This state has 5 districts with 7 people in each.
264                                                         CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     22. This state has 5 districts with 9 people in each.
     23. This state has 6 districts with 7 people in each.
     24. This state has 6 districts with 9 people in each.
5.4. GERRYMANDERING AND HOW TO MEASURE IT  265
266                                                                  CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

5.5 Chapter 5 Review

Exercise Group. In exercises 1-4, determine the apportionment using

a. Hamilton's Method
b. Jefferson's Method
c. Webster's Method
d. Huntington-Hill Method

1. A small country consists of four states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature has 78
      seats, apportion the seats.

                              A           B                C     D

                              96,400 162,700 119,900 384,900

2. Reapportion the previous problem with 90 seats.

3. A small country consists of five states, whose populations are listed below. If the legislature as 100
      seats, apportion the seats.

                           A           B     C                D      E

                           584,000 226,600 88,500 257,300 104,300

4. Reapportion the previous problem with 125 seats.

Exercise Group. In exercises 5-8, complete the following:

a. How many voters voted in this election?
b. How many votes are needed for a majority?
c. Find the winner under the plurality method.
d. Find the winner under the Instant Runoff Voting method.
e. Find the winner under the Borda Count Method.
f. Find the winner under Copeland's method.

5. A Portland Community College Board member race has four candidates: E, F, G, H. The votes are:

Number of voters 12 16 17 15 34 13 19 8

                           1st choice     G H E E F G HG

                           2nd choice     E F F H G H GF

                           3rd choice     F GG F H E FE

                           4th choice     H E H G E F EH

6. A Forest Grove School Board position has four candidates: I, J, K, L. The votes are:

Number of voters 15 13 25 16 18 10 7 11 2

1st choice                             K I J LKLI IL

2nd choice                             J L L I I JKJK

3rd choice                             L J I K J I JKJ

4th choice                             I K K J L KLL I
5.5. CHAPTER 5 REVIEW                                                                         267

7. A Multnomah County Commissioner's race has five candidates: M, N, O, P, Q. The votes are:

                       Number of voters 31 18 35 37 33 12

                       1st choice  MQON P Q

                       2nd choice  P OQ PMN

                       3rd choice  OMP ONM

                       4th choice  N P NMQO

                       5th choice  QNMQO P

8. The Oregon State Governor's race has five candidates: R, S, T, U, V. The votes are:

                       Number of voters 22 45 20 47 43 18 26

                       1st choice  R S RUTVV

                       2nd choice  TV S TU S T

                       3rd choice  S TVSVUS

                       4th choice  URUVRRU

                       5th choice  VUTR S TR

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 9-10, use the rules of the U.S. government to
complete the table and determine the following:

a. The total number of electors in the state.
b. The number of electoral votes needed for a majority and win a presidential election.

9. In this country there is one representative for every 55,000 residents.

  State                Population     Number of     Number of                Number of
                                   Representatives   Senators                  Electors
Fonville                  825,000
Gurley                    550,000
Nevarez                   275,000
  Total

10. In this country there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

    State              Population     Number of     Number of                Number of
                                   Representatives   Senators                  Electors
   Arbery                 720,000
Monterrosa                360,000
                          240,000
    Bland                 480,000
    Davis
    Total

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 11-12, use the rules of the U.S. government (assume
that all of a state's electoral votes go to the candidate who received the majority of the votes in that state)
to complete the table and determine the following:

   a. The winner of the popular vote in the country and the percentage of votes they won.

   b. The winner of the electoral college who becomes the president and the percentage of electoral votes
       they won.
268                                                           CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

     11. In this country from problem 9, there is one representative for every 55,000 residents.

         State      Votes for                      Votes for  Number of    Number of
                  Candidate A                    Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
       Fonville                                               Votes for A  Votes for B
        Gurley        684,750                        140,250
       Nevarez        257,400                        292,600
     Total Votes      132,275                        142,725

     12. In this country from problem 10, there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

         State      Votes for                      Votes for  Number of    Number of
                  Candidate A                    Candidate B    Electoral   Electoral
        Arbery                                                Votes for A  Votes for B
     Monterrosa       372,240                        347,760
                       38,880                        321,120
         Bland        134,640                        105,360
         Davis        104,160                        375,840
         Total

Exercise Group. In each fictional country in problems 13-14, use the rules of the U.S. government to
complete the table and determine the following:

a. The state that has the most electoral power
b. The state that has the least electoral power

     13. In this country from problem 9, there is one representative for every 55,000 residents.

       State     Population       Number         Number       Number          Electoral
                                       of             of          of          Votes per
     Fonville       825,000                                                55,000 people
     Gurley         550,000  Representatives     Senators     Electors
     Nevarez        275,000

     14. In this country from problem 10, there is one representative for every 60,000 residents.

         State   Population       Number         Number       Number          Electoral
                                       of             of          of          Votes per
        Arbery      720,000                                                60,000 people
     Monterrosa     360,000  Representatives     Senators     Electors
                    240,000
         Bland      480,000
         Davis

Exercise Group. For each map in problems 15-16, complete the following:

   a. How many votes are needed for a majority?
   b. How many seats are won by each party?
5.5. CHAPTER 5 REVIEW                                                    269

c. Calculate the efficiency gap.
d. Calculate the percentage of the state that each district represents.
e. Calculate how many district seats the efficiency gap is worth.
f. Explain whether you think the map is fair and why or why not.

 15. This state has 5 districts with 9 people in each district.

16. This state has 6 districts with 7 people in each.
References

[1] About the electors. (2019, August 27). National Archives. archives.gov/electoral-college/electors
[2] American Civil Liberties Union. (2020). Voting Rights Act: Major Dates in History. American Civil

       Liberties Union. aclu.org/voting-rights-act-major-dates-history
[3] Ballotpedia Staff. (n.d.). Presidential Election, 2016. Ballotpedia. Retrieved 2020, from ballotpedia.

        org/Presidential_election,_2016
[4] Best, J. (2004). Presidential selection: Complex problems and simple solutions. Political Science

       Quarterly, 119(1), 39-59.
[5] Brown, S. (2015, March 22). Baltimore Professor Working To Make Higher Mathematics Accessible

       To All. CBS Baltimore. baltimore.cbslocal.com/2015/03/22/baltimore-professor-working-to-make-hig
        her-mathematics-accessible-to-all
[6] Chichilnisky, G. (1980). Social choice and the topology of spaces of preferences. Advances in Mathe-
       matics, 37 (2), 165-176. doi.org/10.1016/0001-8708(80)90032-8
[7] Chichilnisky, G. (2018). Graciela Chichilnisky - Graciela Chichilnisky. Bio. chichilnisky.com/graciel
        a-chichilnisky
[8] Clayton, D. (2015). The electoral college: An idea whose time has come and gone. The Black Scholar,
       37 (3), 28-41.
[9] David Harold Blackwell: National Visionary Leadership Project: African American History. (2013).
        visionaryproject.org/blackwelldavid
[10] Farley, J. (2020). Jonathan Farley. www.Latticetheory.Net. latticetheory.net
[11] Freidenreich, H. (2020). Hilda Geiringer. Jewish Women's Archive. jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/gei
        ringer-hilda
[12] Giridharadas, A., and Bradsher, K. (2006, October 13). Microloan Pioneer and His Bank Win Nobel
       Peace Prize. The New York Times. nytimes.com/2006/10/13/business/14nobelcnd.html
[13] Hermoza, L. C. (2015, October 5). Associate Professor In Baltimore Uses Mathematics To Counter
       Terrorism. CBS Baltimore. baltimore.cbslocal.com/2015/10/05/associate-professor-in-baltimore-use
        s-mathematics-to-counter-terrorism
[14] History.com Editors. (2018a, September 14). Native American Cultures. HISTORY. history.com/topi
        cs/native-american-history/native-american-cultures
[15] History.com Editors. (2018b, October 4). Compromise of 1850. HISTORY. history.com/topics/aboli
        tionist-movement/compromise-of-1850
[16] How Slavery Helped Build a World Economy. (2003, January 3). Nationalgeographic.Com. nationalge
        ographic.com/news/2003/1/how-slavery-helped-build-a-world-economy/#close
[17] Indian Land Trust Tenure Foundation. (2020). History - ILTF. Indian Land Tenure Foundation.
        iltf.org/land-issues/history

                                                                    271
272  CHAPTER 5. DEMOCRACY

[18] Jonathan Farley, Mathematics - Martin Luther King Jr. Scholars. (2005). MLK Visiting Professors
       and Scholars Program. mlkscholars.mit.edu/jfarley

[19] Manning, B. (2019, November 5). Overdue recognition. Wheaton College Massachusetts. wheatoncolle
        ge.edu/news/overdue-recognition

[20] McDonald, M. P. (2016). 2016 November General Election Turnout Rates. Electproject.Org. electpro
        ject.org/2016g

[21] McNeill, L. (2019). The woman who reshaped maths. BBC.com; BBC Future. bbc.com/future/article
        /20191031-hilda-geiringer-mathematician-who-fled-the-nazis

[22] Paiva, J. M. (2011). On introducing proportionality in american presidential elections: An historical
       analysis. The Political Quarterly, 82(3), 435-447.

[23] Ranked Choice Voting Resource Center. (2020). Ranked Choice Voting Resource Center. rankedchoi
        cevoting.org/where_used

[24] Renton, P. (2008, December 5). A Brief History of Microlending. Lend Academy. lendacademy.com/a-b
        rief-history-of-microlending

[25] Robertson, E., and O'Connor, J. (2020). Hilda Geiringer - Biography. MacTutor History of Mathe-
       maticians Archive. mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Geiringer

[26] Siegle, L. (2010, November 14). Graciela Chichilnisky's innovation: carbon capturing. The Guardian.
        theguardian.com/environment/2010/nov/14/graciela-chichilnisky-carbon-capture-global-thermostat

[27] Stafford, J. B. (2006, March 3). Does 1+1=terror? Using math models to calculate risks. Stanford
       University. news.stanford.edu/news/2006/march8/mterror-030806.html

[28] Wikipedia Contributors. (2019, January 27). Muhammad Yunus. Wikipedia; Wikimedia Foundation.
        en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_Yunus

[29] Williams, S. W. (2008). Who are the greatest Black Mathematicians? www.Math.Buffalo.edu. math.b
        uffalo.edu/mad/PEEPS/blackwell_david.html

[30] Worrall, S. (2018, June 9). When, How Did the First Americans Arrive? It's Complicated. Nation-
       algeographic.com. nationalgeographic.com/news/2018/06/when-and-how-did-the-first-americans-arriv
        e--its-complicated-
