Prealgebra 2e

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
LYNN MARECEK, SANTA ANA COLLEGE
MARYANNE ANTHONY-SMITH, FORMERLY OF SANTA ANA COLLEGE
ANDREA HONEYCUTT MATHIS, NORTHEAST MISSISSIPPI COMMUNITY COLLEGE
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2020 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/prealgebra-2e in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13      978-0-9986257-9-9
PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-951693-32-9
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-975076-43-6
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13     978-1-951693-19-0
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR   2020
2 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CE 20 15
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of
partners, please visit openstax.org/impact.

Arnold Ventures                                  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative                       Michelson 20MM Foundation
Chegg, Inc.                                      National Science Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  The Open Society Foundations
Digital Promise                                  Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
Ann and John Doerr                               Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
Girard Foundation                                Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go
Google Inc.                                      Stand Together
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
The Hewlett-Packard Company                      The Stuart Family Foundation
Intel Inc.                                       Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
Rusty and John Jaggers                           Valhalla Charitable Foundation
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     White Star Education Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          Schmidt Futures
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 William Marsh Rice University
The Maxfield Foundation
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                                  Get started at openstax.org/details/books/prealgebra-2e

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    Contents

     Preface 1

1 Whole Numbers 7

         Introduction 7
         1.1 Introduction to Whole Numbers 7
         1.2 Add Whole Numbers 22
         1.3 Subtract Whole Numbers 38
         1.4 Multiply Whole Numbers 51
         1.5 Divide Whole Numbers 68
         Chapter Review 85
         Exercises 87

2 The Language of Algebra 95

         Introduction to the Language of Algebra 95
         2.1 Use the Language of Algebra 95
         2.2 Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 113
         2.3 Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 126
         2.4 Find Multiples and Factors 139
         2.5 Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 152
         Chapter Review 162
         Exercises 165

3 Integers 171

         Introduction to Integers 171
         3.1 Introduction to Integers 171
         3.2 Add Integers 186
         3.3 Subtract Integers 201
         3.4 Multiply and Divide Integers 219
         3.5 Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 232
         Chapter Review 244
         Exercises 246

4 Fractions 253

         Introduction to Fractions 253
         4.1 Visualize Fractions 253
         4.2 Multiply and Divide Fractions 274
         4.3 Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 291
         4.4 Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators 302
         4.5 Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 311
         4.6 Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 329
         4.7 Solve Equations with Fractions 344
         Chapter Review 359
         Exercises 362
   5 Decimals 367

              Introduction to Decimals 367
              5.1 Decimals 367
              5.2 Decimal Operations 383
              5.3 Decimals and Fractions 401
              5.4 Solve Equations with Decimals 413
              5.5 Averages and Probability 421
              5.6 Ratios and Rate 433
              5.7 Simplify and Use Square Roots 444
              Chapter Review 457
              Exercises 460

   6 Percents 467

              Introduction to Percents 467
              6.1 Understand Percent 467
              6.2 Solve General Applications of Percent 482
              6.3 Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 494
              6.4 Solve Simple Interest Applications 507
              6.5 Solve Proportions and their Applications 516
              Chapter Review 532
              Exercises 533

   7 The Properties of Real Numbers 539

              Introduction to the Properties of Real Numbers 539
              7.1 Rational and Irrational Numbers 539
              7.2 Commutative and Associative Properties 546
              7.3 Distributive Property 556
              7.4 Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 567
              7.5 Systems of Measurement 578
              Chapter Review 595
              Exercises 596

   8 Solving Linear Equations 601

              Introduction to Solving Linear Equations 601
              8.1 Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 601
              8.2 Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality 614
              8.3 Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 621
              8.4 Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 637
              Chapter Review 647
              Exercises 648

   9 Math Models and Geometry 651

              Introduction 651
              9.1 Use a Problem Solving Strategy 651
              9.2 Solve Money Applications 666
              9.3 Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 679

Access for free at openstax.org
          9.4 Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 698
          9.5 Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 724
          9.6 Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 736
          9.7 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 755
          Chapter Review 766
          Exercises 769

10 Polynomials 779

          Introduction to Polynomials 779
          10.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials 779
          10.2 Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 788
          10.3 Multiply Polynomials 801
          10.4 Divide Monomials 814
          10.5 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 830
          10.6 Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 845
          Chapter Review 857
          Exercises 859

11 Graphs 865

          Graphs 865
          11.1 Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 865
          11.2 Graphing Linear Equations 886
          11.3 Graphing with Intercepts 904
          11.4 Understand Slope of a Line 919
          Chapter Review 946
          Exercises 947

A Cumulative Review 955

B Powers and Roots Tables 961

C Geometric Formulas 967

     Answer Key 969

     Index 1067
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 1

Preface

Welcome to Prealgebra 2e, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to high-quality
learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education. Our first
openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 35 books for college and
AP® Courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost personalized learning tool, is
being piloted in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and
our alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to
learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax Resources

Customization

Prealgebra 2e is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which means that you
can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its content
contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in
the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution in Prealgebra 2e

In Prealgebra 2e, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license within the
caption. For art that is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same attribution to its
original source. Some art has been provided through permissions and should only be used with the attribution or
limitations provided in the credit.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Prealgebra 2e

Prealgebra 2e is designed to meet scope and sequence requirements for a one-semester prealgebra course. The text
introduces the fundamental concepts of algebra while addressing the needs of students with diverse backgrounds and
learning styles. Each topic builds upon previously developed material to demonstrate the cohesiveness and structure of
mathematics.

Students who are taking basic mathematics and prealgebra classes in college present a unique set of challenges. Many
students in these classes have been unsuccessful in their prior math classes. They may think they know some math, but
their core knowledge is full of holes. Furthermore, these students need to learn much more than the course content.
They need to learn study skills, time management, and how to deal with math anxiety. Some students lack basic reading
and arithmetic skills. The organization of Prealgebra makes it easy to adapt the book to suit a variety of course syllabi.

Coverage and Scope

Prealgebra 2e takes a student-support approach in its presentation of the content. The beginning, in particular, is
presented as a sequence of small steps so that students gain confidence in their ability to succeed in the course. The
order of topics was carefully planned to emphasize the logical progression throughout the course and to facilitate a
thorough understanding of each concept. As new ideas are presented, they are explicitly related to previous topics.
2 Preface

       · Chapter 1: Whole Numbers
           Each of the four basic operations with whole numbers--addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division--is
           modeled and explained. As each operation is covered, discussions of algebraic notation and operation signs,
           translation of algebraic expressions into word phrases, and the use of the operation in applications are included.

       · Chapter 2: The Language of Algebra
           Mathematical vocabulary as it applies to the whole numbers is presented. The use of variables, which distinguishes
           algebra from arithmetic, is introduced early in the chapter, and the development of and practice with arithmetic
           concepts use variables as well as numeric expressions. In addition, the difference between expressions and
           equations is discussed, word problems are introduced, and the process for solving one-step equations is modeled.

       · Chapter 3: Integers
           While introducing the basic operations with negative numbers, students continue to practice simplifying, evaluating,
           and translating algebraic expressions. The Division Property of Equality is introduced and used to solve one-step
           equations.

       · Chapter 4: Fractions
           Fraction circles and bars are used to help make fractions real and to develop operations on them. Students continue
           simplifying and evaluating algebraic expressions with fractions, and learn to use the Multiplication Property of
           Equality to solve equations involving fractions.

       · Chapter 5: Decimals
           Basic operations with decimals are presented, as well as methods for converting fractions to decimals and vice
           versa. Averages and probability, unit rates and unit prices, and square roots are included to provide opportunities to
           use and round decimals.

       · Chapter 6: Percents
           Conversions among percents, fractions, and decimals are explored. Applications of percent include calculating sales
           tax, commission, and simple interest. Proportions and solving percent equations as proportions are addressed as
           well.

       · Chapter 7: The Properties of Real Numbers
           The properties of real numbers are introduced and applied as a culmination of the work done thus far, and to
           prepare students for the upcoming chapters on equations, polynomials, and graphing.

       · Chapter 8: Solving Linear Equations
           A gradual build-up to solving multi-step equations is presented. Problems involve solving equations with constants
           on both sides, variables on both sides, variables and constants on both sides, and fraction and decimal coefficients.

       · Chapter 9: Math Models and Geometry
           The chapter begins with opportunities to solve "traditional" number, coin, and mixture problems. Geometry sections
           cover the properties of triangles, rectangles, trapezoids, circles, irregular figures, the Pythagorean Theorem, and
           volumes and surface areas of solids. Distance-rate-time problems and formulas are included as well.

       · Chapter 10: Polynomials
           Adding and subtracting polynomials is presented as an extension of prior work on combining like terms. Integer
           exponents are defined and then applied to scientific notation. The chapter concludes with a brief introduction to
           factoring polynomials.

       · Chapter 11: Graphs
           This chapter is placed last so that all of the algebra with one variable is completed before working with linear
           equations in two variables. Examples progress from plotting points to graphing lines by making a table of solutions
           to an equation. Properties of vertical and horizontal lines and intercepts are included. Graphing linear equations at
           the end of the course gives students a good opportunity to review evaluating expressions and solving equations.

    All chapters are broken down into multiple sections, the titles of which can be viewed in the Table of Contents.

   Changes to the Second Edition

    The Prealgebra 2e revision focused on mathematical clarity and accuracy. Every Example, Try-It, Section Exercise, Review
    Exercise, and Practice Test item was reviewed by multiple faculty experts, and then verified by authors. This intensive
    effort resulted in hundreds of changes to the text, problem language, answers, instructor solutions, and graphics.

    However, OpenStax and our authors are aware of the difficulties posed by shifting problem and exercise numbers when
    textbooks are revised. In an effort to make the transition to the 2nd edition as seamless as possible, we have minimized

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 3

any shifting of exercise numbers. For example, instead of deleting or adding problems where necessary, we replaced
problems in order to keep the numbering intact. As a result, in nearly all chapters, there will be no shifting of exercise
numbers; in the chapters where shifting does occur, it will be minor. Faculty and course coordinators should be able to
use the new edition in a straightforward manner.
Also, to increase convenience, answers to the Be Prepared Exercises will now appear in the regular solutions manuals,
rather than as a separate resource.
A detailed transition guide is available as an instructor resource at openstax.org.

Pedagogical Foundation and Features

Learning Objectives

Each chapter is divided into multiple sections (or modules), each of which is organized around a set of learning
objectives. The learning objectives are listed explicitly at the beginning of each section and are the focal point of every
instructional element.

Narrative text

Narrative text is used to introduce key concepts, terms, and definitions, to provide real-world context, and to provide
transitions between topics and examples. An informal voice was used to make the content accessible to students.
Throughout this book, we rely on a few basic conventions to highlight the most important ideas:

  · Key terms are boldfaced, typically when first introduced and/or when formally defined.
  · Key concepts and definitions are called out in a blue box for easy reference.

Examples

Each learning objective is supported by one or more worked examples, which demonstrate the problem-solving
approaches that students must master. Typically, we include multiple Examples for each learning objective in order to
model different approaches to the same type of problem, or to introduce similar problems of increasing complexity.
All Examples follow a simple two- or three-part format. First, we pose a problem or question. Next, we demonstrate the
Solution, spelling out the steps along the way. Finally (for select Examples), we show students how to check the solution.
Most examples are written in a two-column format, with explanation on the left and math on the right to mimic the way
that instructors "talk through" examples as they write on the board in class.

Figures

Prealgebra 2e contains many figures and illustrations. Art throughout the text adheres to a clear, understated style,
drawing the eye to the most important information in each figure while minimizing visual distractions.

Supporting Features

Four small but important features serve to support Examples:
Be Prepared!
Each section, beginning with Section 1.2, starts with a few "Be Prepared!" exercises so that students can determine if they
have mastered the prerequisite skills for the section. Reference is made to specific Examples from previous sections so
students who need further review can easily find explanations. Answers to these exercises can be found in the
supplemental resources that accompany this title.
How To

A "How To" is a list of steps necessary to solve a certain type of problem. A "How To" typically precedes an Example.
Try It

A "Try It" exercise immediately follows an Example, providing the student with an immediate opportunity to solve a
4 Preface

    similar problem. In the PDF and the Web View version of the text, answers to the Try It exercises are located in the
    Answer Key.

    Media

    The "Media" icon appears at the conclusion of each section, just prior to the Section Exercises. This icon marks a list of
    links to online video tutorials that reinforce the concepts and skills introduced in the section.

    Disclaimer: While we have selected tutorials that closely align to our learning objectives, we did not produce these
    tutorials, nor were they specifically produced or tailored to accompany Prealgebra 2e.

   Section Exercises

    Each section of every chapter concludes with a well-rounded set of exercises that can be assigned as homework or used
    selectively for guided practice. Exercise sets are named Practice Makes Perfect to encourage completion of homework
    assignments.

       · Exercises correlate to the learning objectives. This facilitates assignment of personalized study plans based on
           individual student needs.

       · Exercises are carefully sequenced to promote building of skills.
       · Values for constants and coefficients were chosen to practice and reinforce arithmetic facts.
       · Even and odd-numbered exercises are paired.
       · Exercises parallel and extend the text examples and use the same instructions as the examples to help students

           easily recognize the connection.
       · Applications are drawn from many everyday experiences, as well as those traditionally found in college math texts.
       · Everyday Math highlights practical situations using the math concepts from that particular section.
       · Writing Exercises are included in every Exercise Set to encourage conceptual understanding, critical thinking, and

           literacy.

   Chapter Review Features

    The end of each chapter includes a review of the most important takeaways, as well as additional practice problems that
    students can use to prepare for exams.

       · Key Terms provides a formal definition for each bold-faced term in the chapter.
       · Key Concepts summarizes the most important ideas introduced in each section, linking back to the relevant

           Example(s) in case students need to review.
       · Chapter Review Exercises includes practice problems that recall the most important concepts from each section.
       · Practice Test includes additional problems assessing the most important learning objectives from the chapter.
       · Answer Key includes the answers to all Try It exercises and every other exercise from the Section Exercises, Chapter

           Review Exercises, and Practice Test.

   Answers to Questions in the Book

    All answers to Try It questions are provided in the Answer Key. Answers to Examples are provided directly below the
    question. Students can find odd-numbered answers to Chapter Review Exercises, Practice Test, and Section Exercises in
    the Answer Key. Answers to all odd and even-numbered questions are provided only to instructors in the Instructor
    Answer Guide via the Instructor Resources page.

   Additional Resources

   Student and Instructor Resources

    We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, manipulative
    mathematics worksheets, Links to Literacy assignments, and an answer key. Instructor resources require a verified
    instructor account, which can be requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to
    supplement your OpenStax book.

   Partner Resources

    OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to
    students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access
    the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on openstax.org.

   About the Authors

   Senior Contributing Authors

    Lynn Marecek and MaryAnne Anthony-Smith taught mathematics at Santa Ana College for many years and have worked

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Preface 5

together on several projects aimed at improving student learning in developmental math courses. They are the authors
of Strategies for Success: Study Skills for the College Math Student, published by Pearson HigherEd.

Lynn Marecek, Santa Ana College

MaryAnne Anthony-Smith, Santa Ana College

Andrea Honeycutt Mathis, Northeast Mississippi Community College

Reviewers

Tony Ayers, Collin College Preston Ridge Campus
David Behrman, Somerset Community College
Brandie Biddy, Cecil College
Bryan Blount, Kentucky Wesleyan College
Steven Boettcher, Estrella Mountain Community College
Kimberlyn Brooks, Cuyahoga Community College
Pamela Burleson, Lone Star College University Park
Tamara Carter, Texas A&M University
Phil Clark, Scottsdale Community College
Christina Cornejo, Erie Community College
Denise Cutler, Bay de Noc Community College
Richard Darnell, Eastern Wyoming College
Robert Diaz, Fullerton College
Karen Dillon, Thomas Nelson Community College
Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State
Bryan Faulkner, Ferrum College
David French, Tidewater Community College
Stephanie Gable, Columbus State University
Heather Gallacher, Cleveland State University
Rachel Gross, Towson University
Dianne Hendrickson, Becker College
Linda Hunt, Shawnee State University
Betty Ivory, Cuyahoga Community College
Joanne Kendall, Lone Star College System
Kevin Kennedy, Athens Technical College
Stephanie Krehl, Mid-South Community College
Allyn Leon, Imperial Valley College
Gerald LePage, Bristol Community College
Laurie Lindstrom, Bay de Noc Community College
Jonathan Lopez, Niagara University
Yixia Lu, South Suburban College
Mikal McDowell, Cedar Valley College
Kim McHale, Columbia College of Missouri
Allen Miller, Northeast Lakeview College
Michelle Moravec, Baylor University TX/McLennan Community College
Jennifer Nohai-Seaman, Housatonic Community College
Rick Norwood, East Tennessee State University
Linda Padilla, Joliet Junior College
Kelly Proffitt, Patrick Henry Community College
Teresa Richards, Butte-Glenn Community College
Christian Roldan-Johnson, College of Lake County Community College
Patricia C. Rome, Delgado Community College, City Park Campus
Kegan Samuel, Naugatuck Valley Community College
Bruny Santiago, Tarrant College Southeast Campus
Sutandra Sarkar, Georgia State University
Richard Sgarlotti, Bay Mills Community College
Chuang Shao, Rose State College
Carla VanDeSande, Arizona State University
Shannon Vinson, Wake Technical Community College
Maryam Vulis, Norwalk Community College
6 Preface

    Toby Wagner, Chemeketa Community College
    Libby Watts, Tidewater Community College
    Becky Wheelock, San Diego City College

     Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              1 · Introduction 7

1  WHOLE NUMBERS

Figure 1.1 Purchasing pounds of fruit at a fruit market requires a basic understanding of numbers. (credit: Dr. Karl-Heinz
Hochhaus, Wikimedia Commons)

Chapter Outline

  1.1 Introduction to Whole Numbers
  1.2 Add Whole Numbers
  1.3 Subtract Whole Numbers
  1.4 Multiply Whole Numbers
  1.5 Divide Whole Numbers

      Introduction

Even though counting is first taught at a young age, mastering mathematics, which is the study of numbers, requires
constant attention. If it has been a while since you have studied math, it can be helpful to review basic topics. In this
chapter, we will focus on numbers used for counting as well as four arithmetic operations--addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. We will also discuss some vocabulary that we will use throughout this book.

1.1 Introduction to Whole Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Identify counting numbers and whole numbers
           Model whole numbers
           Identify the place value of a digit
           Use place value to name whole numbers
           Use place value to write whole numbers
           Round whole numbers

Identify Counting Numbers and Whole Numbers

Learning algebra is similar to learning a language. You start with a basic vocabulary and then add to it as you go along.
You need to practice often until the vocabulary becomes easy to you. The more you use the vocabulary, the more
familiar it becomes.

Algebra uses numbers and symbols to represent words and ideas. Let's look at the numbers first. The most basic

numbers used in algebra are those we use to count objects:    and so on. These are called the counting

numbers. The notation "..." is called an ellipsis, which is another way to show "and so on", or that the pattern continues

endlessly. Counting numbers are also called natural numbers.
8 1 · Whole Numbers

      Counting Numbers
      The counting numbers start with and continue.

    Counting numbers and whole numbers can be visualized on a number line as shown in Figure 1.2.

             Figure 1.2 The numbers on the number line increase from left to right, and decrease from right to left.
The point labeled is called the origin. The points are equally spaced to the right of and labeled with the counting
numbers. When a number is paired with a point, it is called the coordinate of the point.
The discovery of the number zero was a big step in the history of mathematics. Including zero with the counting
numbers gives a new set of numbers called the whole numbers.

  Whole Numbers

  The whole numbers are the counting numbers and zero.

We stopped at when listing the first few counting numbers and whole numbers. We could have written more numbers
if they were needed to make the patterns clear.

  EXAMPLE 1.1

Which of the following are  counting numbers?  whole numbers?

Solution

 The counting numbers start at   so is not a counting number. The numbers        are all counting

numbers.

 Whole numbers are counting numbers and The numbers                              are whole numbers.

The numbers and are neither counting numbers nor whole numbers. We will discuss these numbers later.

TRY IT 1.1 Which of the following are  counting numbers  whole numbers?

TRY IT 1.2 Which of the following are  counting numbers  whole numbers?

Model Whole Numbers

Our number system is called a place value system because the value of a digit depends on its position, or place, in a

number. The number has a different value than the number     Even though they use the same digits, their value is

different because of the different placement of the and the

Money gives us a familiar model of place value. Suppose a wallet contains three  bills, seven bills, and four

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 9

bills. The amounts are summarized in Figure 1.3. How much money is in the wallet?

                                                                              Figure 1.3
Find the total value of each kind of bill, and then add to find the total. The wallet contains

Base-10 blocks provide another way to model place value, as shown in Figure 1.4. The blocks can be used to represent
hundreds, tens, and ones. Notice that the tens rod is made up of ones, and the hundreds square is made of tens,
or ones.

Figure 1.5 shows the number modeled with  Figure 1.4
                                           blocks.

Figure 1.5 We use place value notation to show the value of the number

              Digit Place value Number Value Total value
                           hundreds
                               tens
10 1 · Whole Numbers

                                 Digit Place value Number Value Total value
                                                 ones

  EXAMPLE 1.2                                                            blocks shown.
Use place value notation to find the value of the number modeled by the

     Solution
There are hundreds squares, which is
There is tens rod, which is
There are ones blocks, which is

                                 Digit Place value Number Value Total value
                                              hundreds
                                                  tens
                                                 ones

The  blocks model the number

     TRY IT 1.3 Use place value notation to find the value of the number modeled by the  blocks shown.

     TRY IT 1.4 Use place value notation to find the value of the number modeled by the  blocks shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 11

MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Number Line-Part 1 will help you develop a better understanding of the
counting numbers and the whole numbers.

Identify the Place Value of a Digit

By looking at money and        blocks, we saw that each place in a number has a different value. A place value chart is

a useful way to summarize this information. The place values are separated into groups of three, called periods. The

periods are ones, thousands, millions, billions, trillions, and so on. In a written number, commas separate the periods.

Just as with the  blocks, where the value of the tens rod is ten times the value of the ones block and the value of

the hundreds square is ten times the tens rod, the value of each place in the place-value chart is ten times the value of

the place to the right of it.

Figure 1.6 shows how the number  is written in a place value chart.

                                                                            Figure 1.6

· The digit is in the millions place. Its value is
· The digit is in the hundred thousands place. Its value is
· The digit is in the ten thousands place. Its value is
· The digit is in the thousands place. Its value is
· The digit is in the hundreds place. Its value is
· The digit is in the tens place. Its value is
· The digit is in the ones place. Its value is

EXAMPLE 1.3

In the number                  find the place value of each of the following digits:



     Solution
Write the number in a place value chart, starting at the right.
12 1 · Whole Numbers

 The is in the thousands place.
 The is in the ten thousands place.
 The is in the tens place.
 The is in the ten millions place.
 The is in the millions place.

       TRY IT 1.5 For each number, find the place value of digits listed:

                   

       TRY IT 1.6 For each number, find the place value of digits listed:

                   

Use Place Value to Name Whole Numbers

When you write a check, you write out the number in words as well as in digits. To write a number in words, write the
number in each period followed by the name of the period without the `s' at the end. Start with the digit at the left, which
has the largest place value. The commas separate the periods, so wherever there is a comma in the number, write a
comma between the words. The ones period, which has the smallest place value, is not named.

So the number                    is written thirty-seven million, five hundred nineteen thousand, two hundred forty-eight.

Notice that the word and is not used when naming a whole number.

...

     HOW TO

Name a whole number in words.

Step 1. Starting at the digit on the left, name the number in each period, followed by the period name. Do not
           include the period name for the ones.

Step 2. Use commas in the number to separate the periods.

  EXAMPLE 1.4                    in words.
Name the number

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 13

      Solution                                                                eight trillion
    Begin with the leftmost digit, which is 8. It is in the trillions place.

    The next period to the right is billions.                                 one hundred sixty-five billion

    The next period to the right is millions.                                 four hundred thirty-two million

    The next period to the right is thousands.                                ninety-eight thousand

    The rightmost period shows the ones.                                      seven hundred ten

Putting all of the words together, we write       as eight trillion, one hundred sixty-five billion, four

hundred thirty-two million, ninety-eight thousand, seven hundred ten.

    TRY IT 1.7 Name each number in words:
    TRY IT 1.8 Name each number in words:

EXAMPLE 1.5

A student conducted research and found that the number of mobile phone users in the United States during one month

in  was      Name that number in words.

     Solution
Identify the periods associated with the number.

Name the number in each period, followed by the period name. Put the commas in to separate the periods.
Millions period: three hundred twenty-seven million
Thousands period: five hundred seventy-seven thousand
Ones period: five hundred twenty-nine
So the number of mobile phone users in the Unites States during the month of April was three hundred twenty-seven
million, five hundred seventy-seven thousand, five hundred twenty-nine.

    TRY IT 1.9 The population in a country is                                 Name that number.

    TRY IT 1.10 One year is                     seconds. Name that number.
14 1 · Whole Numbers

   Use Place Value to Write Whole Numbers

     We will now reverse the process and write a number given in words as digits.

                    ...

                      HOW TO

       Use place value to write a whole number.
       Step 1. Identify the words that indicate periods. (Remember the ones period is never named.)
       Step 2. Draw three blanks to indicate the number of places needed in each period. Separate the periods by commas.
       Step 3. Name the number in each period and place the digits in the correct place value position.

       EXAMPLE 1.6

     Write the following numbers using digits.

    fifty-three million, four hundred one thousand, seven hundred forty-two
    nine billion, two hundred forty-six million, seventy-three thousand, one hundred eighty-nine

          Solution

    Identify the words that indicate periods.

     Except for the first period, all other periods must have three places. Draw three blanks to indicate the number of places
     needed in each period. Separate the periods by commas.
     Then write the digits in each period.

Put the numbers together, including the commas. The number is

 Identify the words that indicate periods.

Except for the first period, all other periods must have three places. Draw three blanks to indicate the number of places
needed in each period. Separate the periods by commas.

Then write the digits in each period.

The number is

Notice that in part  , a zero was needed as a place-holder in the hundred thousands place. Be sure to write zeros as

needed to make sure that each period, except possibly the first, has three places.

TRY IT 1.11  Write each number in standard form:
             fifty-three million, eight hundred nine thousand, fifty-one.

TRY IT 1.12 Write each number in standard form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 15

                                  two billion, twenty-two million, seven hundred fourteen thousand, four hundred sixty-six.

  EXAMPLE 1.7
A state budget was about billion. Write the budget in standard form.

     Solution
Identify the periods. In this case, only two digits are given and they are in the billions period. To write the entire number,
write zeros for all of the other periods.

So the budget was about

      TRY IT 1.13  Write each number in standard form:
                   The closest distance from Earth to Mars is about
                                                                      million miles.

      TRY IT 1.14  Write each number in standard form:
                   The total weight of an aircraft carrier is
                                                                      million pounds.

Round Whole Numbers

In       the U.S. Census Bureau reported the population of the state of New York as    people. It might be

enough to say that the population is approximately million. The word approximately means that million is not the

exact population, but is close to the exact value.

The process of approximating a number is called rounding. Numbers are rounded to a specific place value depending

on how much accuracy is needed. million was achieved by rounding to the millions place. Had we rounded to the one

hundred thousands place, we would have              as a result. Had we rounded to the ten thousands place, we would

have     as a result, and so on. The place value to which we round to depends on how we need to use the

number.

Using the number line can help you visualize and understand the rounding process. Look at the number line in Figure
1.7. Suppose we want to round the number to the nearest ten. Is closer to or on the number line?

                  Figure 1.7 We can see that is closer to  than to    So rounded to the nearest ten is
Now consider the number Find in Figure 1.8.

                          Figure 1.8 We can see that is closer to so  rounded to the nearest ten is
How do we round to the nearest ten. Find in Figure 1.9.

                                        Figure 1.9 The number is exactly midway between and

So that everyone rounds the same way in cases like this, mathematicians have agreed to round to the higher number,
     So, rounded to the nearest ten is
16 1 · Whole Numbers

     Now that we have looked at this process on the number line, we can introduce a more general procedure. To round a
     number to a specific place, look at the number to the right of that place. If the number is less than round down. If it is
     greater than or equal to round up.
     So, for example, to round to the nearest ten, we look at the digit in the ones place.

The digit in the ones place is a Because is greater than or equal to we increase the digit in the tens place by one.
So the in the tens place becomes an Now, replace any digits to the right of the with zeros. So, rounds to

Let's look again at rounding to the nearest Again, we look to the ones place.

The digit in the ones place is Because is less than we keep the digit in the tens place the same and replace the
digits to the right of it with zero. So rounded to the nearest ten is

...

     HOW TO

Round a whole number to a specific place value.

Step 1.  Locate the given place value. All digits to the left of that place value do not change unless the digit
         immediately to the left is 9, in which case it may. (See Step 3.)
Step 2.  Underline the digit to the right of the given place value.
Step 3.  Determine if this digit is greater than or equal to

           Yes--add to the digit in the given place value. If that digit is 9, replace it with 0 and add 1 to the digit
               immediately to its left. If that digit is also a 9, repeat.

           No--do not change the digit in the given place value.

Step 4. Replace all digits to the right of the given place value with zeros.

  EXAMPLE 1.8
Round to the nearest ten.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                          1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 17

     Solution
  Locate the tens place.

  Underline the digit to the right of the tens place.
  Since 3 is less than 5, do not change the digit in the tens place.
  Replace all digits to the right of the tens place with zeros.

                                                                                                Rounding 843 to the nearest ten gives 840.

       TRY IT 1.15 Round to the nearest ten:
       TRY IT 1.16 Round to the nearest ten:
  EXAMPLE 1.9
Round each number to the nearest hundred:

 Solution 
 

  Locate the hundreds place.

  The digit to the right of the hundreds place is 5. Underline the digit to the right of the
  hundreds place.

  Since 5 is greater than or equal to 5, round up by adding 1 to the digit in the hundreds
  place. Then replace all digits to the right of the hundreds place with zeros.

                                                                                                                                  So 23,658 rounded to the
                                                                                                                                  nearest hundred is 23,700.

 

  Locate the hundreds place.
18 1 · Whole Numbers

        Underline the digit to the right of the hundreds place.

The digit to the right of the hundreds place is 7. Since 7 is greater
than or equal to 5, round up by adding 1 to the 9. Then place all
digits to the right of the hundreds place with zeros.

                                                                           So 3,978 rounded to the nearest hundred is
                                                                           4,000.

       TRY IT 1.17 Round to the nearest hundred:

       TRY IT 1.18 Round to the nearest hundred:

  EXAMPLE 1.10
Round each number to the nearest thousand:

 Solution 
 

  Locate the thousands place. Underline the digit to the right of the thousands
  place.

  The digit to the right of the thousands place is 0. Since 0 is less than 5, we do
  not change the digit in the thousands place.

We then replace all digits to the right of the thousands pace with zeros.            So 147,032 rounded to the nearest
                                                                                     thousand is 147,000.



Locate the thousands place.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 19

    Underline the digit to the right of the thousands place.

    The digit to the right of the thousands place is 5. Since 5 is greater
    than or equal to 5, round up by adding 1 to the 9. Then replace all
    digits to the right of the thousands place with zeros.

                                                                                So 29,504 rounded to the nearest thousand
                                                                                is 30,000.

Notice that in part  , when we add thousand to the thousands, the total is thousands. We regroup this as ten

thousand and thousands. We add the ten thousand to the ten thousands and put a in the thousands place.

    TRY IT 1.19 Round to the nearest thousand:

    TRY IT 1.20 Round to the nearest thousand:

    MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Determine Place Value (http://www.openstax.org/l/24detplaceval)
    Write a Whole Number in Digits from Words (http://www.openstax.org/l/24numdigword)

        SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Identify Counting Numbers and Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, determine which of the following numbers are  counting numbers  whole numbers.

1.  2.                                                                      3.

4.
20 1 · Whole Numbers

Model Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, use place value notation to find the value of the number modeled by the  blocks.

5.                               6.                                    7.

8.

Identify the Place Value of a Digit

In the following exercises, find the place value of the given digits.

9.                               10.                                   11.

  9607                              9328                                  8647
  5                                 7                                     0

12.                                                                     15.
                                                                        18.
   8426
   7

Use Place Value to Name Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, name each number in words.

13.                                  14.

16.                                  17.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1.1 · Introduction to Whole Numbers 21

19.                                20.                                  21. The height of Mount

                                                                        Rainier is         feet.

22. The height of Mount            23. Seventy years is                 24. One year is
                                         hours.                               minutes.
     Adams is    feet.
                                   26. The population of Chicago
25. The U.S. Census estimate             was                            27. There are projected to be
      of the population of Miami-                                                              college and
      Dade county was
                                                                              university students in the
                                                                              US in five years.

28. About twelve years ago         29. The population of China is       30. The population of India is
      there were                         expected to reach                    estimated at
      registered automobiles in                               in              as of July
      California.

Use Place Value to Write Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, write each number as a whole number using digits.

31. four hundred twelve            32. two hundred fifty-three          33. thirty-five thousand, nine
                                                                              hundred seventy-five

34. sixty-one thousand, four       35. eleven million, forty-four       36. eighteen million, one
      hundred fifteen                    thousand, one hundred                hundred two thousand,
                                         sixty-seven                          seven hundred eighty-
                                                                              three

37. three billion, two hundred     38. eleven billion, four             39. The population of the
      twenty-six million, five           hundred seventy-one                  world was estimated to be
      hundred twelve thousand,           million, thirty-six thousand,        seven billion, one hundred
      seventeen                          one hundred six                      seventy-three million
                                                                              people.

40. The age of the solar           41. Lake Tahoe has a capacity        42. The federal government
      system is estimated to be          of thirty-nine trillion              budget was three trillion,
      four billion, five hundred         gallons of water.                    five hundred billion dollars.
      sixty-eight million years.

Round Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, round to the indicated place value.

43. Round to the nearest ten:      44. Round to the nearest ten:        45. Round to the nearest

                                                                        hundred:

                                                                                         

46. Round to the nearest           47. Round to the nearest ten:        48. Round to the nearest

     hundred:                                                           thousand:

                                                                        

49. Round to the nearest           50. Round to the nearest

     hundred:                           thousand:

                                                   

Everyday Math

51. Writing a Check Jorge bought a car for           52. Writing a Check Marissa's kitchen remodeling
      He paid for the car with a check. Write the
      purchase price in words.                                   cost   She wrote a check to the contractor.

                                                                 Write the amount paid in words.
22 1 · Whole Numbers

53. Buying a Car Jorge bought a car for                   54. Remodeling a Kitchen Marissa's kitchen
      Round the price to the nearest:
                                                          remodeling cost           Round the cost to the
    ten dollars  hundred dollars
    thousand dollars  ten-thousand dollars                nearest:

                                                           ten dollars  hundred dollars
                                                           thousand dollars  ten-thousand dollars

55. Population The population of China was                56. Astronomy The average distance between Earth

                      in         Round the population to  and the sun is            kilometers. Round the

the nearest:                                              distance to the nearest:

 billion people  hundred-million people                    hundred-million kilometers
 million people                                            ten-million kilometers  million kilometers

Writing Exercises

57. In your own words, explain the difference             58. Give an example from your everyday life where it
      between the counting numbers and the whole                helps to round numbers.
      numbers.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were...

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

1.2 Add Whole Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use addition notation
           Model addition of whole numbers
           Add whole numbers without models
           Translate word phrases to math notation
           Add whole numbers in applications

BE PREPARED 1.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 What is the number modeled by the  blocks?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 23

                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.2.

BE PREPARED 1.2              Write the number three hundred forty-two thousand six using digits?
                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.7.

Use Addition Notation                                          hours on Monday and  hours on Friday. To find the total

A college student has a part-time job. Last week he worked
number of hours he worked last week, he added and

The operation of addition combines numbers to get a sum. The notation we use to find the sum of and is:

We read this as three plus four and the result is the sum of three and four. The numbers and are called the addends.
A math statement that includes numbers and operations is called an expression.

Addition Notation

To describe addition, we can use symbols and words.

                   Operation Notation Expression               Read as              Result

                   Addition                                    three plus four the sum of and

  EXAMPLE 1.11

Translate from math notation to words:

 Solution 
 The expression consists of a plus symbol connecting the addends 7 and 1. We read this as seven plus one. The

result is the sum of seven and one.

 The expression consists of a plus symbol connecting the addends 12 and 14. We read this as twelve plus

fourteen. The result is the sum of twelve and fourteen.

TRY IT 1.21 Translate from math notation to words:

                             

TRY IT 1.22 Translate from math notation to words:

                               

Model Addition of Whole Numbers

Addition is really just counting. We will model addition with  blocks. Remember, a block represents  and a rod

represents Let's start by modeling the addition expression we just considered,
24 1 · Whole Numbers

     Each addend is less than so we can use ones blocks.

        We start by modeling the first number with 3 blocks.

        Then we model the second number with 4 blocks.

        Count the total number of blocks.

     There are blocks in all. We use an equal sign to show the sum. A math sentence that shows that two expressions
     are equal is called an equation. We have shown that.

                MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
        Doing the Manipulative Math Worksheets activity "Model Addition of Whole Numbers" will help you develop a better
        understanding of adding whole numbers.

        EXAMPLE 1.12
     Model the addition

           Solution
              means the sum of and

     Each addend is less than 10, so we can use ones blocks.
        Model the first number with 2 blocks.

        Model the second number with 6 blocks.

Count the total number of blocks

                                  There are blocks in all, so

       TRY IT 1.23 Model:

       TRY IT 1.24 Model:

When the result is or more ones blocks, we will exchange the blocks for one rod.
  EXAMPLE 1.13

Model the addition
     Solution
        means the sum of and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 25

Each addend is less than 10, se we can use ones blocks.
Model the first number with 5 blocks.
Model the second number with 8 blocks.

Count the result. There are more than 10 blocks so we exchange 10 ones
blocks for 1 tens rod.

Now we have 1 ten and 3 ones, which is 13.                              5 + 8 = 13

Notice that we can describe the models as ones blocks and tens rods, or we can simply say ones and tens. From now on,
we will use the shorter version but keep in mind that they mean the same thing.

TRY IT 1.25 Model the addition:

TRY IT 1.26 Model the addition:

Next we will model adding two digit numbers.

  EXAMPLE 1.14

Model the addition:
     Solution
           means the sum of 17 and 26.

Model the 17.                1 ten and 7 ones

Model the 26.                2 tens and 6 ones

Combine.                     3 tens and 13 ones

Exchange 10 ones for 1 ten.  4 tens and 3 ones
We have shown that

TRY IT 1.27 Model the addition:
26 1 · Whole Numbers

  TRY IT 1.28 Model the addition:

Add Whole Numbers Without Models

Now that we have used models to add numbers, we can move on to adding without models. Before we do that, make
sure you know all the one digit addition facts. You will need to use these number facts when you add larger numbers.

Imagine filling in Table 1.1 by adding each row number along the left side to each column number across the top. Make
sure that you get each sum shown. If you have trouble, model it. It is important that you memorize any number facts you
do not already know so that you can quickly and reliably use the number facts when you add larger numbers.

                      +0 1         2      3  4  5  6  7  8  9

                      00 1         2      3  4  5  6  7  8  9

                      11 2         3      4  5  6  7  8  9 10

                      22 3         4      5  6  7  8  9 10 11

                      33 4         5      6  7  8  9 10 11 12

                      44 5         6      7  8  9 10 11 12 13

                      55 6         7      8  9 10 11 12 13 14

                      66 7         8      9 10 11 12 13 14 15

                      77 8         9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

                      8 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17

                      9 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

                                Table 1.1

Did you notice what happens when you add zero to a number? The sum of any number and zero is the number itself. We
call this the Identity Property of Addition. Zero is called the additive identity.

Identity Property of Addition

The sum of any number and is the number.

EXAMPLE 1.15

Find each sum:

  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 27

  Solution

 The first addend is zero. The sum of any number and zero is the number.
 The second addend is zero. The sum of any number and zero is the number.

TRY IT 1.29 Find each sum:

                            

TRY IT 1.30 Find each sum:

                            

Look at the pairs of sums.

Notice that when the order of the addends is reversed, the sum does not change. This property is called the
Commutative Property of Addition, which states that changing the order of the addends does not change their sum.

  Commutative Property of Addition
  Changing the order of the addends and does not change their sum.

  EXAMPLE 1.16
Add:

 Solution 
 

  Add.

 

  Add.
28 1 · Whole Numbers

Did you notice that changing the order of the addends did not change their sum? We could have immediately known the

sum from part  just by recognizing that the addends were the same as in part  , but in the reverse order. As a

result, both sums are the same.

TRY IT 1.31 Add:                 and

TRY IT 1.32 Add:                 and

  EXAMPLE 1.17

Add:
     Solution

To add numbers with more than one digit, it is often easier to write the numbers vertically in columns.

Write the numbers so the ones and tens digits line up vertically.

Then add the digits in each place value.
Add the ones:
Add the tens:

TRY IT 1.33 Add:

TRY IT 1.34 Add:

In the previous example, the sum of the ones and the sum of the tens were both less than But what happens if the

sum is or more? Let's use our         model to find out. Figure 1.10 shows the addition of and again.

                                          Figure 1.10

When we add the ones,            we get ones. Because we have more than ones, we can exchange of the ones for

ten. Now we have tens and ones. Without using the model, we show this as a small red above the digits in the

tens place.

When the sum in a place value column is greater than we carry over to the next column to the left. Carrying is the
same as regrouping by exchanging. For example, ones for ten or tens for hundred.

...

     HOW TO

Add whole numbers.
Step 1. Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                         1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 29

  Step 2. Add the digits in each place value. Work from right to left starting with the ones place. If a sum in a place
             value is more than carry to the next place value.

  Step 3. Continue adding each place value from right to left, adding each place value and carrying if needed.

  EXAMPLE 1.18
Add:

     Solution

  Write the numbers so the digits line up vertically.

  Add the digits in each place.
  Add the ones:

  Write the in the ones place in the sum.
  Add the ten to the tens place.

  Now add the tens:
  Write the 11 in the sum.

TRY IT 1.35 Add:
TRY IT 1.36 Add:

  EXAMPLE 1.19
Add:

     Solution

  Write the numbers so the digits line up vertically.

Add the digits in each place value.                    ten to the tens place.
Add the ones:
Write the in the ones place in the sum and carry the
30 1 · Whole Numbers

        Add the tens:
        Write the in the tens place in the sum and carry the hundred to the hundreds

        Add the hundreds:
        Write the in the hundreds place.

       TRY IT 1.37 Add:
       TRY IT 1.38 Add:

  EXAMPLE 1.20
Add:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so the digits line up vertically.

  Add the digits in each place value.

  Add the ones:
  Write the in the ones place of the sum and carry the ten to the tens place.

Add the tens:
Write the in the tens place and carry the hundred to the hundreds place.

Add the hundreds:
Write the in the hundreds place and carry the thousand to the thousands place.

Add the thousands                .

Write the in the thousands place of the sum.

When the addends have different numbers of digits, be careful to line up the corresponding place values starting with

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 31

the ones and moving toward the left.
       TRY IT 1.39 Add:
       TRY IT 1.40 Add:

  EXAMPLE 1.21
Add:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so the place values line up vertically.

  Add the digits in each place value.

  Add the ones:
  Write the in the ones place of the sum and carry the to the tens place.

  Add the tens:
  Write the in the tens place and carry the to the hundreds place.

  Add the hundreds:
  Write the in the hundreds place and carry the to the thousands place.
32 1 · Whole Numbers

Add the thousands                   .

Write the in the thousands place and carry the to the ten thousands place.

Add the ten-thousands            .

Write the in the ten thousands place in the sum.

This example had three addends. We can add any number of addends using the same process as long as we are careful
to line up the place values correctly.

TRY IT 1.41 Add:

TRY IT 1.42 Add:

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

Earlier in this section, we translated math notation into words. Now we'll reverse the process. We'll translate word
phrases into math notation. Some of the word phrases that indicate addition are listed in Table 1.2.

                                 Operation  Words         Example           Expression

                                 Addition   plus            plus
                                            sum           the sum of and
                                            increased by
                                            more than       increased by
                                            total of        more than
                                            added to      the total of and
                                                            added to

                                 Table 1.2

  EXAMPLE 1.22
Translate and simplify: the sum of and

     Solution
The word sum tells us to add. The words of and tell us the addends.

                     The sum of and

  Translate.

  Add.

                     The sum of and is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 33

       TRY IT 1.43 Translate and simplify: the sum of and

       TRY IT 1.44 Translate and simplify: the sum of and

  EXAMPLE 1.23
Translate and simplify: increased by

     Solution
The words increased by tell us to add. The numbers given are the addends.

                         increased by
  Translate.
  Add.

                     So increased by is

TRY IT 1.45 Translate and simplify: increased by

TRY IT 1.46 Translate and simplify: increased by

Add Whole Numbers in Applications

Now that we have practiced adding whole numbers, let's use what we've learned to solve real-world problems. We'll start
by outlining a plan. First, we need to read the problem to determine what we are looking for. Then we write a word
phrase that gives the information to find it. Next we translate the word phrase into math notation and then simplify.
Finally, we write a sentence to answer the question.

EXAMPLE 1.24

Hao earned grades of         on the five tests of the semester. What is the total number of points he
earned on the five tests?

     Solution
We are asked to find the total number of points on the tests.

Write a phrase.                                                the sum of points on the tests

Translate to math notation.

Then we simplify by adding.
34 1 · Whole Numbers

Since there are several numbers, we will write them vertically.

Write a sentence to answer the question.                          Hao earned a total of 432 points.

Notice that we added points, so the sum is  points. It is important to include the appropriate units in all answers to
applications problems.

TRY IT 1.47           Mark is training for a bicycle race. Last week he rode miles on Monday, miles on
                      Wednesday, miles on Friday, miles on Saturday, and miles on Sunday. What is the total
                      number of miles he rode last week?

TRY IT 1.48           Lincoln Middle School has three grades. The number of students in each grade is
                                                What is the total number of students?

Some application problems involve shapes. For example, a person might need to know the distance around a garden to
put up a fence or around a picture to frame it. The perimeter is the distance around a geometric figure. The perimeter of
a figure is the sum of the lengths of its sides.

  EXAMPLE 1.25

Find the perimeter of the patio shown.

  Solution
We are asked to find the perimeter.

Write a phrase.                             the sum of the sides

Translate to math notation.

Simplify by adding.

Write a sentence to answer the question.

We added feet, so the sum is feet.          The perimeter of the patio is feet.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 35

     TRY IT 1.49 Find the perimeter of the figure. All lengths are in inches.

     TRY IT 1.50 Find the perimeter of the figure. All lengths are in inches.

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES

     Adding Two-Digit Numbers with    blocks (http://www.openstax.org/l/24add2blocks)

     Adding Three-Digit Numbers with             blocks (http://www.openstax.org/l/24add3blocks)

     Adding Whole Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24addwhlnumb)

        SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Addition Notation

In the following exercises, translate the following from math expressions to words.

59.                    60.                                             61.

62.                    63.                                             64.

Model Addition of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the addition.

65.                    66.                                             67.

68.                    69.                                             70.

71.                    72.

Add Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, fill in the missing values in each chart.

73.                    74.                                             75.
36 1 · Whole Numbers

76.                                   77.                                 78.

In the following exercises, add.

79.                                   80.                                 81.   
                                         
82.                                                                       84.
                                      83.                                 87.
85.                                   86.                                 90.
                                      89.                                 93.
88.                                   92.                                 96.
                                      95.                                 99.
91.                                   98.                                 102.
                                      101.                                105.
94.                                   104.

97.

100.

103.

106.

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into math notation and then simplify.

107. the sum of and                   108. the sum of and                 109. the sum of and

110. the sum of and                   111. increased by                   112. increased by

113.        more than                 114.        more than               115. the total of and

116. the total of and                 117.        added to                118.  added to

Add Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve the problem.

119. Home remodeling                  120. Sports equipment Aiden         121. Bike riding Ethan rode
                                                                                  his bike miles on
      Sophia remodeled her                  bought a baseball bat,                Monday, miles on
                                                                                  Tuesday, miles on
      kitchen and bought a new              helmet, and glove. The                Wednesday, miles on
                                                                                  Friday, and miles on
      range, microwave, and                 bat cost    the helmet                Saturday. What was the
                                                                                  total number of miles
      dishwasher. The range                 cost      and the glove               Ethan rode?

      cost            the                   cost      What was the

      microwave cost             and        total cost of Aiden's sports

      the dishwasher cost                   equipment?

      What was the total cost of

      these three appliances?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             1.2 · Add Whole Numbers 37

122. Business Chloe has a           123. Apartment size Jackson               124. Weight Seven men rented
        flower shop. Last week              lives in a room                           a fishing boat. The weights
        she made floral                     apartment. The number of                  of the men were
        arrangements on                     square feet in each room is
        Monday, on Tuesday,                                                           and pounds. What was
            on Wednesday, on              and     What is the total                   the total weight of the
        Thursday, and on                                                              seven men?
        Friday. What was the total        number of square feet in all
        number of floral
        arrangements Chloe                rooms?
        made?

125. Salary Last year Natalie's     126. Home sales Emma is a
                                            realtor. Last month, she
      salary was         Two                sold three houses. The
                                            selling prices of the
      years ago, her salary was             houses were
                                                                         and
      and three years                                      What was the
                                            total of the three selling
      ago it was         What               prices?

      is the total amount of

      Natalie's salary for the

      past three years?

In the following exercises, find the perimeter of each figure.

127.                                128.                                      129.

130.                                131.                                      132.

133.                                134.

Everyday Math

135. Calories Paulette had a grilled chicken salad,      136. Calories Fred had a grilled chicken sandwich, a

      ranch dressing, and a         drink for lunch.            small order of fries, and a  chocolate shake

      On the restaurant's nutrition chart, she saw that         for dinner. The restaurant's nutrition chart lists

      each item had the following number of calories:           the following calories for each item:

      Grilled chicken salad - calories                          Grilled chicken sandwich - calories

      Ranch dressing - calories                                 Small fries - calories

      drink - calories                                                        chocolate shake - calories

      What was the total number of calories of                  What was the total number of calories of Fred's

      Paulette's lunch?                                         dinner?
38 1 · Whole Numbers

137. Test scores A student needs a total of points               138. Elevators The maximum weight capacity of an
        on five tests to pass a course. The student scored
                                       Did the student pass the  elevator is       pounds. Six men are in the
        course?
                                                                 elevator. Their weights are

                                                                                              pounds. Is the

                                                                 total weight below the elevator's maximum

                                                                 capacity?

Writing Exercises

139. How confident do you feel about your                        140. How have you used models to help you learn the
        knowledge of the addition facts? If you are not                  addition facts?
        fully confident, what will you do to improve your
        skills?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

1.3 Subtract Whole Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use subtraction notation
           Model subtraction of whole numbers
           Subtract whole numbers
           Translate word phrases to math notation
           Subtract whole numbers in applications

BE PREPARED 1.3 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Model  using base-ten blocks.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.12.

BE PREPARED 1.4                  Add:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.20.

Use Subtraction Notation

Suppose there are seven bananas in a bowl. Elana uses three of them to make a smoothie. How many bananas are left in
the bowl? To answer the question, we subtract three from seven. When we subtract, we take one number away from
another to find the difference. The notation we use to subtract from is

We read     as seven minus three and the result is the difference of seven and three.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 39

Subtraction Notation

To describe subtraction, we can use symbols and words.

              Operation Notation Expression                Read as                    Result

              Subtraction                               seven minus three the difference of and

EXAMPLE 1.26

Translate from math notation to words:                  .

Solution

 We read this as eight minus one. The result is the difference of eight and one.
 We read this as twenty-six minus fourteen. The result is the difference of twenty-six and fourteen.

TRY IT 1.51 Translate from math notation to words:

                           

TRY IT 1.52 Translate from math notation to words:

                           

Model Subtraction of Whole Numbers

A model can help us visualize the process of subtraction much as it did with addition. Again, we will use  blocks.

Remember a block represents 1 and a rod represents 10. Let's start by modeling the subtraction expression we just

considered,

We start by modeling the first number, 7.

Now take away the second number, 3. We'll circle 3 blocks to show that we are taking
them away.

Count the number of blocks remaining.                                                 We have shown that
There are 4 ones blocks left.                                                                      .

  EXAMPLE 1.27
Model the subtraction:
40 1 · Whole Numbers

  Solution
        means the difference of 8 and 2.

Model the first, 8.

Take away the second number, 2.

Count the number of blocks remaining.

There are 6 ones blocks left.             We have shown that            .

       TRY IT 1.53 Model:

       TRY IT 1.54 Model:

  EXAMPLE 1.28
Model the subtraction:

     Solution
  Model the first number, 13. We use 1 ten and 3 ones.

  Take away the second number, 8. However, there are not 8 ones, so we
  will exchange the 1 ten for 10 ones.

Now we can take away 8 ones.

Count the blocks remaining.                                                We have shown that  .
There are five ones left.

As we did with addition, we can describe the models as ones blocks and tens rods, or we can simply say ones and tens.

TRY IT 1.55 Model the subtraction:
TRY IT 1.56 Model the subtraction:

  EXAMPLE 1.29
Model the subtraction:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 41

     Solution  means take away we begin by modeling the
Because

Now, we need to take away  which is tens and ones. We cannot take away ones from ones. So, we exchange
ten for ones.

Now we can take away tens and ones.

Count the number of blocks remaining. There is ten and ones, which is

TRY IT 1.57 Model the subtraction:

TRY IT 1.58 Model the subtraction:

Subtract Whole Numbers

Addition and subtraction are inverse operations. Addition undoes subtraction, and subtraction undoes addition.

We know        because              Knowing all the addition number facts will help with subtraction. Then we can

check subtraction by adding. In the examples above, our subtractions can be checked by addition.

  EXAMPLE 1.30
Subtract and then check by adding:

 Solution 
 
42 1 · Whole Numbers

        Subtract 7 from 9.
        Check with addition.

    

        Subtract 3 from 8.
        Check with addition.

             TRY IT 1.59 Subtract and then check by adding:

             TRY IT 1.60 Subtract and then check by adding:

     To subtract numbers with more than one digit, it is usually easier to write the numbers vertically in columns just as we
     did for addition. Align the digits by place value, and then subtract each column starting with the ones and then working
     to the left.

        EXAMPLE 1.31
     Subtract and then check by adding:

           Solution
        Write the numbers so the ones and tens digits line up vertically.
        Subtract the digits in each place value.
        Subtract the ones:
        Subtract the tens:
        Check using addition.

     Our answer is correct.
             TRY IT 1.61 Subtract and then check by adding:

       Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 43

TRY IT 1.62 Subtract and then check by adding:

When we modeled subtracting from       we exchanged ten for  ones. When we do this without the model, we say
we borrow from the tens place and add    to the ones place.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the difference of whole numbers.

Step 1.  Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
Step 2.  Subtract the digits in each place value. Work from right to left starting with the ones place. If the digit on top
         is less than the digit below, borrow as needed.
Step 3.  Continue subtracting each place value from right to left, borrowing if needed.
Step 4.  Check by adding.

  EXAMPLE 1.32
Subtract:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.

  Subtract the ones. We cannot subtract 6 from 3, so we borrow 1 ten. This makes 3 tens and 13 ones. We
  write these numbers above each place and cross out the original digits.

Now we can subtract the ones.          We write the 7 in the ones place in the difference.

Now we subtract the tens.      We write the 1 in the tens place in the difference.
Check by adding.

Our answer is correct.

    TRY IT 1.63 Subtract and then check by adding:
    TRY IT 1.64 Subtract and then check by adding:
44 1 · Whole Numbers

        EXAMPLE 1.33
     Subtract and then check by adding:

           Solution
        Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.

        Subtract the ones.
        Write the 3 in the ones place in the difference.

        Subtract the tens. We cannot subtract 6 from 0 so we borrow 1 hundred and add 10 tens to the 0 tens
        we had. This makes a total of 10 tens. We write 10 above the tens place and cross out the 0. Then we
        cross out the 2 in the hundreds place and write 1 above it.

Now we subtract the tens.         We write the 4 in the tens place in the difference.

Finally, subtract the hundreds. There is no digit in the hundreds place in the bottom number so we can

imagine a 0 in that place. Since  we write 1 in the hundreds place in the difference.

Check by adding.

  Our answer is correct.

       TRY IT 1.65 Subtract and then check by adding:
       TRY IT 1.66 Subtract and then check by adding:

  EXAMPLE 1.34
Subtract and then check by adding:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.

  Subtract the ones. We cannot subtract 6 from 0, so we borrow 1 ten and add 10 ones to the 0 ones we
  had. This makes 10 ones. We write a 0 above the tens place and cross out the 1. We write the 10 above
  the ones place and cross out the 0. Now we can subtract the ones.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 45

Write the 4 in the ones place of the difference.

Subtract the tens. We cannot subtract 8 from 0, so we borrow 1 hundred and add 10 tens to the 0 tens
we had, which gives us 10 tens. Write 8 above the hundreds place and cross out the 9. Write 10 above
the tens place.

Now we can subtract the tens.  .

Subtract the hundreds place.   Write the 3 in the hundreds place in the difference.
Check by adding.

  Our answer is correct.

       TRY IT 1.67 Subtract and then check by adding:
       TRY IT 1.68 Subtract and then check by adding:

  EXAMPLE 1.35
Subtract and then check by adding:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
  Subtract the ones. Since we cannot subtract 9 from 2, borrow 1 ten and add 10 ones to the 2 ones to
  make 12 ones. Write 5 above the tens place and cross out the 6. Write 12 above the ones place and
  cross out the 2.
  Now we can subtract the ones.

  Write 3 in the ones place in the difference.
46 1 · Whole Numbers

Subtract the tens. Since we cannot subtract 7 from 5, borrow 1 hundred and add 10 tens to the 5 tens
to make 15 tens. Write 0 above the hundreds place and cross out the 1. Write 15 above the tens place.

Now we can subtract the tens.

Write 8 in the tens place in the difference.

Now we can subtract the hundreds.

Write 6 in the hundreds place in the difference.

Subtract the thousands. There is no digit in the thousands place of the bottom number, so we imagine

a 0.                  Write 1 in the thousands place of the difference.

Check by adding.

Our answer is correct.

       TRY IT 1.69 Subtract and then check by adding:

       TRY IT 1.70 Subtract and then check by adding:

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

As with addition, word phrases can tell us to operate on two numbers using subtraction. To translate from a word phrase
to math notation, we look for key words that indicate subtraction. Some of the words that indicate subtraction are listed
in Table 1.3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 47

              Operation Word Phrase                 Example                Expression

              Subtraction minus                     minus

                                        difference  the difference of and

                              decreased by          decreased by

                                        less than   less than

                              subtracted from subtracted from

              Table 1.3

EXAMPLE 1.36

Translate and then simplify:

 the difference of and         subtract from

     Solution



The word difference tells us to subtract the two numbers. The numbers stay in the same order as in the phrase.

            the difference of 13 and 8

Translate.

Simplify. 5



The words subtract from tells us to take the first number away from the second. We must be careful to get the order
correct.

                     subtract 24 from 43

  Translate.

  Simplify. 19

       TRY IT 1.71 Translate and simplify:

                    the difference of and  subtract from

       TRY IT 1.72 Translate and simplify:

                     decreased by  less than

Subtract Whole Numbers in Applications

To solve applications with subtraction, we will use the same plan that we used with addition. First, we need to determine
what we are asked to find. Then we write a phrase that gives the information to find it. We translate the phrase into math
notation and then simplify to get the answer. Finally, we write a sentence to answer the question, using the appropriate
units.
48 1 · Whole Numbers

  EXAMPLE 1.37

The temperature in Chicago one morning was degrees Fahrenheit. A cold front arrived and by noon the temperature
was degrees Fahrenheit. What was the difference between the temperature in the morning and the temperature at
noon?

     Solution
We are asked to find the difference between the morning temperature and the noon temperature.

Write a phrase.                                            the difference of 73 and 27

Translate to math notation. Difference tells us to
subtract.

Then we do the subtraction.

Write a sentence to answer the question.                   The difference in temperatures was 46 degrees
                                                           Fahrenheit.

TRY IT 1.73           The high temperature on              in Boston was degrees Fahrenheit, and the low

                      temperature was degrees Fahrenheit. What was the difference between the high and low

                      temperatures?

TRY IT 1.74           The weather forecast for June in St Louis predicts a high temperature of degrees Fahrenheit
                      and a low of degrees Fahrenheit. What is the difference between the predicted high and low
                      temperatures?

EXAMPLE 1.38

A washing machine is on sale for     Its regular price is  What is the difference between the regular price and the
sale price?

     Solution
We are asked to find the difference between the regular price and the sale price.

Write a phrase.                           the difference between 588 and 399

Translate to math notation.

Subtract.

Write a sentence to answer the question. The difference between the regular price and the sale price is $189.

TRY IT 1.75           A television set is on sale for      Its regular price is    What is the difference between the
                      regular price and the sale price?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           1.3 · Subtract Whole Numbers 49

      TRY IT 1.76   A patio set is on sale for       Its regular price is  What is the difference between the

                    regular price and the sale price?

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Model subtraction of two-digit whole numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24sub2dignum)
      Model subtraction of three-digit whole numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24sub3dignum)
      Subtract Whole Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24subwholenum)

        SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Subtraction Notation

In the following exercises, translate from math notation to words.

141.                        142.                                    143.
                                                                    146.
144.                        145.
                                                                    149.
Model Subtraction of Whole Numbers                                  152.
                                                                    155.
In the following exercises, model the subtraction.                  158.

147.                        148.                                    161.
                                                                    164.
150.                        151.                                    167.
                                                                    170.
153.                        154.                                    173.
                                                                    176.
156.                        157.                                    179.
                                                                    182.
Subtract Whole Numbers
                                                                    185. The difference of and
In the following exercises, subtract and then check by adding.      188. Subtract from
                                                                    191. decreased by
159.                        160.                                    194. decreased by
                                                                    197. less than
162.                        163.

165.                        166.

168.                        169.

171.                        172.

174.                        175.

177.                        178.

180.                        181.

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

183. The difference of and  184. The difference of and

186. The difference of and  187. Subtract from

189. Subtract from          190. Subtract from

192. decreased by           193. decreased by

195. less than              196. less than
50 1 · Whole Numbers

198. less than

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

199.                                   200.                               201.
                                                                          204.
202.                                   203.

205.                                   206.

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

207. Seventy-five more than            208. Sixty more than ninety-       209. less than
        thirty-five                            three
                                                                          212. The difference of
210. less than                         211. The difference of and                 and

Subtract Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

213. Temperature The high              214. Temperature The high          215. Class size Olivia's third
        temperature on June in                 temperature on June in             grade class has
        Las Vegas was degrees                  Phoenix was degrees                children. Last year, her
        and the low temperature                and the low was                    second grade class had
        was degrees. What                      degrees. What was the                  children. What is the
        was the difference                     difference between the             difference between the
        between the high and low               high and low                       number of children in
        temperatures?                          temperatures?                      Olivia's third grade class
                                                                                  and her second grade
                                                                                  class?

216. Class size There are              217. Shopping A mountain           218. Shopping A mattress set
        students in the school                 bike is on sale for
        band and in the school                 Its regular price is             is on sale for       Its
        orchestra. What is the                 What is the difference
        difference between the                 between the regular price        regular price is
        number of students in the              and the sale price?
        band and the orchestra?                                                 What is the difference
                                       220. Banking Mason had
                                                         in his checking        between the regular price

                                               account. He spent                and the sale price?
                                               How much money does
219. Savings John wants to                     he have left?

      buy a laptop that costs

      He has          in his

      savings account. How

      much more does he need

      to save in order to buy

      the laptop?

Everyday Math

221. Road trip Noah was driving from Philadelphia to    222. Test Scores Sara needs points to pass her
        Cincinnati, a distance of miles. He drove
        miles, stopped for gas, and then drove another  course. She scored                                    on her first
              miles before lunch. How many more miles
        did he have to travel?                          four tests. How many more points does Sara

                                                        need to pass the course?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 51

Writing Exercises

223. Explain how subtraction and addition are related.  224. How does knowing addition facts help you to
                                                                subtract numbers?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

1.4 Multiply Whole Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use multiplication notation
           Model multiplication of whole numbers
           Multiply whole numbers
           Translate word phrases to math notation
           Multiply whole numbers in applications

       BE PREPARED 1.5 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Add:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.21.

BE PREPARED 1.6    Subtract:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 1.33.

Use Multiplication Notation

Suppose you were asked to count all these pennies shown in Figure 1.11.

                                                                             Figure 1.11

Would you count the pennies individually? Or would you count the number of pennies in each row and add that number
  times.

Multiplication is a way to represent repeated addition. So instead of adding three times, we could write a multiplication
expression.

We call each number being multiplied a factor and the result the product. We read  as three times eight, and the
result as the product of three and eight.

There are several symbols that represent multiplication. These include the symbol as well as the dot, , and
52 1 · Whole Numbers

parentheses                                                           Read as  Result
  Operation Symbols for Multiplication
  To describe multiplication, we can use symbols and words.
                           Operation Notation Expression

  EXAMPLE 1.39

Translate from math notation to words:

 Solution  
 We read this as seven times six and the result is the product of seven and six.
 We read this as twelve times fourteen and the result is the product of twelve and fourteen.
 We read this as six times thirteen and the result is the product of six and thirteen.

TRY IT 1.77 Translate from math notation to words:

                                  

TRY IT 1.78 Translate from math notation to words:

                                  

Model Multiplication of Whole Numbers

There are many ways to model multiplication. Unlike in the previous sections where we used    blocks, here we will

use counters to help us understand the meaning of multiplication. A counter is any object that can be used for counting.

We will use round blue counters.

EXAMPLE 1.40

Model:                           we'll start with a row of counters.

     Solution
To model the product

The other factor is so we'll make rows of counters.

Now we can count the result. There are counters in all.

If you look at the counters sideways, you'll see that we could have also made rows of counters. The product would
have been the same. We'll get back to this idea later.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 53

  TRY IT 1.79 Model each multiplication:

  TRY IT 1.80 Model each multiplication:

Multiply Whole Numbers

In order to multiply without using models, you need to know all the one digit multiplication facts. Make sure you know
them fluently before proceeding in this section.

Table 1.4 shows the multiplication facts. Each box shows the product of the number down the left column and the
number across the top row. If you are unsure about a product, model it. It is important that you memorize any number
facts you do not already know so you will be ready to multiply larger numbers.

              ×01 2               3       4  5  6  7  8  9

              000 0               0       0  0  0  0  0  0

              101 2               3       4  5  6  7  8  9

              202 4               6       8 10 12 14 16 18

              303 6               9 12 15 18 21 24 27

              4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36

              5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

              6 0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54

              7 0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63

              8 0 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72

              9 0 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81

                                 Table 1.4

What happens when you multiply a number by zero? You can see that the product of any number and zero is zero. This is
called the Multiplication Property of Zero.

Multiplication Property of Zero

The product of any number and is

EXAMPLE 1.41

Multiply:

           
54 1 · Whole Numbers

           Solution

    

        The product of any number and zero is zero.

    

        Multiplying by zero results in zero.

TRY IT 1.81 Find each product:

                                     

TRY IT 1.82 Find each product:

                                     

What happens when you multiply a number by one? Multiplying a number by one does not change its value. We call this
fact the Identity Property of Multiplication, and is called the multiplicative identity.

Identity Property of Multiplication

The product of any number and is the number.

  EXAMPLE 1.42
Multiply:

 Solution 
 

  The product of any number and one is the number.

 

  Multiplying by one does not change the value.

TRY IT 1.83 Find each product:

                                     

TRY IT 1.84 Find each product:

                                     

Earlier in this chapter, we learned that the Commutative Property of Addition states that changing the order of addition

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 55

does not change the sum. We saw that  is the same as

Is this also true for multiplication? Let's look at a few pairs of factors.

When the order of the factors is reversed, the product does not change. This is called the Commutative Property of
Multiplication.

  Commutative Property of Multiplication

  Changing the order of the factors does not change their product.

EXAMPLE 1.43

Multiply:

           
  Solution



Multiply.



Multiply.

Changing the order of the factors does not change the product.

  TRY IT 1.85 Multiply:

                         

  TRY IT 1.86 Multiply:

                         

To multiply numbers with more than one digit, it is usually easier to write the numbers vertically in columns just as we
did for addition and subtraction.

We start by multiplying by
We write the in the ones place of the product. We carry the tens by writing above the tens place.
56 1 · Whole Numbers                                                                  and  Write

     Then we multiply the by the and add the above the tens place to the product. So
     the in the tens place of the product.

The product is
When we multiply two numbers with a different number of digits, it's usually easier to write the smaller number on the
bottom. You could write it the other way, too, but this way is easier to work with.

  EXAMPLE 1.44
Multiply:

     Solution

  Write the numbers so the digits and line up vertically.

  Multiply by the digit in the ones place of

Write in the ones place of the product and carry the tens.

Multiply by the digit in the tens place of   .

Add the tens we carried.         .

Write the in the tens place of the product.

       TRY IT 1.87 Multiply:
       TRY IT 1.88 Multiply:

  EXAMPLE 1.45
Multiply:

     Solution
  Write the numbers so the digits and line up vertically.

  Multiply by the digit in the ones place of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 57

Write the in the ones place of the product and carry the to the tens place.Multiply by the digit in the

tens place of   .

Add the tens we carried to get     .

Write the in the tens place of the product and carry the 4 to the hundreds place.

Multiply by the digit in the hundreds place of          to the thousands place.
Add the hundreds we carried to get
Write the in the hundreds place of the product and the

TRY IT 1.89 Multiply:

TRY IT 1.90 Multiply:

When we multiply by a number with two or more digits, we multiply by each of the digits separately, working from right
to left. Each separate product of the digits is called a partial product. When we write partial products, we must make sure
to line up the place values.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Multiply two whole numbers to find the product.

Step 1.  Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
Step 2.
         Multiply the digits in each place value.
           Work from right to left, starting with the ones place in the bottom number.
           Multiply the ones digit of the bottom number by the ones digit in the top number, then by the tens digit,

               and so on.
           If a product in a place value is more than carry to the next place value.
           Write the partial products, lining up the digits in the place values with the numbers above.

          Repeat for the tens place in the bottom number, the hundreds place, and so on.
          Insert a zero as a placeholder with each additional partial product.

Step 3. Add the partial products.

  EXAMPLE 1.46
Multiply:
58 1 · Whole Numbers                                                                    Write the 4 in the ones

           Solution
        Write the numbers so each place lines up vertically.

        Start by multiplying 7 by 62. Multiply 7 by the digit in the ones place of 62.
        place of the product and carry the 1 to the tens place.

Multiply 7 by the digit in the tens place of 62.  Add the 1 ten we carried.             . Write the 3 in

the tens place of the product and the 4 in the hundreds place.

The first partial product is 434.

Now, write a 0 under the 4 in the ones place of the next partial product as a placeholder since we now
multiply the digit in the tens place of 87 by 62. Multiply 8 by the digit in the ones place of 62.
Write the 6 in the next place of the product, which is the tens place. Carry the 1 to the tens place.

Multiply 8 by 6, the digit in the tens place of 62, then add the 1 ten we carried to get 49. Write the 9 in the
hundreds place of the product and the 4 in the thousands place.

The second partial product is 4960. Add the partial products.

The product is

  TRY IT 1.91 Multiply:
  TRY IT 1.92 Multiply:

EXAMPLE 1.47

Multiply:

                

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 59

Solution

           .



When we multiplied times the product was         Notice that  has one zero, and we put one zero after to get
                                                               Notice that has two zeros and we put two
the product. When we multiplied times     the product was

zeros after to get the product.

Do you see the pattern? If we multiplied  times  which has four zeros, we would put four zeros after to get
the product

  TRY IT 1.93 Multiply:

                                 

  TRY IT 1.94 Multiply:

                                 

EXAMPLE 1.48

Multiply:

     Solution                                                                                         as a placeholder as
There are three digits in the factors so there will be partial products. We do not have to write the
long as we write each partial product in the correct place.

       TRY IT 1.95 Multiply:
       TRY IT 1.96 Multiply:

  EXAMPLE 1.49
Multiply:
60 1 · Whole Numbers

           Solution
     There should be partial products. The second partial product will be the result of multiplying by

Notice that the second partial product of all zeros doesn't really affect the result. We can place a zero as a placeholder in
the tens place and then proceed directly to multiplying by the in the hundreds place, as shown.

Multiply by but insert only one zero as a placeholder in the tens place. Multiply by  putting the from the
              in the hundreds place.

TRY IT 1.97 Multiply:

TRY IT 1.98 Multiply:

When there are three or more factors, we multiply the first two and then multiply their product by the next factor. For
example:

to multiply

first multiply

then multiply   .

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

Earlier in this section, we translated math notation into words. Now we'll reverse the process and translate word phrases
into math notation. Some of the words that indicate multiplication are given in Table 1.5.

                   Operation Word Phrase    Example             Expression

                Multiplication   times        times
                                 product    the product of and
                                 twice      twice

                Table 1.5

  EXAMPLE 1.50
Translate and simplify: the product of and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 61

     Solution
The word product tells us to multiply. The words of and tell us the two factors.

                     the product of 12 and 27

  Translate.

  Multiply.

       TRY IT 1.99 Translate and simplify: the product of and

       TRY IT 1.100 Translate and simplify: the product of and

  EXAMPLE 1.51
Translate and simplify: twice two hundred eleven.

     Solution
The word twice tells us to multiply by

                     twice two hundred eleven
  Translate. 2(211)
  Multiply. 422

TRY IT 1.101 Translate and simplify: twice one hundred sixty-seven.

TRY IT 1.102 Translate and simplify: twice two hundred fifty-eight.

Multiply Whole Numbers in Applications

We will use the same strategy we used previously to solve applications of multiplication. First, we need to determine
what we are looking for. Then we write a phrase that gives the information to find it. We then translate the phrase into
math notation and simplify to get the answer. Finally, we write a sentence to answer the question.

EXAMPLE 1.52

Humberto bought sheets of stamps. Each sheet had  stamps. How many stamps did Humberto buy?

     Solution
We are asked to find the total number of stamps.

Write a phrase for the total.  the product of 4 and 20

Translate to math notation.
62 1 · Whole Numbers

Multiply.
Write a sentence to answer the question. Humberto bought 80 stamps.

TRY IT 1.103           Valia donated water for the snack bar at her son's baseball game. She brought cases of water
                       bottles. Each case had water bottles. How many water bottles did Valia donate?

TRY IT 1.104           Vanessa brought packs of hot dogs to a family reunion. Each pack has  hot dogs. How
                       many hot dogs did Vanessa bring?

  EXAMPLE 1.53

When Rena cooks rice, she uses twice as much water as rice. How much water does she need to cook cups of rice?
     Solution

We are asked to find how much water Rena needs.

Write as a phrase.               twice as much as 4 cups

Translate to math notation.

Multiply to simplify.            8

Write a sentence to answer the question. Rena needs 8 cups of water for 4 cups of rice.

TRY IT 1.105           Erin is planning her flower garden. She wants to plant twice as many dahlias as sunflowers. If
                       she plants 14 sunflowers, how many dahlias does she need?

TRY IT 1.106           A college choir has twice as many women as men. There are 18 men in the choir. How many
                       women are in the choir?

  EXAMPLE 1.54                                                      tiles in each row. How many tiles does he need for

Van is planning to build a patio. He will have rows of tiles, with
the patio?

     Solution
We are asked to find the total number of tiles.

Write a phrase.                  the product of 8 and 14

Translate to math notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 63

Multiply to simplify.

Write a sentence to answer the question. Van needs 112 tiles for his patio.

TRY IT 1.107           Jane is tiling her living room floor. She will need 16 rows of tile, with 20 tiles in each row. How
                       many tiles does she need for the living room floor?

TRY IT 1.108           Yousef is putting shingles on his garage roof. He will need 24 rows of shingles, with 45 shingles
                       in each row. How many shingles does he need for the garage roof?

If we want to know the size of a wall that needs to be painted or a floor that needs to be carpeted, we will need to find its
area. The area is a measure of the amount of surface that is covered by the shape. Area is measured in square units. We
often use square inches, square feet, square centimeters, or square miles to measure area. A square centimeter is a
square that is one centimeter (cm.) on a side. A square inch is a square that is one inch on each side, and so on.

For a rectangular figure, the area is the product of the length and the width. Figure 1.12 shows a rectangular rug with a
length of feet and a width of feet. Each square is foot wide by foot long, or square foot. The rug is made of
squares. The area of the rug is square feet.

                   Figure 1.12 The area of a rectangle is the product of its length and its width, or square feet.
  EXAMPLE 1.55
Jen's kitchen ceiling is a rectangle that measures 9 feet long by 12 feet wide. What is the area of Jen's kitchen ceiling?

     Solution
We are asked to find the area of the kitchen ceiling.

  Write a phrase for the area. the product of 9 and 12
  Translate to math notation.
64 1 · Whole Numbers

Multiply.

Answer with a sentence.          The area of Jen's kitchen ceiling is 108 square feet.

      TRY IT 1.109    Zoila bought a rectangular rug. The rug is 8 feet long by 5 feet wide. What is the area of the
                      rug?

      TRY IT 1.110 Rene's driveway is a rectangle 45 feet long by 20 feet wide. What is the area of the driveway?

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Multiplying Whole Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multwhlnum)
      Multiplication with Partial Products (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpartprod)
      Example of Multiplying by Whole Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24examplemultnm)

        SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Multiplication Notation

In the following exercises, translate from math notation to words.

225.                             226.                               227.

228.                             229.                               230.

231.                             232.

Model Multiplication of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the multiplication.

233.                             234.                               235.

236.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 65

Multiply Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, fill in the missing values in each chart.

237.                                   238.                            239.

240.                                   241.                            242.

243.                                   244.

In the following exercises, multiply.

245.                                   246.                            247.

248.                                   249.                            250.

251.                                   252.                            253.

254.                                   255.                            256.   

257.                                   258.                            259.

260.                                   261.                            262.

263.                                   264.                            265.

266.                                   267.                            268.

269.                                   270.                            271.

272.                                   273.                            274.
66 1 · Whole Numbers

275.                                   276.                                 277.

278.                                   279.                                 280.

281.                                   282.                                 283.

284.                                   285.                                 286.

287.                                   288.

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

289. the product of and                290. the product of and              291. fifty-one times sixty-seven
                                                                            294. twice
292. forty-eight times seventy-        293. twice
        one

295. ten times three hundred           296. ten times two hundred
        seventy-five                           fifty-five

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

297.                                   298.                                 299.

300.                                   301.                                 302.

303.                                   304.                                 305.

306.                                   307.                                 308.

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

309. the difference of 50 and          310. the difference of 90 and        311. twice 35
        18                                     66
                                                                            314. 65 more than 325
312. twice 140                         313. 20 more than 980                317. subtract 74 from 89
                                                                            320. the sum of 6,308 and 724
315. the product of 12 and 875 316. the product of 15 and 905

318. subtract 45 from 99               319. the sum of 3,075 and 95

321. 366 less than 814                 322. 388 less than 925

Multiply Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

323. Party supplies Tim                324. Sewing Kanisha is making        325. Field trip Seven school
        brought 9 six-packs of                 a quilt. She bought 6                busses let off their
        soda to a club party. How              cards of buttons. Each               students in front of a
        many cans of soda did                  card had four buttons on             museum in Washington,
        Tim bring?                             it. How many buttons did             DC. Each school bus had
                                               Kanisha buy?                         44 students. How many
                                                                                    students were there?
326. Gardening Kathryn                 327. Charity Rey donated 15
        bought 8 flats of                      twelve-packs of t-shirts to  328. School There are 28
        impatiens for her flower               a homeless shelter. How              classrooms at Anna C.
        bed. Each flat has 24                  many t-shirts did he                 Scott elementary school.
        flowers. How many                      donate?                              Each classroom has 26
        flowers did Kathryn buy?                                                    student desks. What is
                                                                                    the total number of
                                                                                    student desks?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      1.4 · Multiply Whole Numbers 67

329. Recipe Stephanie is             330. Gardening Hiroko is             331. Government The United
        making punch for a party.            putting in a vegetable               States Senate has twice as
        The recipe calls for twice           garden. He wants to have             many senators as there
        as much fruit juice as club          twice as many lettuce                are states in the United
        soda. If she uses 10 cups            plants as tomato plants. If          States. There are 50
        of club soda, how much               he buys 12 tomato plants,            states. How many
        fruit juice should she use?          how many lettuce plants              senators are there in the
                                             should he get?                       United States Senate?
332. Recipe Andrea is making
        potato salad for a buffet    333. Painting Jane is painting       334. Home décor Shawnte
        luncheon. The recipe says            one wall of her living               bought a rug for the hall
        the number of servings of            room. The wall is                    of her apartment. The rug
        potato salad will be twice           rectangular, 13 feet wide            is 3 feet wide by 18 feet
        the number of pounds of              by 9 feet high. What is the          long. What is the area of
        potatoes. If she buys 30             area of the wall?                    the rug?
        pounds of potatoes, how
        many servings of potato      336. Gardening June has a            337. NCAA basketball
        salad will there be?                 vegetable garden in her              According to NCAA
                                             yard. The garden is                  regulations, the
335. Room size The meeting                   rectangular, with length             dimensions of a
        room in a senior center is           23 feet and width 28 feet.           rectangular basketball
        rectangular, with length             What is the area of the              court must be 94 feet by
        42 feet and width 34 feet.           garden?                              50 feet. What is the area
        What is the area of the                                                   of the basketball court?
        meeting room?

338. NCAA football According
        to NCAA regulations, the
        dimensions of a
        rectangular football field
        must be 360 feet by 160
        feet. What is the area of
        the football field?

Everyday Math

339. Stock market Javier owns 300 shares of stock in       340. Salary Carlton got a  raise in each paycheck.
        one company. On Tuesday, the stock price rose
              per share. How much money did Javier's       He gets paid 24 times a year. How much higher is
        portfolio gain?
                                                           his new annual salary?

Writing Exercises                                          342. How have you used models to help you learn the
                                                                   multiplication facts?
341. How confident do you feel about your
        knowledge of the multiplication facts? If you are
        not fully confident, what will you do to improve
        your skills?
68 1 · Whole Numbers

    Self Check

      After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

1.5 Divide Whole Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use division notation
           Model division of whole numbers
           Divide whole numbers
           Translate word phrases to math notation
           Divide whole numbers in applications

       BE PREPARED 1.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Multiply:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.44.

BE PREPARED 1.8  Subtract:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.32

BE PREPARED 1.9  Multiply:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.45.

Use Division Notation

So far we have explored addition, subtraction, and multiplication. Now let's consider division. Suppose you have the
cookies in Figure 1.13 and want to package them in bags with cookies in each bag. How many bags would we need?

You might put cookies in first bag,                         Figure 1.13
would fill bags.                     in the second bag, and so on until you run out of cookies. Doing it this way, you

In other words, starting with the cookies, you would take away, or subtract, cookies at a time. Division is a way to
represent repeated subtraction just as multiplication represents repeated addition.
Instead of subtracting repeatedly, we can write

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 69

We read this as twelve divided by four and the result is the quotient of and The quotient is because we can
subtract from exactly times. We call the number being divided the dividend and the number dividing it the
divisor. In this case, the dividend is and the divisor is

In the past you may have used the notation   , but this division also can be written as                 In each case
the is the dividend and the is the divisor.

Operation Symbols for Division

To represent and describe division, we can use symbols and words.

Operation Notation Expression                Read as                                     Result

Division is performed on two numbers at a time. When translating from math notation to English words, or English
words to math notation, look for the words of and and to identify the numbers.

  EXAMPLE 1.56

Translate from math notation to words.

 

     Solution

 We read this as sixty-four divided by eight and the result is the quotient of sixty-four and eight.
 We read this as forty-two divided by seven and the result is the quotient of forty-two and seven.
 We read this as twenty-eight divided by four and the result is the quotient of twenty-eight and four.

TRY IT 1.111  Translate from math notation to words:

               

TRY IT 1.112  Translate from math notation to words:

               

Model Division of Whole Numbers

As we did with multiplication, we will model division using counters. The operation of division helps us organize items
into equal groups as we start with the number of items in the dividend and subtract the number in the divisor
repeatedly.

MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Math Worksheets activity "Model Division of Whole Numbers" will help you develop a better
understanding of dividing whole numbers.
70 1 · Whole Numbers

EXAMPLE 1.57

Model the division:

     Solution                    we want to know how many groups of are in
To find the quotient

Model the dividend. Start with counters.

The divisor tell us the number of counters we want in each group. Form groups of counters.

Count the number of groups. There are groups.

  TRY IT 1.113 Model:

  TRY IT 1.114 Model:

Divide Whole Numbers

We said that addition and subtraction are inverse operations because one undoes the other. Similarly, division is the

inverse operation of multiplication. We know         because                Knowing all the multiplication number facts

is very important when doing division.

We check our answer to division by multiplying the quotient by the divisor to determine if it equals the dividend. In

Example 1.57, we know            is correct because

EXAMPLE 1.58

Divide. Then check by multiplying.            

     Solution

                                                                            

Divide 42 by 6.                         Divide 72 by 9.                     Divide 63 by 7.
Check by multiplying.                   Check by multiplying.               Check by multiplying.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 71

  TRY IT 1.115       Divide. Then check by multiplying:

                     

  TRY IT 1.116       Divide. Then check by multiplying:

                     

What is the quotient when you divide a number by itself?

Dividing any number         by itself produces a quotient of Also, any number divided by produces a quotient of

the number. These two ideas are stated in the Division Properties of One.

Division Properties of One

                                Any number (except 0) divided by itself is one.
                              Any number divided by one is the same number.
                            Table 1.6

EXAMPLE 1.59

Divide. Then check by multiplying:

  Solution  

                                    

A number divided by itself is 1.    A number divided by 1 equals itself.
Check by multiplying.               Check by multiplying.
72 1 · Whole Numbers

    

        A number divided by 1 equals itself.
        Check by multiplying.

TRY IT 1.117  Divide. Then check by multiplying:

                                              

TRY IT 1.118  Divide. Then check by multiplying:

              

Suppose we have and want to divide it among people. How much would each person get? Each person would get
     Zero divided by any number is

Now suppose that we want to divide by That means we would want to find a number that we multiply by to get
     This cannot happen because times any number is Division by zero is said to be undefined.

These two ideas make up the Division Properties of Zero.

Division Properties of Zero

                                        Zero divided by any number is 0.    undefined
                                   Dividing a number by zero is undefined.
                                 Table 1.7

Another way to explain why division by zero is undefined is to remember that division is really repeated subtraction. How
many times can we take away from Because subtracting will never change the total, we will never get an answer.
So we cannot divide a number by

EXAMPLE 1.60

Divide. Check by multiplying:                 

Access for free at openstax.org
  Solution                                                                                                              1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 73

                                             

Zero divided by any number is zero.          Division by zero is undefined. undefined
Check by multiplying.

TRY IT 1.119  Divide. Then check by multiplying:

              

TRY IT 1.120  Divide. Then check by multiplying:

              

When the divisor or the dividend has more than one digit, it is usually easier to use the  notation. This process is
called long division. Let's work through the process by dividing by

Divide the first digit of the dividend, 7, by the divisor, 3.

The divisor 3 can go into 7 two times since  . Write the 2 above the 7 in the quotient.

Multiply the 2 in the quotient by 3 and write the product, 6, under the 7.

Subtract that product from the first digit in the dividend. Subtract  . Write the difference, 1, under the
first digit in the dividend.

Bring down the next digit of the dividend. Bring down the 8.

Divide 18 by the divisor, 3. The divisor 3 goes into 18 six times.
Write 6 in the quotient above the 8.

Multiply the 6 in the quotient by the divisor and write the product, 18, under the dividend. Subtract 18
from 18.
74 1 · Whole Numbers

We would repeat the process until there are no more digits in the dividend to bring down. In this problem, there are no
more digits to bring down, so the division is finished.

Check by multiplying the quotient times the divisor to get the dividend. Multiply  to make sure that product
equals the dividend,

It does, so our answer is correct.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Divide whole numbers.

Step 1.  Divide the first digit of the dividend by the divisor.
         If the divisor is larger than the first digit of the dividend, divide the first two digits of the dividend by the
Step 2.  divisor, and so on.
Step 3.  Write the quotient above the dividend.
Step 4.  Multiply the quotient by the divisor and write the product under the dividend.
Step 5.  Subtract that product from the dividend.
Step 6.  Bring down the next digit of the dividend.
Step 7.  Repeat from Step 1 until there are no more digits in the dividend to bring down.
         Check by multiplying the quotient times the divisor.

EXAMPLE 1.61

Divide                Check by multiplying:
     Solution

Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.

Divide the first digit of the dividend, 2, by the divisor, 4.

Since 4 does not go into 2, we use the first two digits of the dividend and divide 25 by 4. The divisor 4
goes into 25 six times.

We write the 6 in the quotient above the 5.

Multiply the 6 in the quotient by the divisor 4 and write the product, 24, under the first two digits in the
dividend.

Subtract that product from the first two digits in the dividend. Subtract          . Write the difference, 1,
under the second digit in the dividend.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                   1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 75

Now bring down the 9 and repeat these steps. There are 4 fours in 19. Write the 4 over the 9. Multiply
the 4 by 4 and subtract this product from 19.

Bring down the 6 and repeat these steps. There are 9 fours in 36. Write the 9 over the 6. Multiply the 9
by 4 and subtract this product from 36.

So             .

Check by multiplying.

It equals the dividend, so our answer is correct.

    TRY IT 1.121 Divide. Then check by multiplying:
    TRY IT 1.122 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

EXAMPLE 1.62

Divide         Check by multiplying:
     Solution

Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.

First we try to divide 6 into 4.

Since that won't work, we try 6 into 45.
There are 7 sixes in 45. We write the 7 over the 5.

Multiply the 7 by 6 and subtract this product from 45.
76 1 · Whole Numbers

        Now bring down the 0 and repeat these steps. There are 5 sixes in 30.
        Write the 5 over the 0. Multiply the 5 by 6 and subtract this product from 30.

Now bring down the 6 and repeat these steps. There is 1 six in 6.
Write the 1 over the 6. Multiply 1 by 6 and subtract this product from 6.

Check by multiplying.

It equals the dividend, so our answer is correct.

TRY IT 1.123 Divide. Then check by multiplying:
TRY IT 1.124 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

EXAMPLE 1.63

Divide         Check by multiplying.
     Solution

Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.

First we try to divide 9 into 7.

Since that won't work, we try 9 into 72. There are 8 nines in 72.
We write the 8 over the 2.

Multiply the 8 by 9 and subtract this product from 72.

Now bring down the 6 and repeat these steps. There are 0 nines in 6.
Write the 0 over the 6. Multiply the 0 by 9 and subtract this product from 6.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 77

  Now bring down the 3 and repeat these steps. There are 7 nines in 63. Write the 7 over the 3.
  Multiply the 7 by 9 and subtract this product from 63.

  Check by multiplying.

It equals the dividend, so our answer is correct.
       TRY IT 1.125 Divide. Then check by multiplying:
       TRY IT 1.126 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

So far all the division problems have worked out evenly. For example, if we had cookies and wanted to make bags of
cookies, we would have bags. But what if there were cookies and we wanted to make bags of Start with the
cookies as shown in Figure 1.14.

                                                                             Figure 1.14
Try to put the cookies in groups of eight as in Figure 1.15.

                                                                             Figure 1.15
There are groups of eight cookies, and cookies left over. We call the cookies that are left over the remainder and
show it by writing R4 next to the (The R stands for remainder.)
To check this division we multiply times to get and then add the remainder of

EXAMPLE 1.64

Divide        Check by multiplying.
78 1 · Whole Numbers

           Solution
        Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.
        First we try to divide 4 into 1. Since that won't work, we try 4 into 14.
        There are 3 fours in 14. We write the 3 over the 4.

        Multiply the 3 by 4 and subtract this product from 14.

        Now bring down the 3 and repeat these steps. There are 5 fours in 23.
        Write the 5 over the 3. Multiply the 5 by 4 and subtract this product from 23.

        Now bring down the 9 and repeat these steps. There are 9 fours in 39.
        Write the 9 over the 9. Multiply the 9 by 4 and subtract this product from 39.
        There are no more numbers to bring down, so we are done.
        The remainder is 3.

        Check by multiplying.

So  is with a remainder of Our answer is correct.

    TRY IT 1.127 Divide. Then check by multiplying:
    TRY IT 1.128 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

  EXAMPLE 1.65
Divide and then check by multiplying:

     Solution
  Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.

  First we try to divide 13 into 1. Since that won't work, we try 13 into 14.
  There is 1 thirteen in 14. We write the 1 over the 4.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 79

Multiply the 1 by 13 and subtract this product from 14.

Now bring down the 6 and repeat these steps. There is 1 thirteen in 16.
Write the 1 over the 6. Multiply the 1 by 13 and subtract this product from 16.

Now bring down the 1 and repeat these steps. There are 2 thirteens in 31.

Write the 2 over the 1. Multiply the 2 by 13 and subtract this product from 31. There are no

more numbers to bring down, so we are done.

The remainder is 5.     is 112 with a remainder of 5.

Check by multiplying.

Our answer is correct.

TRY IT 1.129 Divide. Then check by multiplying:
TRY IT 1.130 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

  EXAMPLE 1.66
Divide and check by multiplying:

     Solution
  Let's rewrite the problem to set it up for long division.

First we try to divide 241 into 7. Since that won't work, we try 241 into 74. That still won't

work, so we try 241 into 745. Since 2 divides into 7 three times, we try 3.

Since                   , we write the 3 over the 5 in 745.

Note that 4 would be too large because                       , which is greater than 745.

Multiply the 3 by 241 and subtract this product from 745.
80 1 · Whole Numbers

Now bring down the 2 and repeat these steps. 241 does not divide into 222.
We write a 0 over the 2 as a placeholder and then continue.

Now bring down the 1 and repeat these steps. Try 9. Since           ,

we write the 9 over the 1. Multiply the 9 by 241 and subtract this product from 2,221.

There are no more numbers to bring down, so we are finished. The remainder is 52. So
is 309 with a remainder of 52.
Check by multiplying.

Sometimes it might not be obvious how many times the divisor goes into digits of the dividend. We will have to guess
and check numbers to find the greatest number that goes into the digits without exceeding them.

TRY IT 1.131 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

TRY IT 1.132 Divide. Then check by multiplying:

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

Earlier in this section, we translated math notation for division into words. Now we'll translate word phrases into math
notation. Some of the words that indicate division are given in Table 1.8.

                      Operation Word Phrase                Example          Expression

                      Division   divided by        divided by
                                 quotient of   the quotient of and
                                 divided into
                                                 divided into

                                  Table 1.8

  EXAMPLE 1.67
Translate and simplify: the quotient of and

     Solution
The word quotient tells us to divide.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 81

We could just as correctly have translated the quotient of and using the notation

TRY IT 1.133 Translate and simplify: the quotient of and

TRY IT 1.134 Translate and simplify: the quotient of and

Divide Whole Numbers in Applications

We will use the same strategy we used in previous sections to solve applications. First, we determine what we are
looking for. Then we write a phrase that gives the information to find it. We then translate the phrase into math notation
and simplify it to get the answer. Finally, we write a sentence to answer the question.

EXAMPLE 1.68

Cecelia bought a       box of oatmeal at the big box store. She wants to divide the ounces of oatmeal into

servings. She will put each serving into a plastic bag so she can take one bag to work each day. How many

servings will she get from the big box?

     Solution
We are asked to find the how many servings she will get from the big box.

Write a phrase.                          160 ounces divided by 8 ounces

Translate to math notation.

Simplify by dividing.

Write a sentence to answer the question. Cecelia will get 20 servings from the big box.

TRY IT 1.135           Marcus is setting out animal crackers for snacks at the preschool. He wants to put crackers in
                       each cup. One box of animal crackers contains crackers. How many cups can he fill from
                       one box of crackers?

TRY IT 1.136           Andrea is making bows for the girls in her dance class to wear at the recital. Each bow takes
                       feet of ribbon, and feet of ribbon are on one spool. How many bows can Andrea make from
                       one spool of ribbon?

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Dividing Whole Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24divwhlnum)
Dividing Whole Numbers No Remainder (http://www.openstax.org/l/24divnumnorem)
Dividing Whole Numbers With Remainder (http://www.openstax.org/l/24divnumwrem)
82 1 · Whole Numbers

        SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Division Notation

In the following exercises, translate from math notation to words.

343.                             344.                               345.

346.                             347.                               348.

349.                             350.

Model Division of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the division.

351.                             352.                               353.

354.                             355.                               356.

357.                             358.

Divide Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, divide. Then check by multiplying.

359.                             360.                               361.

362.                             363.                               364.

365.                             366.                               367.

368.                             369.                               370.

371.                             372.                               373.

374.                             375.                               376.

377.                             378.                               379.

380.                             381.                               382.

383.                             384.                               385.

386.                             387.                               388.

389.                             390.                               391.

392.                             393.                               394.

395.                             396.                               397.

398.                             399.                               400.

401.                             402.                               403.

404.                             405.                               406.

407.                             408.                               409.

410.                             411.                               412.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            1.5 · Divide Whole Numbers 83

413.                                   414.                                 415.
                                                                            418.
416.                                   417.                                 421.

419.                                   420.                                 425.
                                                                            428.
422.
                                                                            433. the quotient of and
Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

423.                                   424.

426.                                   427.

429.                                   430.

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

431. the quotient of and               432. the quotient of and

434. the quotient of and

Divide Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

435. Trail mix Ric bought              436. Crackers Evie bought a          437. Astronomy class There
        ounces of trail mix. He                    ounce box of crackers.           are students in an
        wants to divide it into                                                     astronomy class. The
        small bags, with ounces                She wants to divide it into          professor assigns them
        of trail mix in each bag.              bags with ounces of                  into groups of How
        How many bags can Ric                  crackers in each bag. How            many groups of students
        fill?                                  many bags can Evie fill?             are there?

438. Flower shop Melissa's             439. Baking One roll of plastic      440. Dental floss One package
        flower shop got a                      wrap is feet long.                   of dental floss is feet
        shipment of roses.                     Marta uses feet of                   long. Brian uses feet of
        She wants to make                      plastic wrap to wrap each            dental floss every day.
        bouquets of roses each.                cake she bakes. How                  How many days will one
        How many bouquets can                  many cakes can she wrap              package of dental floss
        Melissa make?                          from one roll?                       last Brian?

Mixed Practice                         442. Distance Mayra lives            443. Field trip The students
                                               miles from her mother's              in a Geology class will go
In the following exercises, solve.             house and miles from                 on a field trip, using the
                                               her mother-in-law's                  college's vans. Each van
441. Miles per gallon Susana's                 house. How much farther              can hold students. How
        hybrid car gets miles                  is Mayra from her                    many vans will they need
        per gallon. Her son's truck            mother-in-law's house                for the field trip?
        gets miles per gallon.                 than from her mother's
        What is the difference in              house?
        miles per gallon between
        Susana's car and her son's
        truck?
84 1 · Whole Numbers

444. Potting soil Aki bought a      445. Hiking Bill hiked miles       446. Reading Last night Emily
              ounce bag of potting          on the first day of his            read pages in her
                                            backpacking trip, miles            Business textbook,
        soil. How many ounce                the second day, miles              pages in her History text,
        pots can he fill from the           the third day, and                     pages in her
        bag?                                miles the fourth day.              Psychology text, and
                                            What is the total number           pages in her math text.
447. Patients LaVonne treats                of miles Bill hiked?               What is the total number
            patients each day in                                               of pages Emily read?
                                    448. Scouts There are boys
        her dental office. Last             in Dave's scout troop. At
        week she worked days.               summer camp, each boy
        How many patients did               earned merit badges.
        she treat last week?                What was the total
                                            number of merit badges
                                            earned by Dave's scout
                                            troop at summer camp?

Writing Exercises

449. Contact lenses Jenna puts in a new pair of       450. Cat food One bag of cat food feeds Lara's cat for
        contact lenses every days. How many pairs of              days. How many bags of cat food does Lara
        contact lenses does she need for days?
                                                              need for days?

Everyday Math

451. Explain how you use the multiplication facts to  452. Oswaldo divided by and said his answer
        help with division.                                   was with a remainder of How can you check
                                                              to make sure he is correct?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                            1 · Chapter Review 85

Chapter Review

Key Terms

coordinate A number paired with a point on a number line is called the coordinate of the point.
counting numbers The counting numbers are the numbers 1, 2, 3, ....
difference The difference is the result of subtracting two or more numbers.
dividend When dividing two numbers, the dividend is the number being divided.
divisor When dividing two numbers, the divisor is the number dividing the dividend.
number line A number line is used to visualize numbers. The numbers on the number line get larger as they go from

    left to right, and smaller as they go from right to left.
origin The origin is the point labeled 0 on a number line.
place value system Our number system is called a place value system because the value of a digit depends on its

    position, or place, in a number.
product The product is the result of multiplying two or more numbers.
quotient The quotient is the result of dividing two numbers.
rounding The process of approximating a number is called rounding.
sum The sum is the result of adding two or more numbers.
whole numbers The whole numbers are the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, ....

Key Concepts
1.1 Introduction to Whole Numbers

                                                                             Figure 1.16
  · Name a whole number in words.

      Step 1. Starting at the digit on the left, name the number in each period, followed by the period name. Do not
                  include the period name for the ones.

      Step 2. Use commas in the number to separate the periods.
  · Use place value to write a whole number.

      Step 1. Identify the words that indicate periods. (Remember the ones period is never named.)
      Step 2. Draw three blanks to indicate the number of places needed in each period.
      Step 3. Name the number in each period and place the digits in the correct place value position.
  · Round a whole number to a specific place value.
      Step 1. Locate the given place value. All digits to the left of that place value do not change unless the digit

                  immediately to the left is 9, in which case it may. (See Step 3.).
      Step 2. Underline the digit to the right of the given place value.
      Step 3. Determine if this digit is greater than or equal to 5. If yes--add 1 to the digit in the given place value. If that

                  digit is 9, replace it with 0 and add 1 to the digit immediately to its left. If that digit is also a 9, repeat. If
                  no--do not change the digit in the given place value.
      Step 4. Replace all digits to the right of the given place value with zeros.
86 1 · Chapter Review

1.2 Add Whole Numbers

  · Addition Notation To describe addition, we can use symbols and words.

                       Operation Notation Expression  Read as              Result

                       Addition                       three plus four the sum of and

· Identity Property of Addition
    The sum of any number and is the number.

· Commutative Property of Addition

 Changing the order of the addends and does not change their sum.          .

· Add whole numbers.
    Step 1. Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
    Step 2. Add the digits in each place value. Work from right to left starting with the ones place. If a sum in a place
               value is more than 9, carry to the next place value.
    Step 3. Continue adding each place value from right to left, adding each place value and carrying if needed.

1.3 Subtract Whole Numbers                            Read as              Result

                       Operation Notation Expression

Subtraction                                           seven minus three the difference of and

· Subtract whole numbers.
    Step 1. Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
    Step 2. Subtract the digits in each place value. Work from right to left starting with the ones place. If the digit on
               top is less than the digit below, borrow as needed.
    Step 3. Continue subtracting each place value from right to left, borrowing if needed.
    Step 4. Check by adding.

1.4 Multiply Whole Numbers

Operation Notation Expression                         Read as              Result

  · Multiplication Property of Zero
       The product of any number and 0 is 0.

  · Identity Property of Multiplication
       The product of any number and 1 is the number.

  · Commutative Property of Multiplication
       Changing the order of the factors does not change their product.

  · Multiply two whole numbers to find the product.
      Step 1. Write the numbers so each place value lines up vertically.
      Step 2. Multiply the digits in each place value.
      Step 3. Work from right to left, starting with the ones place in the bottom number.
      Step 4. Multiply the bottom number by the ones digit in the top number, then by the tens digit, and so on.
      Step 5. If a product in a place value is more than 9, carry to the next place value.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          1 · Exercises 87

      Step 6.  Write the partial products, lining up the digits in the place values with the numbers above. Repeat for the
               tens place in the bottom number, the hundreds place, and so on.
      Step 7.  Insert a zero as a placeholder with each additional partial product.
      Step 8.  Add the partial products.

1.5 Divide Whole Numbers

               Operation Notation Expression         Read as                 Result

· Division Properties of One
    Any number (except 0) divided by itself is one.
    Any number divided by one is the same number.

· Division Properties of Zero                        undefined
    Zero divided by any number is 0.
    Dividing a number by zero is undefined.

  · Divide whole numbers.
      Step 1. Divide the first digit of the dividend by the divisor.
                  If the divisor is larger than the first digit of the dividend, divide the first two digits of the dividend by the
                  divisor, and so on.
      Step 2. Write the quotient above the dividend.
      Step 3. Multiply the quotient by the divisor and write the product under the dividend.
      Step 4. Subtract that product from the dividend.
      Step 5. Bring down the next digit of the dividend.
      Step 6. Repeat from Step 1 until there are no more digits in the dividend to bring down.
      Step 7. Check by multiplying the quotient times the divisor.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Introduction to Whole Numbers

Identify Counting Numbers and Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, determine which of the following are (a) counting numbers (b) whole numbers.

453.                                 454.                              455.

456.

Model Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model each number using  blocks and then show its value using place value notation.

457. 258                             458. 104

Identify the Place Value of a Digit

In the following exercises, find the place value of the given digits.

459.                 460.

                         
                         
88 1 · Exercises

Use Place Value to Name Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, name each number in words.

461.                               462.                            463.

464.

Use Place Value to Write Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, write as a whole number using digits.

465. six hundred two               466. fifteen thousand, two      467. three hundred forty
                                           hundred fifty-three             million, nine hundred
                                                                           twelve thousand, sixty-
                                                                           one

468. two billion, four hundred
        ninety-two million, seven
        hundred eleven
        thousand, two

Round Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, round to the nearest ten.

469.                               470.                            471.

472.

In the following exercises, round to the nearest hundred.

473.                               474.                            475.

476.

Add Whole Numbers

Use Addition Notation

In the following exercises, translate the following from math notation to words.

477.                               478.                            479.

480.

Model Addition of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the addition.

481.                               482.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           1 · Exercises 89

Add Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, fill in the missing values in each chart.

483.                                484.

In the following exercises, add.

485.                                486.                                487.             

488.                                489.                                490.

491.                                492.                                493.

494.

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into math notation and then simplify.

495. the sum of and                 496. increased by                   497. more than

498. total of and

Add Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

499. Shopping for an                500. Running Jackson ran
                                            miles on Monday,
      interview Nathan bought               miles on Tuesday, mile
                                            on Wednesday, miles on
      a new shirt, tie, and slacks          Thursday, and miles on
                                            Friday. What was the total
      to wear to a job interview.           number of miles Jackson
                                            ran?
      The shirt cost  the tie

      cost  and the slacks

      cost  What was

      Nathan's total cost?

In the following exercises, find the perimeter of each figure.

501.                                502.

Subtract Whole Numbers

Use Subtraction Notation

In the following exercises, translate the following from math notation to words.

503.                                504.                                505.

506.
90 1 · Exercises

Model Subtraction of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the subtraction.

507.                                508.

Subtract Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, subtract and then check by adding.

509.                                510.                              511.
                                                                      514.
512.                                513.                              517.
                                                                      520.
515.                                516.                              523. seventy-four decreased

518.                                519.                                      by eight

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation                               529.

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

521. the difference of nineteen     522. subtract sixty-five from
        and thirteen                        one hundred

524. twenty-three less than
        forty-one

Subtract Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

525. Temperature The high           526. Savings Lynn wants to go
        temperature in Peoria
        one day was degrees               on a cruise that costs
        Fahrenheit and the low
        temperature was                              She has      in
        degrees Fahrenheit. What
        was the difference                her vacation savings
        between the high and low
        temperatures?                     account. How much more

                                          does she need to save in

                                          order to pay for the

                                          cruise?

Multiply Whole Numbers

Use Multiplication Notation

In the following exercises, translate from math notation to words.

527.                                528.

530.

Model Multiplication of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model the multiplication.

531.                                532.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                               1 · Exercises 91

Multiply Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, fill in the missing values in each chart.

533.                                   534.

In the following exercises, multiply.

535.                                   536.                                537.
                                                                           540.
538.                                   539.                                543.
                                                                           546.
541.                                   542.

544.                                   545.

547.                                   548.

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

549. the product of and                550. ninety-four times thirty-      551. twice
                                               three

552. ten times two hundred
        sixty-four

Multiply Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

553. Gardening Geniece                 554. Cooking Ratika is making       555. Multiplex There are
        bought packs of                        rice for a dinner party.            twelve theaters at the
        marigolds to plant in her              The number of cups of               multiplex and each
        yard. Each pack has                    water is twice the number           theater has seats.
        flowers. How many                      of cups of rice. If Ratika          What is the total number
        marigolds did Geniece                  plans to use cups of                of seats at the multiplex?
        buy?                                   rice, how many cups of
                                               water does she need?

556. Roofing Lewis needs to
        put new shingles on his
        roof. The roof is a
        rectangle, feet by
        feet. What is the area of
        the roof?

Divide Whole Numbers

Use Division Notation

Translate from math notation to words.

557.                                   558.                                559.
92 1 · Exercises

560.

Model Division of Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, model.

561.                                562.

Divide Whole Numbers

In the following exercises, divide. Then check by multiplying.

563.                                564.                                 565.

566.                                567.                                 568.

569.                                570.                                 571.

572.                                573.                                 574.

Translate Word Phrases to Math Notation

In the following exercises, translate and simplify.

575. the quotient of and            576. the quotient of and

Divide Whole Numbers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

577. Ribbon One spool of            578. Juice One carton of fruit
        ribbon is feet. Lizbeth             juice is ounces. How
        uses feet of ribbon for             many ounce cups can
        each gift basket that she           Shayla fill from one carton
        wraps. How many gift                of juice?
        baskets can Lizbeth wrap
        from one spool of ribbon?

Practice Test                       580. Find the place value of the     581. Write each number as a
                                            given digits in the                  whole number using
579. Determine which of the                 number                               digits.
        following numbers are
                                                                              six hundred thirteen
     counting numbers                                                         fifty-five thousand
     whole numbers.
                                                                                 two hundred eight

582. Round        to the

      nearest hundred.

Simplify.

583.                                584.                                 585.

586.                                587.                                 588.

589.                                590.                                 591.

592.                                593.                                 594.

595.                                596.                                 597.

598.                                599.                                 600.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         1 · Exercises 93

601.                                602.

Translate each phrase to math notation and then simplify.

603. The sum of and                 604. The product of and            605. The difference of and

606. The quotient of and            607. Twice                         608. more than
609. less than

In the following exercises, solve.  611. Last month, Stan's take-      612. Each class at Greenville
                                                                               School has children
610. LaVelle buys a jumbo bag             home pay was            and          enrolled. The school has
        of candies to make                                                         classes. How many
        favor bags for her son's          his expenses were                    children are enrolled at
        party. If she wants to                                                 Greenville School?
        make bags, how many               How much of his take-
        candies should she put in
        each bag?                         home pay did Stan have

613. Clayton walked blocks                left after he paid his
        to his mother's house,
        blocks to the gym, and            expenses?
        blocks to the grocery
        store before walking the
        last blocks home. What
        was the total number of
        blocks that Clayton
        walked?
94 1 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      2 · Introduction to the Language of Algebra 95

2  THE LANGUAGE OF ALGEBRA

Figure 2.1 Algebra has a language of its own. The picture shows just some of the words you may see and use in your
study of Prealgebra.

Chapter Outline

  2.1 Use the Language of Algebra
  2.2 Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions
  2.3 Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality
  2.4 Find Multiples and Factors
  2.5 Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple

      Introduction to the Language of Algebra

You may not realize it, but you already use algebra every day. Perhaps you figure out how much to tip a server in a
restaurant. Maybe you calculate the amount of change you should get when you pay for something. It could even be
when you compare batting averages of your favorite players. You can describe the algebra you use in specific words, and
follow an orderly process. In this chapter, you will explore the words used to describe algebra and start on your path to
solving algebraic problems easily, both in class and in your everyday life.

2.1 Use the Language of Algebra

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use variables and algebraic symbols
           Identify expressions and equations
           Simplify expressions with exponents
           Simplify expressions using the order of operations

       BE PREPARED 2.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.19.

   BE PREPARED 2.2

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.48.

   BE PREPARED 2.3
96 2 · The Language of Algebra

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.64.

Use Variables and Algebraic Symbols

Greg and Alex have the same birthday, but they were born in different years. This year Greg is years old and Alex is
     so Alex is years older than Greg. When Greg was Alex was When Greg is Alex will be No matter what

Greg's age is, Alex's age will always be years more, right?

In the language of algebra, we say that Greg's age and Alex's age are variable and the three is a constant. The ages
change, or vary, so age is a variable. The years between them always stays the same, so the age difference is the
constant.

In algebra, letters of the alphabet are used to represent variables. Suppose we call Greg's age  Then we could use
to represent Alex's age. See Table 2.1.

                                 Greg's age Alex's age

                                                                  Table 2.1
Letters are used to represent variables. Letters often used for variables are

  Variables and Constants
  A variable is a letter that represents a number or quantity whose value may change.
  A constant is a number whose value always stays the same.

To write algebraically, we need some symbols as well as numbers and variables. There are several types of symbols we
will be using. In Whole Numbers, we introduced the symbols for the four basic arithmetic operations: addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division. We will summarize them here, along with words we use for the operations and
the result.

      Operation                  Notation        Say:                              The result is...

      Addition                                          the sum of and

      Subtraction                                       the difference of and

      Multiplication                                    The product of and

      Division                                   divided by The quotient of and

In algebra, the cross symbol, is not used to show multiplication because that symbol may cause confusion. Does

mean  (three times ) or          (three times    )? To make it clear, use · or parentheses for multiplication.

We perform these operations on two numbers. When translating from symbolic form to words, or from words to
symbolic form, pay attention to the words of or and to help you find the numbers.

The sum of and means add plus which we write as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 97

The difference of and means subtract minus which we write as
The product of and means multiply times which we can write as
The quotient of and means divide by which we can write as

EXAMPLE 2.1

Translate from algebra to words:

 Solution                               



               12 plus 14
the sum of twelve and fourteen



             30 times 5
the product of thirty and five



              64 divided by 8
the quotient of sixty-four and eight



             minus
the difference of and

  TRY IT 2.1 Translate from algebra to words.

                                                               

  TRY IT 2.2 Translate from algebra to words.

                                                               
98 2 · The Language of Algebra

     When two quantities have the same value, we say they are equal and connect them with an equal sign.
       Equality Symbol

       The symbol is called the equal sign.

     An inequality is used in algebra to compare two quantities that may have different values. The number line can help you
     understand inequalities. Remember that on the number line the numbers get larger as they go from left to right. So if
     we know that is greater than it means that is to the right of on the number line. We use the symbols and
     for inequalities.

       Inequality
                is read is less than

          is to the left of on the number line

                is read is greater than
          is to the right of on the number line

The expressions                  can be read from left-to-right or right-to-left, though in English we usually read from
left-to-right. In general,

When we write an inequality symbol with a line under it, such as   it means             or  We read this is less
than or equal to Also, if we put a slash through an equal sign,
                                                                   it means not equal.

We summarize the symbols of equality and inequality in Table 2.2.

                                 Algebraic Notation                Say

                                                     is equal to

                                                     is not equal to

                                                     is less than

                                                     is greater than

                                                     is less than or equal to

                                                     is greater than or equal to

                                 Table 2.2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 99

Symbols and

The symbols and each have a smaller side and a larger side.
smaller side larger side
larger side smaller side
The smaller side of the symbol faces the smaller number and the larger faces the larger number.

EXAMPLE 2.2

Translate from algebra to words:

 Solution                                      



20 is less than or equal to 35



11 is not equal to 15 minus 3



9 is greater than 10 divided by 2



plus 2 is less than 10

  TRY IT 2.3 Translate from algebra to words.

                                                   

  TRY IT 2.4 Translate from algebra to words.

                                                   
100 2 · The Language of Algebra

EXAMPLE 2.3

The information in Figure 2.2 compares the fuel economy in miles-per-gallon (mpg) of several cars. Write the appropriate

symbol       in each expression to compare the fuel economy of the cars.

                          Figure 2.2 (credit: modification of work by Bernard Goldbach, Wikimedia Commons)

 MPG of Prius_____ MPG of Mini Cooper  MPG of Versa_____ MPG of Fit
 MPG of Mini Cooper_____ MPG of Fit  MPG of Corolla_____ MPG of Versa
 MPG of Corolla_____ MPG of Prius

     Solution

 

                                              MPG of Prius____MPG of Mini Cooper

Find the values in the chart.    48____27

Compare.                         48 > 27

                                 MPG of Prius > MPG of Mini Cooper



                                            MPG of Versa____MPG of Fit

Find the values in the chart.    26____27

Compare.                         26 < 27

                                 MPG of Versa < MPG of Fit



                                            MPG of Mini Cooper____MPG of Fit

Find the values in the chart.    27____27

Compare.                         27 = 27

                                 MPG of Mini Cooper = MPG of Fit

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 101



                                            MPG of Corolla____MPG of Versa

Find the values in the chart.  28____26

Compare.                       28 > 26

                               MPG of Corolla > MPG of Versa



                                            MPG of Corolla____MPG of Prius

Find the values in the chart.  28____48

Compare.                       28 < 48

                               MPG of Corolla < MPG of Prius

       TRY IT 2.5 Use Figure 2.2 to fill in the appropriate

                    MPG of Prius_____MPG of Versa  MPG of Mini Cooper_____ MPG of Corolla

       TRY IT 2.6 Use Figure 2.2 to fill in the appropriate

                    MPG of Fit_____ MPG of Prius  MPG of Corolla _____ MPG of Fit

Grouping symbols in algebra are much like the commas, colons, and other punctuation marks in written language. They
indicate which expressions are to be kept together and separate from other expressions. Table 2.3 lists three of the most
commonly used grouping symbols in algebra.

                                                                Common Grouping Symbols

                                                                 parentheses

                                                                 brackets

                                                                 braces

                                                              Table 2.3

Here are some examples of expressions that include grouping symbols. We will simplify expressions like these later in
this section.

Identify Expressions and Equations

What is the difference in English between a phrase and a sentence? A phrase expresses a single thought that is
incomplete by itself, but a sentence makes a complete statement. "Running very fast" is a phrase, but "The football
player was running very fast" is a sentence. A sentence has a subject and a verb.
In algebra, we have expressions and equations. An expression is like a phrase. Here are some examples of expressions
102 2 · The Language of Algebra

and how they relate to word phrases:                     Words                   Phrase
                                           Expression  minus one   the sum of three and five
                                                       divided by  the difference of and one
                                                                   the product of six and seven
                                                                   the quotient of and

Notice that the phrases do not form a complete sentence because the phrase does not have a verb. An equation is two
expressions linked with an equal sign. When you read the words the symbols represent in an equation, you have a
complete sentence in English. The equal sign gives the verb. Here are some examples of equations:

                                 Equation                          Sentence

                                                       The sum of three and five is equal to eight.

                                                       minus one equals fourteen.

                                                       The product of six and seven is equal to forty-two.

                                                       is equal to fifty-three.

                                                       plus nine is equal to two minus three.

Expressions and Equations

An expression is a number, a variable, or a combination of numbers and variables and operation symbols.
An equation is made up of two expressions connected by an equal sign.

EXAMPLE 2.4

Determine if each is an expression or an equation:

 Solution                                              

             This is an equation--two expressions are connected with an equal sign.

             This is an expression--no equal sign.

             This is an expression--no equal sign.

             This is an equation--two expressions are connected with an equal sign.

  TRY IT 2.7 Determine if each is an expression or an equation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 103

                                       

TRY IT 2.8            Determine if each is an expression or an equation:

Simplify Expressions with Exponents

To simplify a numerical expression means to do all the math possible. For example, to simplify  we'd first multiply

to get and then add the to get A good habit to develop is to work down the page, writing each step of the

process below the previous step. The example just described would look like this:

Suppose we have the expression                   We could write this more compactly using exponential

notation. Exponential notation is used in algebra to represent a quantity multiplied by itself several times. We write

as and                                 as In expressions such as the is called the base and the is called

the exponent. The exponent tells us how many factors of the base we have to multiply.

We say is in exponential notation and    is in expanded notation.

Exponential Notation

For any expression       is a factor multiplied by itself times if is a positive integer.

The expression is read to the power.

For powers of       and  we have special names.

Table 2.4 lists some examples of expressions written in exponential notation.

                         Exponential Notation    In Words

                                                 to the second power, or squared

                                                 to the third power, or cubed

                                                 to the fourth power

                                                 to the fifth power

                         Table 2.4
104 2 · The Language of Algebra

EXAMPLE 2.5

Write each expression in exponential form:

 Solution                                               

 The base 16 is a factor 7 times.

 The base 9 is a factor 5 times.

 The base is a factor 4 times.

 The base is a factor 8 times.

TRY IT 2.9 Write each expression in exponential form:

TRY IT 2.10 Write each expression in exponential form:

EXAMPLE 2.6

Write each exponential expression in expanded form:

                                            means
                                            means
     Solution

 The base is and the exponent is so
 The base is and the exponent is so

TRY IT 2.11 Write each exponential expression in expanded form:

                                 

TRY IT 2.12 Write each exponential expression in expanded form:

                                   

To simplify an exponential expression without using a calculator, we write it in expanded form and then multiply the
factors.

EXAMPLE 2.7

Simplify:
     Solution

Expand the expression.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 105

Multiply left to right.

Multiply.

TRY IT 2.13 Simplify:

                           

TRY IT 2.14 Simplify:

                           

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

We've introduced most of the symbols and notation used in algebra, but now we need to clarify the order of operations.
Otherwise, expressions may have different meanings, and they may result in different values.

For example, consider the expression:

Imagine the confusion that could result if every problem had several different correct answers. The same expression
should give the same result. So mathematicians established some guidelines called the order of operations, which
outlines the order in which parts of an expression must be simplified.

  Order of Operations

  When simplifying mathematical expressions perform the operations in the following order:
  1. Parentheses and other Grouping Symbols

    · Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping symbols, working on the innermost
        parentheses first.

  2. Exponents
    · Simplify all expressions with exponents.

  3. Multiplication and Division
    · Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

  4. Addition and Subtraction
    · Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These operations have equal priority.

Students often ask, "How will I remember the order?" Here is a way to help you remember: Take the first letter of each
key word and substitute the silly phrase. Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally.
106 2 · The Language of Algebra

                                               Order of Operations

                                 Please        Parentheses

                                 Excuse        Exponents

                                 My Dear Multiplication and Division

                                 Aunt Sally Addition and Subtraction

It's good that `My Dear' goes together, as this reminds us that multiplication and division have equal priority. We do not
always do multiplication before division or always do division before multiplication. We do them in order from left to
right.
Similarly, `Aunt Sally' goes together and so reminds us that addition and subtraction also have equal priority and we do
them in order from left to right.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Game of 24 will give you practice using the order of operations.

  EXAMPLE 2.8
Simplify the expressions:

 Solution 
 

Are there any parentheses? No.
Are there any exponents? No.
Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply first.
Add.



Are there any parentheses? Yes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 107

Simplify inside the parentheses.
Are there any exponents? No.
Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply.

TRY IT 2.15  Simplify the expressions:
TRY IT 2.16
               

             Simplify the expressions:

               

EXAMPLE 2.9

Simplify:

 Solution 
 

Are there any parentheses? No.
Are there any exponents? No.
Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply and divide from left to right. Divide.
Multiply.



Are there any parentheses? No.
Are there any exponents? No.
Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply and divide from left to right.
108 2 · The Language of Algebra

         Multiply.
         Divide.

              TRY IT 2.17 Simplify:

              TRY IT 2.18 Simplify:

         EXAMPLE 2.10
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Parentheses? Yes, subtract first.
         Exponents? No.
         Multiplication or division? Yes.
         Divide first because we multiply and divide left to right.
         Any other multiplication or division? Yes.
         Multiply.
         Any other multiplication or division? No.
         Any addition or subtraction? Yes.

              TRY IT 2.19 Simplify:

              TRY IT 2.20 Simplify:

       When there are multiple grouping symbols, we simplify the innermost parentheses first and work outward.
         EXAMPLE 2.11

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 109

  Solution

Are there any parentheses (or other grouping symbol)? Yes.
Focus on the parentheses that are inside the brackets.
Subtract.
Continue inside the brackets and multiply.
Continue inside the brackets and subtract.
The expression inside the brackets requires no further simplification.
Are there any exponents? Yes.
Simplify exponents.
Is there any multiplication or division? Yes.
Multiply.
Is there any addition or subtraction? Yes.
Add.
Add.

       TRY IT 2.21 Simplify:

       TRY IT 2.22 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 2.12
Simplify:

     Solution

  If an expression has several exponents, they may be simplified in the same step.
110 2 · The Language of Algebra

         Simplify exponents.
         Divide.
         Add.
         Subtract.

     TRY IT 2.23 Simplify:

     TRY IT 2.24 Simplify:

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Order of Operations (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24orderoperate)
     Order of Operations - The Basics (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24orderbasic)
     Ex: Evaluate an Expression Using the Order of Operations (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Evalexpress)
     Example 3: Evaluate an Expression Using The Order of Operations (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24evalexpress3)

        SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Variables and Algebraic Symbols

In the following exercises, translate from algebraic notation to words.

1.                               2.                                      3.

4.                               5.                                      6.

7.                               8.                                      9.

10.                              11.                                     12.

13.                              14.                                     15.

16.                              17.                                     18.

19.                              20.                                     21.

22.

Identify Expressions and Equations

In the following exercises, determine if each is an expression or an equation.

23.                              24.                                     25.

26.                              27.                                     28.

29.                              30.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             2.1 · Use the Language of Algebra 111

Simplify Expressions with Exponents

In the following exercises, write in exponential form.

31.                                    32.              33.

34.

In the following exercises, write in expanded form.

35.                                    36.              37.

38.

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

In the following exercises, simplify.

39.                                    40.              41.

                                            

42.                                    43.              44.

45.                                    46.              47.

48.                                    49.              50.

51.                                    52.              53.

54.                                    55.              56.

57.                                    58.              59.

60.                                    61.              62.

63.                                    64.
112 2 · The Language of Algebra

Everyday Math

65. Basketball In the 2014 NBA playoffs, the San       66. Elevation In Colorado there are more than
      Antonio Spurs beat the Miami Heat. The table           mountains with an elevation of over
      below shows the heights of the starters on each        The table shows the ten tallest. Use this table to
      team. Use this table to fill in the appropriate        fill in the appropriate inequality symbol.
      symbol

                                                             Mountain    Elevation
                                                       Mt. Elbert
   Spurs       Height               Heat    Height

Tim                              Rashard               Mt. Massive
Duncan                           Lewis

Boris Diaw                       LeBron                Mt. Harvard
                                 James                 Blanca Peak
Kawhi                                                  La Plata Peak
Leonard                          Chris                 Uncompahgre Peak
                                 Bosh                  Crestone Peak
Tony                                                   Mt. Lincoln
Parker                           Dwyane
                                 Wade
Danny
Green                            Ray Allen

 Height of Tim Duncan____Height of Rashard               Grays Peak

Lewis                                                    Mt. Antero

 Height of Boris Diaw____Height of LeBron               Elevation of La Plata Peak____Elevation of Mt.

James                                                  Antero

 Height of Kawhi Leonard____Height of Chris             Elevation of Blanca Peak____Elevation of Mt.

Bosh                                                   Elbert

 Height of Tony Parker____Height of Dwyane              Elevation of Gray's Peak____Elevation of Mt.

Wade                                                   Lincoln

 Height of Danny Green____Height of Ray Allen           Elevation of Mt. Massive____Elevation of

                                                       Crestone Peak

                                                        Elevation of Mt. Harvard____Elevation of

                                                       Uncompahgre Peak

Writing Exercises                                      68. Why is it important to use the order of operations
                                                             to simplify an expression?
67. Explain the difference between an expression and
      an equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                     2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 113

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

2.2 Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Evaluate algebraic expressions
           Identify terms, coefficients, and like terms
           Simplify expressions by combining like terms
           Translate word phrases to algebraic expressions

BE PREPARED 2.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                               Is  an expression or an equation?

                               If you missed this problem, review Example 2.4.

BE PREPARED 2.5                Simplify
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 2.7.

BE PREPARED 2.6                Simplify
                               If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.

Evaluate Algebraic Expressions

In the last section, we simplified expressions using the order of operations. In this section, we'll evaluate
expressions--again following the order of operations.

To evaluate an algebraic expression means to find the value of the expression when the variable is replaced by a given
number. To evaluate an expression, we substitute the given number for the variable in the expression and then simplify
the expression using the order of operations.

EXAMPLE 2.13

Evaluate  when

          
114 2 · The Language of Algebra

           Solution

    To evaluate, substitute for in the expression, and then simplify.

Substitute.
Add.

When         the expression           has a value of
                                 for in the expression, and then simplify.
 To evaluate, substitute

Substitute.
Add.

When         the expression      has a value of

Notice that we got different results for parts  and  even though we started with the same expression. This is

because the values used for were different. When we evaluate an expression, the value varies depending on the value
used for the variable.

TRY IT 2.25 Evaluate:

                                  

TRY IT 2.26 Evaluate:

                                  

EXAMPLE 2.14

Evaluate

 Solution                         means times

Remember means times so

 To evaluate the expression when    we substitute for  and then simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 115

  Multiply.                           we substitute for and then simplify.
  Subtract.

 To evaluate the expression when

Multiply.
Subtract.

Notice that in part  that we wrote    and in part  we wrote  Both the dot and the parentheses tell us to

multiply.

TRY IT 2.27 Evaluate:

                                    

TRY IT 2.28 Evaluate:

                                    

EXAMPLE 2.15

Evaluate when      and then simplify the expression.

     Solution
We substitute for

Use the definition of exponent.
Multiply.

When       the expression has a value of

TRY IT 2.29 Evaluate:

TRY IT 2.30 Evaluate:
116 2 · The Language of Algebra

        EXAMPLE 2.16
           Solution

      In this expression, the variable is an exponent.

Use the definition of exponent.
Multiply.

When  the expression has a value of

TRY IT 2.31 Evaluate:

TRY IT 2.32 Evaluate:

  EXAMPLE 2.17

     Solution
This expression contains two variables, so we must make two substitutions.

Multiply.
Add and subtract left to right.

When  and  the expression                               has a value of

TRY IT 2.33 Evaluate:

TRY IT 2.34 Evaluate:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                            2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 117

EXAMPLE 2.18

Solution

We need to be careful when an expression has a variable with an exponent. In this expression,  means                      and is

different from the expression  which means

  Simplify .
  Multiply.
  Add.

       TRY IT 2.35 Evaluate:

       TRY IT 2.36 Evaluate:

Identify Terms, Coefficients, and Like Terms

Algebraic expressions are made up of terms. A term is a constant or the product of a constant and one or more
variables. Some examples of terms are
The constant that multiplies the variable(s) in a term is called the coefficient. We can think of the coefficient as the
number in front of the variable. The coefficient of the term is When we write the coefficient is since
Table 2.5 gives the coefficients for each of the terms in the left column.

                                                                       Term Coefficient

                                                                     Table 2.5

An algebraic expression may consist of one or more terms added or subtracted. In this chapter, we will only work with
terms that are added together. Table 2.6 gives some examples of algebraic expressions with various numbers of terms.
Notice that we include the operation before a term with it.
118 2 · The Language of Algebra

                                         Expression                      Terms

                                      Table 2.6

EXAMPLE 2.19

Identify each term in the expression             Then identify the coefficient of each term.

Solution

The expression has four terms. They are          and

The coefficient of is

The coefficient of     is

Remember that if no number is written before a variable, the coefficient is So the coefficient of is

The coefficient of a constant is the constant, so the coefficient of is

TRY IT 2.37 Identify all terms in the given expression, and their coefficients:

TRY IT 2.38 Identify all terms in the given expression, and their coefficients:

Some terms share common traits. Look at the following terms. Which ones seem to have traits in common?

Which of these terms are like terms?
  · The terms and are both constant terms.
  · The terms and are both terms with
  · The terms and both have

Terms are called like terms if they have the same variables and exponents. All constant terms are also like terms. So
among the terms

Like Terms
Terms that are either constants or have the same variables with the same exponents are like terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 119

EXAMPLE 2.20

Identify the like terms:

 Solution                                                       and constants.


Look at the variables and exponents. The expression contains

The terms and are like terms because they both have

The terms and are like terms because they both have

The terms and are like terms because they are both constants.

The term does not have any like terms in this list since no other terms have the variable raised to the power of



Look at the variables and exponents. The expression contains the terms

The terms and are like terms because they both have

The terms                 are like terms because they all have

The term has no like terms in the given expression because no other terms contain the two variables

TRY IT 2.39 Identify the like terms in the list or the expression:

TRY IT 2.40 Identify the like terms in the list or the expression:

Simplify Expressions by Combining Like Terms                                    would simplify to? If you thought

We can simplify an expression by combining the like terms. What do you think
     you would be right!

We can see why this works by writing both terms as addition problems.

Add the coefficients and keep the same variable. It doesn't matter what is. If you have of something and add more
of the same thing, the result is of them. For example, oranges plus oranges is oranges. We will discuss the
mathematical properties behind this later.

The expression            has only two terms. When an expression contains more terms, it may be helpful to rearrange the

terms so that like terms are together. The Commutative Property of Addition says that we can change the order of

addends without changing the sum. So we could rearrange the following expression before combining like terms.

Now it is easier to see the like terms to be combined.
120 2 · The Language of Algebra
                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Combine like terms.
         Step 1. Identify like terms.
         Step 2. Rearrange the expression so like terms are together.
         Step 3. Add the coefficients of the like terms.

         EXAMPLE 2.21
       Simplify the expression:

            Solution

         Identify the like terms.
         Rearrange the expression, so the like terms are together.
         Add the coefficients of the like terms.
         The original expression is simplified to...

              TRY IT 2.41 Simplify:

              TRY IT 2.42 Simplify:

       When any of the terms have negative coefficients, the procedure is the same, except that you have to subtract instead of
       adding to combine like terms.

         EXAMPLE 2.22
       Simplify the expression:

            Solution

         Identify the like terms.
         Rearrange the expression so like terms are together.
         Add the coefficients of the like terms.

        Access for free at openstax.org
These are not like terms and cannot be combined. So                                   2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 121
       TRY IT 2.43 Simplify:
                                                             is in simplest form.

TRY IT 2.44 Simplify:

Translate Words to Algebraic Expressions

In the previous section, we listed many operation symbols that are used in algebra, and then we translated expressions
and equations into word phrases and sentences. Now we'll reverse the process and translate word phrases into algebraic
expressions. The symbols and variables we've talked about will help us do that. They are summarized in Table 2.7.

Operation                                            Phrase  Expression

Addition                 plus
                       the sum of and

                         increased by
                         more than
                       the total of and
                         added to

Subtraction              minus
                       the difference of and

                         subtracted from
                         decreased by
                         less than

Multiplication           times                               ,, ,
                       the product of and

Division                 divided by                          , ,,
                       the quotient of and
                       the ratio of and

                         divided into

Table 2.7

Look closely at these phrases using the four operations:
  · the sum of and
  · the difference of and
  · the product of and
  · the quotient of and

Each phrase tells you to operate on two numbers. Look for the words of and and to find the numbers.

  EXAMPLE 2.23

Translate each word phrase into an algebraic expression:

 the difference of and  the quotient of and
122 2 · The Language of Algebra

            Solution

     The key word is difference, which tells us the operation is subtraction. Look for the words of and and to find the

       numbers to subtract.

 The key word is quotient, which tells us the operation is division.

This can also be written as

TRY IT 2.45 Translate the given word phrase into an algebraic expression:

                   the difference of and                   the quotient of and

TRY IT 2.46 Translate the given word phrase into an algebraic expression:

                   the sum of and          the product of and

How old will you be in eight years? What age is eight more years than your age now? Did you add to your present age?
Eight more than means eight added to your present age.

How old were you seven years ago? This is seven years less than your age now. You subtract from your present age.
Seven less than means seven subtracted from your present age.

EXAMPLE 2.24

Translate each word phrase into an algebraic expression:

 Eight more than   Seven less than

     Solution

 The key words are more than. They tell us the operation is addition. More than means "added to".

 The key words are less than. They tell us the operation is subtraction. Less than means "subtracted from".

TRY IT 2.47       Translate each word phrase into an algebraic expression:
TRY IT 2.48
                   Eleven more than  Fourteen less than

                  Translate each word phrase into an algebraic expression:

                   more than  less than

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 123

EXAMPLE 2.25

Translate each word phrase into an algebraic expression:

 five times the sum of and           the sum of five times and

     Solution

 There are two operation words: times tells us to multiply and sum tells us to add. Because we are multiplying

times the sum, we need parentheses around the sum of and

five times the sum of and

 To take a sum, we look for the words of and and to see what is being added. Here we are taking the sum of five

times and
the sum of five times and

Notice how the use of parentheses changes the result. In part  , we add first and in part  , we multiply first.

TRY IT 2.49 Translate the word phrase into an algebraic expression:

               four times the sum of and  the sum of four times and

TRY IT 2.50 Translate the word phrase into an algebraic expression:

               the difference of two times                  two times the difference of

Later in this course, we'll apply our skills in algebra to solving equations. We'll usually start by translating a word phrase
to an algebraic expression. We'll need to be clear about what the expression will represent. We'll see how to do this in the
next two examples.

EXAMPLE 2.26

The height of a rectangular window is inches less than the width. Let  represent the width of the window. Write an
expression for the height of the window.

Solution

Write a phrase about the height.    less than the width

Substitute for the width.           less than

Rewrite 'less than' as 'subtracted from'. subtracted from

Translate the phrase into algebra.

TRY IT 2.51   The length of a rectangle is inches less than the width. Let represent the width of the
              rectangle. Write an expression for the length of the rectangle.

TRY IT 2.52   The width of a rectangle is meters greater than the length. Let represent the length of the
              rectangle. Write an expression for the width of the rectangle.
124 2 · The Language of Algebra

  EXAMPLE 2.27

Blanca has dimes and quarters in her purse. The number of dimes is less than times the number of quarters. Let
represent the number of quarters. Write an expression for the number of dimes.

     Solution
  Write a phrase about the number of dimes. two less than five times the number of quarters

Substitute for the number of quarters.        less than five times

Translate times .                             less than

Translate the phrase into algebra.

     TRY IT 2.53                 Geoffrey has dimes and quarters in his pocket. The number of dimes is seven less than six times
                                 the number of quarters. Let represent the number of quarters. Write an expression for the
                                 number of dimes.

     TRY IT 2.54                 Lauren has dimes and nickels in her purse. The number of dimes is eight more than four times
                                 the number of nickels. Let represent the number of nickels. Write an expression for the
                                 number of dimes.

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Algebraic Expression Vocabulary (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24AlgExpvocab)

        SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Evaluate Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, evaluate the expression for the given value.

69.                                 70.                                   71.

72.                                 73.                                   74.

75.                                 76.                                   77.

78.                                 79.                                   80.

81.                                 82.                                        83.

84.                                 85.                                   86.

87.                                 88.

Identify Terms, Coefficients, and Like Terms

In the following exercises, list the terms in the given expression.

89.                                 90.                                   91.

92.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               2.2 · Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions 125

In the following exercises, identify the coefficient of the given term.

93.                                 94.                                  95.

96.

In the following exercises, identify all sets of like terms.

97.                                 98.                                  99.

100.

Simplify Expressions by Combining Like Terms

In the following exercises, simplify the given expression by combining like terms.

101.                                102.                                 103.

104.                                105.                                 106.

107.                                108.                                 109.

110.                                111.                                 112.

113.                                114.                                 115.

116.

Translate English Phrases into Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate the given word phrase into an algebraic expression.

117. The sum of 8 and 12            118. The sum of 9 and 1              119. The difference of 14 and 9

120. 8 less than 19                 121. The product of 9 and 7          122. The product of 8 and 7

123. The quotient of 36 and 9       124. The quotient of 42 and 7        125. The difference of and

126. less than                      127. The product of and              128. The product of and

129. The sum of and                 130. The sum of and                  131. The quotient of and

132. The quotient of and            133. Eight times the difference      134. Seven times the
                                            of and nine                          difference of and one

135. Five times the sum of          136. Nine times five less than
        and                                 twice

In the following exercises, write an algebraic expression.

137. Adele bought a skirt and a     138. Eric has rock and classical     139. The number of girls in a
        blouse. The skirt cost              CDs in his car. The                  second-grade class is
        more than the blouse. Let           number of rock CDs is                less than the number of
          represent the cost of             more than the number of              boys. Let represent the
        the blouse. Write an                classical CDs. Let                   number of boys. Write an
        expression for the cost of          represent the number of              expression for the
        the skirt.                          classical CDs. Write an              number of girls.
                                            expression for the
                                            number of rock CDs.
126 2 · The Language of Algebra

140. Marcella has fewer male     141. Greg has nickels and           142. Jeannette has and
        cousins than female              pennies in his pocket. The          bills in her wallet. The
        cousins. Let represent           number of pennies is                number of fives is three
        the number of female             seven less than twice the           more than six times the
        cousins. Write an                number of nickels. Let              number of tens. Let
        expression for the               represent the number of             represent the number of
        number of boy cousins.           nickels. Write an                   tens. Write an expression
                                         expression for the                  for the number of fives.
                                         number of pennies.

Everyday Math

In the following exercises, use algebraic expressions to solve the problem.

143. Car insurance Justin's car insurance has a               144. Home insurance Pam and Armando's home

deductible per incident. This means that he pays              insurance has a  deductible per incident.

and his insurance company will pay all                        This means that they pay  and their

costs beyond                     If Justin files a claim for  insurance company will pay all costs beyond

            how much will he pay, and how much will                  If Pam and Armando file a claim for

his insurance company pay?                                           how much will they pay, and how much

                                                              will their insurance company pay?

Writing Exercises

145. Explain why "the sum of x and y" is the same as          146. Explain the difference between times the sum
        "the sum of y and x," but "the difference of x and            of and and "the sum of times and
        y" is not the same as "the difference of y and x."
        Try substituting two random numbers for and
          to help you explain.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

2.3 Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties
of Equality

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether a number is a solution of an equation
           Model the Subtraction Property of Equality
           Solve equations using the Subtraction Property of Equality
           Solve equations using the Addition Property of Equality
           Translate word phrases to algebraic equations
           Translate to an equation and solve

       BE PREPARED 2.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                           2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 127

BE PREPARED 2.8

                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.14.

BE PREPARED 2.9            Translate into algebra: the difference of and
                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.24.

When some people hear the word algebra, they think of solving equations. The applications of solving equations are
limitless and extend to all careers and fields. In this section, we will begin solving equations. We will start by solving basic
equations, and then as we proceed through the course we will build up our skills to cover many different forms of
equations.

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

Solving an equation is like discovering the answer to a puzzle. An algebraic equation states that two algebraic
expressions are equal. To solve an equation is to determine the values of the variable that make the equation a true
statement. Any number that makes the equation true is called a solution of the equation. It is the answer to the puzzle!

  Solution of an Equation

  A solution to an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when substituted into the equation.

  The process of finding the solution to an equation is called solving the equation.

To find the solution to an equation means to find the value of the variable that makes the equation true. Can you

recognize the solution of  If you said you're right! We say is a solution to the equation  because

when we substitute for the resulting statement is true.

Since       is a true statement, we know that is indeed a solution to the equation.

The symbol  asks whether the left side of the equation is equal to the right side. Once we know, we can change to an
equal sign  or not-equal sign

       ...

            HOW TO

Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

Step 1.  Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

         Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
           If it is true, the number is a solution.
           If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

EXAMPLE 2.28
128 2 · The Language of Algebra

            Solution

Multiply.
Subtract.

So     is not a solution to the equation

    TRY IT 2.55
    TRY IT 2.56

EXAMPLE 2.29

     Solution
Here, the variable appears on both sides of the equation. We must substitute for each

Multiply.
Subtract.

Since      results in a true equation, we know that is a solution to the equation

       TRY IT 2.57

       TRY IT 2.58

Model the Subtraction Property of Equality

We will use a model to help you understand how the process of solving an equation is like solving a puzzle. An envelope
represents the variable - since its contents are unknown - and each counter represents one.
Suppose a desk has an imaginary line dividing it in half. We place three counters and an envelope on the left side of
desk, and eight counters on the right side of the desk as in Figure 2.3. Both sides of the desk have the same number of
counters, but some counters are hidden in the envelope. Can you tell how many counters are in the envelope?

Access for free at openstax.org
                2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 129

                                                                              Figure 2.3

What steps are you taking in your mind to figure out how many counters are in the envelope? Perhaps you are thinking
"I need to remove the counters from the left side to get the envelope by itself. Those counters on the left match with

  on the right, so I can take them away from both sides. That leaves five counters on the right, so there must be
counters in the envelope." Figure 2.4 shows this process.

                Figure 2.4

What algebraic equation is modeled by this situation? Each side of the desk represents an expression and the center line

takes the place of the equal sign. We will call the contents of the envelope so the number of counters on the left side

of the desk is  On the right side of the desk are counters. We are told that  is equal to so our equation

is

                                                                              Figure 2.5
Let's write algebraically the steps we took to discover how many counters were in the envelope.

  First, we took away three from each side.
  Then we were left with five.
Now let's check our solution. We substitute for in the original equation and see if we get a true statement.

Our solution is correct. Five counters in the envelope plus three more equals eight.
          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity, "Subtraction Property of Equality" will help you develop a better
  understanding of how to solve equations by using the Subtraction Property of Equality.
130 2 · The Language of Algebra

         EXAMPLE 2.30
       Write an equation modeled by the envelopes and counters, and then solve the equation:

Solution

On the left, write for the contents of the envelope, add the counters, so we have             .

On the right, there are counters.

The two sides are equal.

Solve the equation by subtracting counters from each side.

We can see that there is one counter in the envelope. This can be shown algebraically as:
Substitute for in the equation to check.

Since  makes the statement true, we know that is indeed a solution.

TRY IT 2.59 Write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters, and then solve the equation:

       TRY IT 2.60 Write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters, and then solve the equation:

Solve Equations Using the Subtraction Property of Equality

Our puzzle has given us an idea of what we need to do to solve an equation. The goal is to isolate the variable by itself on

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 131

one side of the equations. In the previous examples, we used the Subtraction Property of Equality, which states that
when we subtract the same quantity from both sides of an equation, we still have equality.

  Subtraction Property of Equality
  For any numbers and if

  then

Think about twin brothers Andy and Bobby. They are years old. How old was Andy years ago? He was years less

than so his age was          or What about Bobby's age years ago? Of course, he was also. Their ages are

equal now, and subtracting the same quantity from both of them resulted in equal ages years ago.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Solve an equation using the Subtraction Property of Equality.
  Step 1. Use the Subtraction Property of Equality to isolate the variable.
  Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
  Step 3. Check the solution.

  EXAMPLE 2.31
Solve:

     Solution
We will use the Subtraction Property of Equality to isolate

Subtract 8 from both sides.
Simplify.

Since  makes                 a true statement, we know is the solution to the equation.

TRY IT 2.61 Solve:

TRY IT 2.62 Solve:
132 2 · The Language of Algebra

EXAMPLE 2.32

Solve:                                                                                                        we will

     Solution
To solve an equation, we must always isolate the variable--it doesn't matter which side it is on. To isolate
subtract from both sides.

Subtract 74 from both sides.
Simplify.
Substitute for to check.

Since  makes                     a true statement, we have found the solution to this equation.

TRY IT 2.63 Solve:

TRY IT 2.64 Solve:

Solve Equations Using the Addition Property of Equality

In all the equations we have solved so far, a number was added to the variable on one side of the equation. We used
subtraction to "undo" the addition in order to isolate the variable.

But suppose we have an equation with a number subtracted from the variable, such as              We want to isolate the
variable, so to "undo" the subtraction we will add the number to both sides.

We use the Addition Property of Equality, which says we can add the same number to both sides of the equation without
changing the equality. Notice how it mirrors the Subtraction Property of Equality.

Addition Property of Equality

For any numbers , and , if

then

Remember the                     twins, Andy and Bobby? In ten years, Andy's age will still equal Bobby's age. They will both be

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 133

We can add the same number to both sides and still keep the equality.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Solve an equation using the Addition Property of Equality.
  Step 1. Use the Addition Property of Equality to isolate the variable.
  Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
  Step 3. Check the solution.

  EXAMPLE 2.33
Solve:

     Solution
We will use the Addition Property of Equality to isolate the variable.

  Add 5 to both sides.
  Simplify.

TRY IT 2.65 Solve:
TRY IT 2.66 Solve:

EXAMPLE 2.34

Solve:         to each side to isolate the variable.

     Solution
We will add
134 2 · The Language of Algebra

         Add 16 to each side.
         Simplify.

The solution to                  is

TRY IT 2.67 Solve:

TRY IT 2.68 Solve:

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Equations

Remember, an equation has an equal sign between two algebraic expressions. So if we have a sentence that tells us that
two phrases are equal, we can translate it into an equation. We look for clue words that mean equals. Some words that
translate to the equal sign are:

  · is equal to
  · is the same as
  · is
  · gives
  · was
  · will be

It may be helpful to put a box around the equals word(s) in the sentence to help you focus separately on each phrase.
Then translate each phrase into an expression, and write them on each side of the equal sign.

We will practice translating word sentences into algebraic equations. Some of the sentences will be basic number facts
with no variables to solve for. Some sentences will translate into equations with variables. The focus right now is just to
translate the words into algebra.

  EXAMPLE 2.35

Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation: The sum of and is

     Solution
The word is tells us the equal sign goes between 9 and 15.

  Locate the "equals" word(s).

  Write the = sign.

Access for free at openstax.org
             2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 135

Translate the words to the left of the equals word into an algebraic expression.
Translate the words to the right of the equals word into an algebraic expression.

TRY IT 2.69  Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation:
             The sum of and gives

TRY IT 2.70  Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation:
             The sum of and is

  EXAMPLE 2.36
Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation: The product of and is

     Solution
The location of the word is tells us that the equal sign goes between 7 and 56.

  Locate the "equals" word(s).

  Write the = sign.

  Translate the words to the left of the equals word into an algebraic expression.

  Translate the words to the right of the equals word into an algebraic expression.

TRY IT 2.71  Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation:
             The product of and is

TRY IT 2.72  Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation:
             The product of and gives

  EXAMPLE 2.37
Translate the sentence into an algebraic equation: Twice the difference of and gives

     Solution
  Locate the "equals" word(s).

  Recognize the key words: twice; difference of .... and .... Twice means two times.

Translate.
136 2 · The Language of Algebra

    TRY IT 2.73                  Translate the given sentence into an algebraic equation:
                                 Twice the difference of and gives

    TRY IT 2.74                  Translate the given sentence into an algebraic equation:
                                 Twice the difference of and gives

Translate to an Equation and Solve

Now let's practice translating sentences into algebraic equations and then solving them. We will solve the equations by
using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality.

EXAMPLE 2.38

Translate and solve: Three more than  is equal to
     Solution

                                                   Three more than x is equal to 47.

Translate.

Subtract 3 from both sides of the equation.

Simplify.

We can check. Let                .

So         is the solution.

    TRY IT 2.75                  Translate and solve:
                                 Seven more than is equal to

    TRY IT 2.76                  Translate and solve:
                                 Eleven more than is equal to

  EXAMPLE 2.39                                                 The difference of y and 14 is 18.
Translate and solve: The difference of and is

     Solution

  Translate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              2.3 · Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 137

Add 14 to both sides.

Simplify.

We can check. Let            .

So         is the solution.

    TRY IT 2.77        Translate and solve:
                       The difference of and
                                              is equal to

    TRY IT 2.78        Translate and solve:
                       The difference of and
                                              is equal to

    MEDIA

    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Solving One Step Equations By Addition and Subtraction (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Solveonestep)

        SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each given value is a solution to the equation.

147.                            148.                       149.

                                                                   

150.                            151.                       152.

                                                                 

153.                            154.                       155.

                                                                 

156.                            157.                       158.

                                                                 
138 2 · The Language of Algebra

Model the Subtraction Property of Equality

In the following exercises, write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters and then solve using the
subtraction property of equality.

159.                                160.                             161.

162.

Solve Equations using the Subtraction Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the subtraction property of equality.

163.                             164.                          165.

166.                             167.                          168.

169.                             170.                          171.

172.                             173.                          174.

Solve Equations using the Addition Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the addition property of equality.

175.                             176.                          177.

178.                             179.                          180.

181.                             182.                          183.

184.                             185.                          186.

Translate Word Phrase to Algebraic Equations

In the following exercises, translate the given sentence into an algebraic equation.

187. The sum of and is           188. The sum of and is        189. The difference of and
        equal to                         equal to                          is equal to

190. The difference of and       191. The product of and is    192. The product of and is
            is equal to                  equal to                      equal to

193. The quotient of and         194. The quotient of and      195. Twice the difference of
        is equal to                      is equal to                   and gives

196. Twice the difference of     197. The sum of three times   198. The sum of eight times
        and gives                        and is                        and is

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the following exercises, translate the given sentence into an algebraic equation and then solve it.

199. Five more than is equal     200. Nine more than is equal  201. The sum of and is
        to                               to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 139

202. The sum of and is          203. The difference of and  204. The difference of and
                                        is equal to                 is equal to

205. less than is               206. less than is           207.              less than gives

208.     less than gives

Everyday Math

209. Insurance Vince's car insurance has a            210. Insurance Marta's homeowner's insurance

      deductible. Find the amount the insurance       policy has a            deductible. The insurance

      company will pay, for an  claim by              company paid             to repair damages caused

      solving the equation                            by a storm. Find the total cost of the storm

                                                      damage, by solving the equation

211. Sale purchase Arthur bought a suit that was on   212. Sale purchase Rita bought a sofa that was on

      sale for  off. He paid    for the suit. Find    sale for                She paid a total of

      the original price, of the suit by solving the  including sales tax. Find the amount of the sales

      equation                                        tax, by solving the equation

Writing Exercises

213. Is         a solution to the equation            214. Write the equation       in words. Then
                               How do you know?
                                                      make up a word problem for this equation.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

2.4 Find Multiples and Factors

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Identify multiples of numbers
           Use common divisibility tests
           Find all the factors of a number
           Identify prime and composite numbers

       BE PREPARED 2.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Which of the following numbers are counting numbers (natural numbers)?

                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 1.1.

      BE PREPARED 2.11        Find the sum of and
                              If you missed the problem, review Example 2.1.
140 2 · The Language of Algebra

Identify Multiples of Numbers

Annie is counting the shoes in her closet. The shoes are matched in pairs, so she doesn't have to count each one. She

counts by twos:                  She has shoes in her closet.

The numbers                      are called multiples of  Multiples of can be written as the product of a counting number

and The first six multiples of are given below.

A multiple of a number is the product of the number and a counting number. So a multiple of would be the product of
a counting number and Below are the first six multiples of

We can find the multiples of any number by continuing this process. Table 2.8 shows the multiples of through for the
first twelve counting numbers.

                      Counting Number

                  Table 2.8
Multiple of a Number
A number is a multiple of if it is the product of a counting number and

Recognizing the patterns for multiples of                 will be helpful to you as you continue in this course.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 141

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Multiples" will help you develop a better understanding of multiples.
Figure 2.6 shows the counting numbers from to Multiples of are highlighted. Do you notice a pattern?

                                         Figure 2.6 Multiples of between and

The last digit of each highlighted number in Figure 2.6 is either        This is true for the product of and any

counting number. So, to tell if any number is a multiple of look at the last digit. If it is  then the number is

a multiple of

EXAMPLE 2.40

Determine whether each of the following is a multiple of

 Solution 
 

  Is 489 a multiple of 2?

Is the last digit 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8? No.

                                489 is not a multiple of 2.



Is 3,714 a multiple of 2?
Is the last digit 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8? Yes.

                                              3,714 is a multiple of 2.

TRY IT 2.79 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                

TRY IT 2.80 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                

Now let's look at multiples of  Figure 2.7 highlights all of the multiples of between and     What do you notice
about the multiples of
142 2 · The Language of Algebra

                                                       Figure 2.7 Multiples of between and
All multiples of end with either or Just like we identify multiples of by looking at the last digit, we can identify
multiples of by looking at the last digit.

  EXAMPLE 2.41
Determine whether each of the following is a multiple of

 Solution 
 

  Is 579 a multiple of 5?
  Is the last digit 5 or 0? No.

                                      579 is not a multiple of 5.

 

  Is 880 a multiple of 5?
  Is the last digit 5 or 0? Yes.

                                      880 is a multiple of 5.

  TRY IT 2.81 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                   

  TRY IT 2.82 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                   

Figure 2.8 highlights the multiples of between and All multiples of  all end with a zero.

                                   Figure 2.8 Multiples of between and

EXAMPLE 2.42

Determine whether each of the following is a multiple of

  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 143

  Solution



Is 425 a multiple of 10?

Is the last digit zero?    No.

                           425 is not a multiple of 10.



Is 350 a multiple of 10?

Is the last digit zero?    Yes.

                           350 is a multiple of 10.

  TRY IT 2.83 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                 

  TRY IT 2.84 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                 

Figure 2.9 highlights multiples of The pattern for multiples of is not as obvious as the patterns for multiples of

                                                       Figure 2.9 Multiples of between and

Unlike the other patterns we've examined so far, this pattern does not involve the last digit. The pattern for multiples of
is based on the sum of the digits. If the sum of the digits of a number is a multiple of then the number itself is a
multiple of See Table 2.9.

                     Table 2.9

Consider the number       The digits are and and their sum is  Since is a multiple of we know that is
also a multiple of

EXAMPLE 2.43

Determine whether each of the given numbers is a multiple of

  
144 2 · The Language of Algebra

     Solution

 Is a multiple of

  Find the sum of the digits.

Is 15 a multiple of 3?                                                                         Yes.

If we're not sure, we could add its digits to find out. We can check it by dividing 645 by 3.

The quotient is 215.

 Is           a multiple of

Find the sum of the digits.

Is 16 a multiple of 3?                         No.

So 10,519 is not a multiple of 3 either..

We can check this by dividing by 10,519 by 3.

When we divide                   by we do not get a counting number, so  is not the product of a counting number and

It is not a multiple of

    TRY IT 2.85 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                   

    TRY IT 2.86 Determine whether each number is a multiple of

                                   

Look back at the charts where you highlighted the multiples of of and of Notice that the multiples of are the

numbers that are multiples of both and That is because                   Likewise, since       the multiples of are

the numbers that are multiples of both and

Use Common Divisibility Tests

Another way to say that is a multiple of is to say that is divisible by  In fact,              is so is

Notice in Example 2.43 that        is not a multiple When we divided     by we did not get a counting number,

so   is not divisible by

Divisibility

If a number is a multiple of then we say that is divisible by

Since multiplication and division are inverse operations, the patterns of multiples that we found can be used as
divisibility tests. Table 2.10 summarizes divisibility tests for some of the counting numbers between one and ten.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 145

                                                             Divisibility Tests
                          A number is divisible by

                                                                      if the last digit is
                                                                  if the sum of the digits is divisible by

                                                                             if the last digit is or
                                                                          if divisible by both and

                                                                                if the last digit is
                        Table 2.10

EXAMPLE 2.44

Determine whether       is divisible by

     Solution                                 In the far right column, we check the results of the divisibility tests by
Table 2.11 applies the divisibility tests to
seeing if the quotient is a whole number.

              Divisible by...?                 Test          Divisible?              Check

                                Is last digit          Yes.  yes

                                                                                yes
                                                     Yes.

                                Is last digit or Yes.        yes

                                Is last digit Yes.           yes

              Table 2.11

Thus,  is divisible by

TRY IT 2.87 Determine whether the given number is divisible by

TRY IT 2.88 Determine whether the given number is divisible by

EXAMPLE 2.45

Determine whether       is divisible by

     Solution                                 and tests the results by finding the quotients.
Table 2.12 applies the divisibility tests to
146 2 · The Language of Algebra

          Divisible by...?                      Test            Divisible?           Check

                                 Is last digit             No.  no

                                                                                yes
                                                      Yes.

                                 Is last digit is or Yes.       yes

                                 Is last digit No.              no

          Table 2.12

Thus,     is divisible by and but not or

TRY IT 2.89 Determine whether the given number is divisible

TRY IT 2.90 Determine whether the given number is divisible

Find All the Factors of a Number

There are often several ways to talk about the same idea. So far, we've seen that if is a multiple of we can say that

is divisible by We know that is the product of and so we can say is a multiple of and is a multiple of

We can also say is divisible by and by Another way to talk about this is to say that and are factors of When

we write  we can say that we have factored

Factors                                                         and both a and b are integers, then  are

In the expression , both a and b are called factors. If
factors of and is the product of

In algebra, it can be useful to determine all of the factors of a number. This is called factoring a number, and it can help
us solve many kinds of problems.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Multiplication and Factoring" will help you develop a better
  understanding of multiplication and factoring.

For example, suppose a choreographer is planning a dance for a ballet recital. There are dancers, and for a certain
scene, the choreographer wants to arrange the dancers in groups of equal sizes on stage.
In how many ways can the dancers be put into groups of equal size? Answering this question is the same as identifying
the factors of Table 2.13 summarizes the different ways that the choreographer can arrange the dancers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                          2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 147

              Number of Groups Dancers per Group Total Dancers

                                         Table 2.13

What patterns do you see in Table 2.13? Did you notice that the number of groups times the number of dancers per
group is always This makes sense, since there are always dancers.
You may notice another pattern if you look carefully at the first two columns. These two columns contain the exact same
set of numbers--but in reverse order. They are mirrors of one another, and in fact, both columns list all of the factors of

     which are:

We can find all the factors of any counting number by systematically dividing the number by each counting number,
starting with If the quotient is also a counting number, then the divisor and the quotient are factors of the number. We
can stop when the quotient becomes smaller than the divisor.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Find all the factors of a counting number.

  Step 1. Divide the number by each of the counting numbers, in order, until the quotient is smaller than the divisor.
                If the quotient is a counting number, the divisor and quotient are a pair of factors.
                If the quotient is not a counting number, the divisor is not a factor.

  Step 2. List all the factor pairs.
  Step 3. Write all the factors in order from smallest to largest.

EXAMPLE 2.46

Find all the factors of                               If the quotient is a whole number, the divisor and quotient

     Solution
Divide by each of the counting numbers starting with
are a pair of factors.
148 2 · The Language of Algebra

The next line would have a divisor of and a quotient of The quotient would be smaller than the divisor, so we stop. If
we continued, we would end up only listing the same factors again in reverse order. Listing all the factors from smallest
to greatest, we have

TRY IT 2.91 Find all the factors of the given number:

TRY IT 2.92 Find all the factors of the given number:

Identify Prime and Composite Numbers

Some numbers, like have many factors. Other numbers, such as have only two factors: and the number. A
number with only two factors is called a prime number. A number with more than two factors is called a composite
number. The number is neither prime nor composite. It has only one factor, itself.

  Prime Numbers and Composite Numbers

  A prime number is a counting number greater than whose only factors are and itself.
  A composite number is a counting number that is not prime.

Figure 2.10 lists the counting numbers from through  along with their factors. The highlighted numbers are prime,
since each has only two factors.

Figure 2.10 Factors of the counting numbers from through with prime numbers highlighted

The prime numbers less than are                                 There are many larger prime numbers too. In order to

determine whether a number is prime or composite, we need to see if the number has any factors other than and

itself. To do this, we can test each of the smaller prime numbers in order to see if it is a factor of the number. If none of

the prime numbers are factors, then that number is also prime.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 149

...

     HOW TO

Determine if a number is prime.

Step 1.  Test each of the primes, in order, to see if it is a factor of the number.
Step 2.  Start with and stop when the quotient is smaller than the divisor or when a prime factor is found.
Step 3.  If the number has a prime factor, then it is a composite number. If it has no prime factors, then the number
         is prime.

EXAMPLE 2.47

Identify each number as prime or composite:              , starting with  as shown. We will stop when the quotient is



     Solution

 Test each prime, in order, to see if it is a factor of

smaller than the divisor.

              Prime                                      Test             Factor of

                                 Last digit of is not                     No.

                                 and is not divisible by                  No.

                                 The last digit of is not or              No.

                                                                          No.

                                                                          No.

We can stop when we get to because the quotient                is less than the divisor.

We did not find any prime numbers that are factors of so we know is prime.

 Test each prime, in order, to see if it is a factor of

              Prime                                      Test             Factor of

                                 Last digit is not                        No.

                                 and is not divisible by                  No.

                                 the last digit is not or                 No.

                                                                          Yes.

Since is divisible by we know it is not a prime number. It is composite.

TRY IT 2.93 Identify the number as prime or composite:
150 2 · The Language of Algebra

              TRY IT 2.94 Identify the number as prime or composite:

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activities One Hundred Hungry Ants, Spunky Monkeys on Parade and A Remainder of One will
provide you with another view of the topics covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Divisibility Rules (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Divisrules)
    Factors (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Factors)
    Ex 1: Determine Factors of a Number (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Factors1)
    Ex 2: Determine Factors of a Number (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Factors2)
    Ex 3: Determine Factors of a Number (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Factors3)

        SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Identify Multiples of Numbers

In the following exercises, list all the multiples less than  for the given number.
                                                                               217.
215.                              216.                                         220.
                                                                               223.
218.                              219.

221.                              222.

224.

Use Common Divisibility Tests

In the following exercises, use the divisibility tests to determine whether each number is divisible by

225.                              226.                                 227.

228.                              229.                                 230.

231.                              232.                                 233.

234.                              235.                                 236.

237.                              238.                                 239.

240.                              241.                                 242.

Find All the Factors of a Number

In the following exercises, find all the factors of the given number.

243.                              244.                                 245.

246.                              247.                                 248.

249.                              250.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  2.4 · Find Multiples and Factors 151

Identify Prime and Composite Numbers

In the following exercises, determine if the given number is prime or composite.

251.               252.                                   253.

254.               255.                                   256.

257.               258.                                   259.

260.               261.                                   262.

Everyday Math

263. Banking Frank's grandmother gave him           at    264. Banking In March, Gina opened a Christmas
                                                                  club savings account at her bank. She deposited
      his high school graduation. Instead of spending                   to open the account. Every week, she added
                                                                        to the account. The table shows how much
      it, Frank opened a bank account. Every week, he             money Gina had put in the account by the end of
                                                                  each week. Complete the table by filling in the
      added to the account. The table shows how                   blanks.

      much money Frank had put in the account by the

      end of each week. Complete the table by filling in

      the blanks.

         Weeks     Total number of       Simplified        Weeks                  Total number of   Simplified
          after    dollars Frank put        Total           after                 dollars Gina put     Total
      graduation                                          opening                  in the account
                     in the account                          the
                                                          account

Writing Exercises

265. If a number is divisible by and by  why is it        266. What is the difference between prime numbers
        also divisible by                                         and composite numbers?
152 2 · The Language of Algebra

     Self Check

       After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

2.5 Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the prime factorization of a composite number
           Find the least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers

       BE PREPARED 2.12 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Is divisible by
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.44.

BE PREPARED 2.13                 Is prime or composite?
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.47.

                                 Write  in exponential notation.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.5.

Find the Prime Factorization of a Composite Number

In the previous section, we found the factors of a number. Prime numbers have only two factors, the number and the
prime number itself. Composite numbers have more than two factors, and every composite number can be written as a
unique product of primes. This is called the prime factorization of a number. When we write the prime factorization of a
number, we are rewriting the number as a product of primes. Finding the prime factorization of a composite number will
help you later in this course.

  Prime Factorization

  The prime factorization of a number is the product of prime numbers that equals the number.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Prime Numbers" will help you develop a better sense of prime numbers.

You may want to refer to the following list of prime numbers less than as you work through this section.

Prime Factorization Using the Factor Tree Method

One way to find the prime factorization of a number is to make a factor tree. We start by writing the number, and then
writing it as the product of two factors. We write the factors below the number and connect them to the number with a
small line segment--a "branch" of the factor tree.
If a factor is prime, we circle it (like a bud on a tree), and do not factor that "branch" any further. If a factor is not prime,

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         2.5 · Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 153

we repeat this process, writing it as the product of two factors and adding new branches to the tree.

We continue until all the branches end with a prime. When the factor tree is complete, the circled primes give us the
prime factorization.

For example, let's find the prime factorization of  We can start with any factor pair such as and      We write and
below with branches connecting them.

The factor is prime, so we circle it. The factor    is composite, so we need to find its factors. Let's use and We write
these factors on the tree under the

The factor is prime, so we circle it. The factor is composite, and it factors into  We write these factors under the
   Since is prime, we circle both

The prime factorization is the product of the circled primes. We generally write the prime factorization in order from
least to greatest.

In cases like this, where some of the prime factors are repeated, we can write prime factorization in exponential form.

Note that we could have started our factor tree with any factor pair of  We chose and but the same result would

have been the same if we had started with and       and

...

     HOW TO

Find the prime factorization of a composite number using the tree method.

Step 1.  Find any factor pair of the given number, and use these numbers to create two branches.
Step 2.  If a factor is prime, that branch is complete. Circle the prime.
Step 3.  If a factor is not prime, write it as the product of a factor pair and continue the process.
Step 4.  Write the composite number as the product of all the circled primes.

  EXAMPLE 2.48                   using the factor tree method.
Find the prime factorization of
154 2 · The Language of Algebra

            Solution
         We can start our tree using any factor pair of 48. Let's use 2 and 24.
         We circle the 2 because it is prime and so that branch is complete.

         Now we will factor 24. Let's use 4 and 6.

         Neither factor is prime, so we do not circle either.
         We factor the 4, using 2 and 2.
         We factor 6, using 2 and 3.
         We circle the 2s and the 3 since they are prime. Now all of the branches end
         in a prime.

         Write the product of the circled numbers.
         Write in exponential form.
      Check this on your own by multiplying all the factors together. The result should be

              TRY IT 2.95 Find the prime factorization using the factor tree method:
              TRY IT 2.96 Find the prime factorization using the factor tree method:
         EXAMPLE 2.49
      Find the prime factorization of 84 using the factor tree method.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    2.5 · Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 155

  Solution

We start with the factor pair 4 and 21.
Neither factor is prime so we factor them further.

Now the factors are all prime, so we circle them.

  Then we write 84 as the product of all circled primes.

Draw a factor tree of

       TRY IT 2.97 Find the prime factorization using the factor tree method:
       TRY IT 2.98 Find the prime factorization using the factor tree method:

Prime Factorization Using the Ladder Method

The ladder method is another way to find the prime factors of a composite number. It leads to the same result as the
factor tree method. Some people prefer the ladder method to the factor tree method, and vice versa.
To begin building the "ladder," divide the given number by its smallest prime factor. For example, to start the ladder for

     we divide by the smallest prime factor of

To add a "step" to the ladder, we continue dividing by the same prime until it no longer divides evenly.

Then we divide by the next prime; so we divide by

We continue dividing up the ladder in this way until the quotient is prime. Since the quotient,  is prime, we stop here.
Do you see why the ladder method is sometimes called stacked division?
The prime factorization is the product of all the primes on the sides and top of the ladder.

Notice that the result is the same as we obtained with the factor tree method.
156 2 · The Language of Algebra

...

     HOW TO

Find the prime factorization of a composite number using the ladder method.

Step 1.  Divide the number by the smallest prime.
Step 2.  Continue dividing by that prime until it no longer divides evenly.
Step 3.  Divide by the next prime until it no longer divides evenly.
Step 4.  Continue until the quotient is a prime.
Step 5.  Write the composite number as the product of all the primes on the sides and top of the ladder.

  EXAMPLE 2.50                   using the ladder method.
Find the prime factorization of

     Solution

Divide the number by the smallest prime, which is 2.

Continue dividing by 2 until it no longer divides evenly.

Divide by the next prime, 3.

The quotient, 5, is prime, so the ladder is complete. Write the prime factorization of 120.

Check this yourself by multiplying the factors. The result should be

TRY IT 2.99 Find the prime factorization using the ladder method:
TRY IT 2.100 Find the prime factorization using the ladder method:

  EXAMPLE 2.51                   using the ladder method.
Find the prime factorization of

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           2.5 · Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 157

  Solution
Divide the number by the smallest prime, 2.

Continue dividing by 2 until it no longer divides evenly.

The quotient, 3, is prime, so the ladder is complete. Write the prime factorization of 48.

       TRY IT 2.101 Find the prime factorization using the ladder method.

       TRY IT 2.102 Find the prime factorization using the ladder method.

Find the Least Common Multiple (LCM) of Two Numbers

One of the reasons we look at multiples and primes is to use these techniques to find the least common multiple of two
numbers. This will be useful when we add and subtract fractions with different denominators.

Listing Multiples Method

A common multiple of two numbers is a number that is a multiple of both numbers. Suppose we want to find common
multiples of and We can list the first several multiples of each number. Then we look for multiples that are
common to both lists--these are the common multiples.

We see that and appear in both lists. They are common multiples of and            We would find more common
multiples if we continued the list of multiples for each.

The smallest number that is a multiple of two numbers is called the least common multiple (LCM). So the least LCM of
    and is

...

     HOW TO

Find the least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers by listing multiples.

Step 1.  List the first several multiples of each number.
Step 2.  Look for multiples common to both lists. If there are no common multiples in the lists, write out additional
         multiples for each number.
Step 3.  Look for the smallest number that is common to both lists.
Step 4.  This number is the LCM.

EXAMPLE 2.52

Find the LCM of and by listing multiples.

     Solution                        and of  Identify the first common multiple.
List the first several multiples of
158 2 · The Language of Algebra

The smallest number to appear on both lists is so is the least common multiple of and
Notice that is on both lists, too. It is a common multiple, but it is not the least common multiple.

       TRY IT 2.103 Find the least common multiple (LCM) of the given numbers:
       TRY IT 2.104 Find the least common multiple (LCM) of the given numbers:

Prime Factors Method

Another way to find the least common multiple of two numbers is to use their prime factors. We'll use this method to
find the LCM of and
We start by finding the prime factorization of each number.

Then we write each number as a product of primes, matching primes vertically when possible.

Now we bring down the primes in each column. The LCM is the product of these factors.

Notice that the prime factors of and the prime factors of are included in the LCM. By matching up the common
primes, each common prime factor is used only once. This ensures that is the least common multiple.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the LCM using the prime factors method.

Step 1.  Find the prime factorization of each number.
Step 2.  Write each number as a product of primes, matching primes vertically when possible.
Step 3.  Bring down the primes in each column.
Step 4.  Multiply the factors to get the LCM.

  EXAMPLE 2.53
Find the LCM of and using the prime factors method.

     Solution
  Write each number as a product of primes.

  Write each number as a product of primes, matching primes vertically when
  possible.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           2.5 · Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 159

Bring down the primes in each column.

Multiply the factors to get the LCM.                                       The LCM of 15 and 18 is 90.

TRY IT 2.105 Find the LCM using the prime factors method.
TRY IT 2.106 Find the LCM using the prime factors method.

EXAMPLE 2.54

Find the LCM of and  using the prime factors method.
     Solution

Write the prime factorization of each number.

Write each number as a product of primes, matching primes vertically when
possible.

Bring down the primes in each column.

Multiply the factors to get the LCM.                                       The LCM of 50 and 100 is 100.

TRY IT 2.107 Find the LCM using the prime factors method:

TRY IT 2.108 Find the LCM using the prime factors method:

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Ex 1: Prime Factorization (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24PrimeFactor1)
Ex 2: Prime Factorization (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24PrimeFactor2)
Ex 3: Prime Factorization (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24PrimeFactor3)
Ex 1: Prime Factorization Using Stacked Division (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24stackeddivis)
Ex 2: Prime Factorization Using Stacked Division (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24stackeddivis2)
The Least Common Multiple (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24LCM)
Example: Determining the Least Common Multiple Using a List of Multiples (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24LCM2)
Example: Determining the Least Common Multiple Using Prime Factorization (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
24LCMFactor)
160 2 · The Language of Algebra

        SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Prime Factorization of a Composite Number

In the following exercises, find the prime factorization of each number using the factor tree method.

267.                             268.                    269.

270.                             271.                    272.

273.                             274.                    275.

276. 1560

In the following exercises, find the prime factorization of each number using the ladder method.

277.                             278.                    279.

280.                             281.                    282.

283.                             284.                    285.

286.

In the following exercises, find the prime factorization of each number using any method.

287.                             288.                    289.

290.                             291.                    292.

293.                             294.

Find the Least Common Multiple (LCM) of Two Numbers

In the following exercises, find the least common multiple (LCM) by listing multiples.

295.                             296.                    297.

298.                             299.                    300.

301.                             302.

In the following exercises, find the least common multiple (LCM) by using the prime factors method.

303.                             304.                    305.

306.                             307.                    308.

In the following exercises, find the least common multiple (LCM) using any method.

309.                             310.                    311.

312.

Everyday Math

313. Grocery shopping Hot dogs are sold in               314. Grocery shopping Paper plates are sold in
        packages of ten, but hot dog buns come in packs          packages of and party cups come in packs of
        of eight. What is the smallest number of hot                What is the smallest number of plates and
        dogs and buns that can be purchased if you               cups you can purchase if you want to have the
        want to have the same number of hot dogs and             same number of each? (Hint: it is the LCM!)
        buns? (Hint: it is the LCM!)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         2.5 · Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple 161

Writing Exercises

315. Do you prefer to find the prime factorization of a  316. Do you prefer to find the LCM by listing multiples
        composite number by using the factor tree                or by using the prime factors method? Why?
        method or the ladder method? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?
162 2 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

coefficient The constant that multiplies the variable(s) in a term is called the coefficient.
composite number A composite number is a counting number that is not prime.
divisibility If a number is a multiple of , then we say that is divisible by .
equation An equation is made up of two expressions connected by an equal sign.
evaluate To evaluate an algebraic expression means to find the value of the expression when the variable is replaced

    by a given number.
expressions An expression is a number, a variable, or a combination of numbers and variables and operation symbols.
least common multiple The smallest number that is a multiple of two numbers is called the least common multiple

    (LCM).
like terms Terms that are either constants or have the same variables with the same exponents are like terms.
multiple of a number A number is a multiple of if it is the product of a counting number and .
prime factorization The prime factorization of a number is the product of prime numbers that equals the number.
prime number A prime number is a counting number greater than 1 whose only factors are 1 and itself.
solution of an equation A solution to an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when

    substituted into the equation. The process of finding the solution to an equation is called solving the equation.
term A term is a constant or the product of a constant and one or more variables.

Key Concepts
2.1 Use the Language of Algebra

              Operation          Notation              Say:                The result is...

              Addition                                                     the sum of and

              Multiplication                                               The product of and

              Subtraction                                                  the difference of and

              Division                                 divided by The quotient of and

· Equality Symbol

  is read as is equal to

 The symbol is called the equal sign.

· Inequality

  is read is less than

 is to the left of on the number line

  is read is greater than

 is to the right of on the number line

                                   Algebraic Notation                 Say
                                 Table 2.14            is equal to
                                                       is not equal to
                                                       is less than

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            2 · Chapter Review 163

Algebraic Notation                                                  Say

                                                         is greater than

                                                         is less than or equal to

                                                         is greater than or equal to

Table 2.14

· Exponential Notation                                   times, if  is a positive integer.
    For any expression is a factor multiplied by itself
    means multiply factors of

       The expression of is read to the power.

Order of Operations When simplifying mathematical expressions perform the operations in the following order:

  · Parentheses and other Grouping Symbols: Simplify all expressions inside the parentheses or other grouping
      symbols, working on the innermost parentheses first.

  · Exponents: Simplify all expressions with exponents.
  · Multiplication and Division: Perform all multiplication and division in order from left to right. These operations have

      equal priority.
  · Addition and Subtraction: Perform all addition and subtraction in order from left to right. These operations have

      equal priority.

2.2 Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions

  · Combine like terms.
      Step 1. Identify like terms.
      Step 2. Rearrange the expression so like terms are together.
      Step 3. Add the coefficients of the like terms

2.3 Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of
Equality

  · Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.
      Step 1. Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Determine whether the resulting equation is true. If it is true, the number is a solution.

      If it is not true, the number is not a solution.
  · Subtraction Property of Equality

       For any numbers , , and ,

                                                                              if

                                                                            then

  · Solve an equation using the Subtraction Property of Equality.
      Step 1. Use the Subtraction Property of Equality to isolate the variable.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Check the solution.

  · Addition Property of Equality
       For any numbers , , and ,
164 2 · Chapter Review

                                                    if
                                                  then

  · Solve an equation using the Addition Property of Equality.
      Step 1. Use the Addition Property of Equality to isolate the variable.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Check the solution.

2.4 Find Multiples and Factors

                                                                         Divisibility Tests

                        A number is divisible by

                                 2                            if the last digit is 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8

                                 3                if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3

                                 4                if the last two digits are a number divisible by 4

                                 5                            if the last digit is 5 or 0

                                 6                            if divisible by both 2 and 3

                                 10                           if the last digit is 0

· Factors If            , then and are factors of , and is the product of and .

· Find all the factors of a counting number.

Step 1. Divide the number by each of the counting numbers, in order, until the quotient is smaller than the divisor.

a. If the quotient is a counting number, the divisor and quotient are a pair of factors.

b. If the quotient is not a counting number, the divisor is not a factor.

Step 2. List all the factor pairs.
Step 3. Write all the factors in order from smallest to largest.

· Determine if a number is prime.
    Step 1. Test each of the primes, in order, to see if it is a factor of the number.
    Step 2. Start with 2 and stop when the quotient is smaller than the divisor or when a prime factor is found.
    Step 3. If the number has a prime factor, then it is a composite number. If it has no prime factors, then the number
               is prime.

2.5 Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple

  · Find the prime factorization of a composite number using the tree method.
      Step 1. Find any factor pair of the given number, and use these numbers to create two branches.
      Step 2. If a factor is prime, that branch is complete. Circle the prime.
      Step 3. If a factor is not prime, write it as the product of a factor pair and continue the process.
      Step 4. Write the composite number as the product of all the circled primes.

· Find the prime factorization of a composite number using the ladder method.
    Step 1. Divide the number by the smallest prime.
    Step 2. Continue dividing by that prime until it no longer divides evenly.
    Step 3. Divide by the next prime until it no longer divides evenly.
    Step 4. Continue until the quotient is a prime.
    Step 5. Write the composite number as the product of all the primes on the sides and top of the ladder.

· Find the LCM by listing multiples.
    Step 1. List the first several multiples of each number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   2 · Exercises 165

      Step 2.  Look for multiples common to both lists. If there are no common multiples in the lists, write out additional
               multiples for each number.
      Step 3.  Look for the smallest number that is common to both lists.
      Step 4.  This number is the LCM.

  · Find the LCM using the prime factors method.
      Step 1. Find the prime factorization of each number.
      Step 2. Write each number as a product of primes, matching primes vertically when possible.
      Step 3. Bring down the primes in each column.
      Step 4. Multiply the factors to get the LCM.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Use the Language of Algebra

Use Variables and Algebraic Symbols

In the following exercises, translate from algebra to English.

317.                                   318.                     319.

320.                                   321.                     322.

323.                                   324.

Identify Expressions and Equations

In the following exercises, determine if each is an expression or equation.

325.                                   326.                     327.

328.

Simplify Expressions with Exponents

In the following exercises, write in exponential form.

329.                                   330.                     331.

332.

In the following exercises, write in expanded form.

333.                                   334.                     335.

336.

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

337.                                   338.                     339.

340.

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

In the following exercises, simplify.

341.                                   342.                     343.

344.                                   345.                     346.

347.                                   348.
166 2 · Exercises

Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions

Evaluate an Expression

In the following exercises, evaluate the following expressions.

349.                                  350.                                351.

352.

Identify Terms, Coefficients and Like Terms

In the following exercises, identify the terms in each expression.

353.                                  354.

In the following exercises, identify the coefficient of each term.

355.                                  356.

In the following exercises, identify the like terms.

357.                                  358.

Simplify Expressions by Combining Like Terms

In the following exercises, simplify the following expressions by combining like terms.

359.                                  360.                                361.

362.                                  363.                                364.

365.                                  366.

Translate English Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate the following phrases into algebraic expressions.

367. the difference of and            368. the sum of and twice           369. the product of and

370. the quotient of and              371. times the sum of and           372. less than the product
                                                                                  of and

373. Jack bought a sandwich           374. The number of poetry
        and a coffee. The cost of             books on Brianna's
        the sandwich was                      bookshelf is less than
        more than the cost of the             twice the number of
        coffee. Call the cost of the          novels. Call the number of
        coffee Write an                       novels Write an
        expression for the cost of            expression for the
        the sandwich.                         number of poetry books.

Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution to the equation.

375.                                  376.                                377.

                                                                              

378.                                  379.                                380.

                                                                              

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           2 · Exercises 167

Model the Subtraction Property of Equality

In the following exercises, write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters and then solve the equation using
the subtraction property of equality.

381.                                382.

Solve Equations using the Subtraction Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the subtraction property of equality.

383.                           384.                           385.

386.

Solve Equations using the Addition Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the addition property of equality.

387.                           388.                           389.

390.

Translate English Sentences to Algebraic Equations

In the following exercises, translate each English sentence into an algebraic equation.

391. The sum of and is         392. The difference of and     393. The product of and is
        equal to                       is equal to                    equal to

394. The quotient of and       395. Twice the difference of   396. The sum of five times
        is equal to                    and gives                      and is

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the following exercises, translate each English sentence into an algebraic equation and then solve it.

397. Eight more than is        398. less than is              399. The difference of and
        equal to                                                      is

400. The sum of and is

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

401.                           402.                           403.

404.                           405.                           406.

407.                           408.

Find Multiples and Factors

Identify Multiples of Numbers

In the following exercises, list all the multiples less than  for each of the following.
                                                                               411.
409.                           410.

412.
168 2 · Exercises

Use Common Divisibility Tests
In the following exercises, using the divisibility tests, determine whether each number is divisible by

413.                              414.                                    415.

416.

Find All the Factors of a Number

In the following exercises, find all the factors of each number.

417.                              418.                                    419.

420.

Identify Prime and Composite Numbers

In the following exercises, identify each number as prime or composite.

421.                              422.                                    423.

424.

Prime Factorization and the Least Common Multiple

Find the Prime Factorization of a Composite Number

In the following exercises, find the prime factorization of each number.

425.                              426.                                    427.

428.

Find the Least Common Multiple of Two Numbers

In the following exercises, find the least common multiple of each pair of numbers.

429.                              430.                                    431.

432.

Everyday Math

433. Describe how you have
        used two topics from The
        Language of Algebra
        chapter in your life
        outside of your math
        class during the past
        month.

Practice Test

In the following exercises, translate from an algebraic equation to English phrases.

434.                              435.

In the following exercises, identify each as an expression or equation.

436.                              437.                                    438.

439.  Write

        in exponential form.

     Write in expanded

        form and then simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           2 · Exercises 169

In the following exercises, simplify, using the order of operations.

440.                                 441.                             442.

443.                                 444.                             445.

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

446.                                 447.                             448.

449.                                 450. Simplify by combining like

                                           terms.

                                           
                                           

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression.

451. more than                       452. the quotient of and         453. three times the difference
                                                                              of

454. Caroline has fewer
        earrings on her left ear
        than on her right ear. Call
        the number of earrings
        on her right ear, Write
        an expression for the
        number of earrings on
        her left ear.

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

455.                                 456.

In the following exercises, translate each English sentence into an algebraic equation and then solve it.

457. less than is                    458. the sum of and is           459. List all the multiples of
                                                                              that are less than

460. Find all the factors of         461. Find the prime              462. Find the LCM (Least
                                             factorization of                 Common Multiple) of
                                                                              and
170 2 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            3 · Introduction to Integers 171

3  INTEGERS

Figure 3.1 The peak of Mount Everest. (credit: Gunther Hagleitner, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  3.1 Introduction to Integers
  3.2 Add Integers
  3.3 Subtract Integers
  3.4 Multiply and Divide Integers
  3.5 Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality

      Introduction to Integers

At over 29,000 feet, Mount Everest stands as the tallest peak on land. Located along the border of Nepal and China,
Mount Everest is also known for its extreme climate. Near the summit, temperatures never rise above freezing. Every
year, climbers from around the world brave the extreme conditions in an effort to scale the tremendous height. Only
some are successful. Describing the drastic change in elevation the climbers experience and the change in temperatures
requires using numbers that extend both above and below zero. In this chapter, we will describe these kinds of numbers
and operations using them.

3.1 Introduction to Integers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Locate positive and negative numbers on the number line
           Order positive and negative numbers
           Find opposites
           Simplify expressions with absolute value
           Translate word phrases to expressions with integers

   BE PREPARED 3.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    Plot  on a number line.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.1.

   BE PREPARED 3.2  Fill in the appropriate symbol:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 2.3.
172 3 · Integers

Locate Positive and Negative Numbers on the Number Line

Do you live in a place that has very cold winters? Have you ever experienced a temperature below zero? If so, you are

already familiar with negative numbers. A negative number is a number that is less than Very cold temperatures are

measured in degrees below zero and can be described by negative numbers. For example,      (read as "negative one

degree Fahrenheit") is           below A minus sign is shown before a number to indicate that it is negative. Figure 3.2

shows             which is       below

                            Figure 3.2 Temperatures below zero are described by negative numbers.

Temperatures are not the only negative numbers. A bank overdraft is another example of a negative number. If a person
writes a check for more than he has in his account, his balance will be negative.

Elevations can also be represented by negative numbers. The elevation at sea level is      Elevations above sea level

are positive and elevations below sea level are negative. The elevation of the Dead Sea, which borders Israel and Jordan,

is about          below sea level, so the elevation of the Dead Sea can be represented as          See Figure 3.3.

Figure 3.3 The surface of the Mediterranean Sea has an elevation of The diagram shows that nearby mountains
have higher (positive) elevations whereas the Dead Sea has a lower (negative) elevation.

Depths below the ocean surface are also described by negative numbers. A submarine, for example, might descend to a

depth of          Its position would then be  as labeled in Figure 3.4.

Figure 3.4 Depths below sea level are described by negative numbers. A submarine           below sea level is at

Both positive and negative numbers can be represented on a number line. Recall that the number line created in Add

Whole Numbers started at and showed the counting numbers increasing to the right as shown in Figure 3.5. The

counting numbers                 on the number line are all positive. We could write a plus sign, before a positive

number such as or but it is customary to omit the plus sign and write only the number. If there is no sign, the

number is assumed to be positive.

                                                                              Figure 3.5
Now we need to extend the number line to include negative numbers. We mark several units to the left of zero, keeping

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3.1 · Introduction to Integers 173

the intervals the same width as those on the positive side. We label the marks with negative numbers, starting with

at the first mark to the left of  at the next mark, and so on. See Figure 3.6.

Figure 3.6 On a number line, positive numbers are to the right of zero. Negative numbers are to the left of zero. What
about zero? Zero is neither positive nor negative.
The arrows at either end of the line indicate that the number line extends forever in each direction. There is no greatest
positive number and there is no smallest negative number.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Number Line-part 2" will help you develop a better understanding of
  integers.

  EXAMPLE 3.1

Plot the numbers on a number line:

 Solution 

Draw a number line. Mark in the center and label several units to the left and right.
 To plot start at and count three units to the right. Place a point as shown in Figure 3.7.

 To plot  start at                           Figure 3.7
                    and count three units to the left. Place a point as shown in Figure 3.8.

 To plot  start at                           Figure 3.8
                    and count two units to the left. Place a point as shown in Figure 3.9.

                                    Figure 3.9

TRY IT 3.1 Plot the numbers on a number line.

                                    

TRY IT 3.2 Plot the numbers on a number line.

                                    

Order Positive and Negative Numbers

We can use the number line to compare and order positive and negative numbers. Going from left to right, numbers
increase in value. Going from right to left, numbers decrease in value. See Figure 3.10.
174 3 · Integers

                                               Figure 3.10

Just as we did with positive numbers, we can use inequality symbols to show the ordering of positive and negative

numbers. Remember that we use the notation     (read is less than ) when is to the left of on the number line.

We write          (read is greater than ) when is to the right of on the number line. This is shown for the numbers

and in Figure 3.11.

          Figure 3.11 The number is to the left of on the number line. So is less than  and is greater than
The numbers lines to follow show a few more examples.


  is to the right of on the number line, so
  is to the left of on the number line, so


    is to the left of on the number line, so
  is to the right of on the number line, so


is to the right of     on the number line, so
is to the left of    on the number line, so

EXAMPLE 3.2

Order each of the following pairs of numbers using or

 Solution   

Begin by plotting the numbers on a number line as shown in Figure 3.12.

                                               Figure 3.12

 Compare 14 and 6.

14 is to the right of 6 on the number line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    3.1 · Introduction to Integers 175

 Compare -1 and 9.

-1 is to the left of 9 on the number line.

 Compare -1 and -4.

-1 is to the right of -4 on the number line.

 Compare 2 and -20.

2 is to the right of -20 on the number line.

TRY IT 3.3 Order each of the following pairs of numbers using or

                                                                  

TRY IT 3.4 Order each of the following pairs of numbers using or

                                                                  

Find Opposites

On the number line, the negative numbers are a mirror image of the positive numbers with zero in the middle. Because
the numbers and are the same distance from zero, they are called opposites. The opposite of is and the
opposite of is as shown in Figure 3.13(a). Similarly, and are opposites as shown in Figure 3.13(b).

                                                                             Figure 3.13
  Opposite
  The opposite of a number is the number that is the same distance from zero on the number line, but on the opposite
  side of zero.

  EXAMPLE 3.3
Find the opposite of each number:
176 3 · Integers

                                                                                           is the opposite of as

     Solution

 The number is the same distance from as but on the opposite side of So

shown in Figure 3.14.

                                                                           Figure 3.14

 The number is the same distance from as , but on the opposite side of So is the opposite of as

shown in Figure 3.15.

                                                Figure 3.15

TRY IT 3.5 Find the opposite of each number:

                                 

TRY IT 3.6 Find the opposite of each number:

                                 

Opposite Notation

Just as the same word in English can have different meanings, the same symbol in algebra can have different meanings.

The specific meaning becomes clear by looking at how it is used. You have seen the symbol  in three different ways.

                  Between two numbers, the symbol indicates the operation of subtraction.

                  We read        as 10 minus .

                  In front of a number, the symbol indicates a negative number.
                  We read as negative eight.

                  In front of a variable or a number, it indicates the opposite.
                  We read as the opposite of .

                  Here we have two signs. The sign in the parentheses indicates that the number is negative 2.

                  The sign outside the parentheses indicates the opposite. We read  as the opposite of

Opposite Notation

    means the opposite of the number
The notation is read the opposite of

  EXAMPLE 3.4
Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.1 · Introduction to Integers 177

  Solution
The opposite of is

       TRY IT 3.7 Simplify:

       TRY IT 3.8 Simplify:

Integers

The set of counting numbers, their opposites, and is the set of integers.
  Integers
  Integers are counting numbers, their opposites, and zero.

We must be very careful with the signs when evaluating the opposite of a variable.

EXAMPLE 3.5

Evaluate        when

 when

     Solution

 To evaluate when     , substitute for .

Simplify.             , substitute for .

 To evaluate when

Simplify.

TRY IT 3.9 Evaluate

                      
178 3 · Integers

  TRY IT 3.10 Evaluate:

                                         

Simplify Expressions with Absolute Value

We saw that numbers such as and are opposites because they are the same distance from on the number line.
They are both five units from The distance between and any number on the number line is called the absolute value
of that number. Because distance is never negative, the absolute value of any number is never negative.

The symbol for absolute value is two vertical lines on either side of a number. So the absolute value of is written as

and the absolute value of is written as  as shown in Figure 3.16.

                                                                           Figure 3.16
Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number is its distance from on the number line.
The absolute value of a number is written as

EXAMPLE 3.6

Simplify:

                         
Solution



3 is 3 units from zero.



-44 is 44 units from zero.



0 is already at zero.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                3.1 · Introduction to Integers 179

TRY IT 3.11 Simplify:

                          

TRY IT 3.12 Simplify:

                          

We treat absolute value bars just like we treat parentheses in the order of operations. We simplify the expression inside
first.

EXAMPLE 3.7

Evaluate:                     

 Solution 
  To find when

Take the absolute value.

 To find when

Simplify.
Take the absolute value.

 To find when

Take the absolute value.

 To find when
180 3 · Integers

  Take the absolute value.
Notice that the result is negative only when there is a negative sign outside the absolute value symbol.

         TRY IT 3.13 Evaluate:

                                                                         
                                                                        

         TRY IT 3.14                                                
                  

EXAMPLE 3.8

Fill in           for each of the following:

 Solution  

To compare two expressions, simplify each one first. Then compare.



Simplify.
Order.



Simplify.
Order.



Simplify.
Order.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            3.1 · Introduction to Integers 181



Simplify.
Order.

TRY IT 3.15 Fill in

                                                                            

TRY IT 3.16 Fill in                           for each of the following:

                                                                            

Absolute value bars act like grouping symbols. First simplify inside the absolute value bars as much as possible. Then
take the absolute value of the resulting number, and continue with any operations outside the absolute value symbols.

EXAMPLE 3.9

Simplify:

 Solution 

For each expression, follow the order of operations. Begin inside the absolute value symbols just as with parentheses.



                                                           |9-3|

Simplify inside the absolute value sign. |6|

Take the absolute value.                      6



                                       4|-2|
Take the absolute value. 42

Multiply.                 8

TRY IT 3.17 Simplify:

                                              

TRY IT 3.18 Simplify:

                                              
182 3 · Integers

  EXAMPLE 3.10

Simplify:
     Solution

For each expression, follow the order of operations. Begin inside the absolute value symbols just as with parentheses.

                                          |8+7|-|5+6|

Simplify inside each absolute value sign. |15|-|11|

Subtract.                                 4

       TRY IT 3.19 Simplify:

       TRY IT 3.20 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 3.11
Simplify:

     Solution
We use the order of operations. Remember to simplify grouping symbols first, so parentheses inside absolute value
symbols would be first.

Simplify in the parentheses first.
Multiply .
Subtract inside the absolute value sign.
Take the absolute value.
Subtract.

TRY IT 3.21 Simplify:

TRY IT 3.22 Simplify:

Translate Word Phrases into Expressions with Integers

Now we can translate word phrases into expressions with integers. Look for words that indicate a negative sign. For

example, the word negative in "negative twenty" indicates  So does the word opposite in "the opposite of

EXAMPLE 3.12

Translate each phrase into an expression with integers:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.1 · Introduction to Integers 183

 the opposite of positive fourteen       the opposite of             negative sixteen
 two minus negative seven                                        negative sixteen  two minus negative seven

     Solution

 the opposite of fourteen  the opposite of -11 

TRY IT 3.23 Translate each phrase into an expression with integers:

               the opposite of positive nine                the opposite of              negative twenty
               eleven minus negative four

TRY IT 3.24 Translate each phrase into an expression with integers:

               the opposite of negative nineteen  the opposite of twenty-two
               negative nine  negative eight minus negative five

As we saw at the start of this section, negative numbers are needed to describe many real-world situations. We'll look at
some more applications of negative numbers in the next example.

EXAMPLE 3.13

Translate into an expression with integers:

 The temperature is                           below zero.        The football team had a gain of
 The elevation of the Dead Sea is
                                               below sea level.   A checking account is overdrawn by
     Solution

Look for key phrases in each sentence. Then look for words that indicate negative signs. Don't forget to include units of

measurement described in the sentence.

                                                   The temperature is 12 degrees Fahrenheit below zero.

Below zero tells us that 12 is a negative number.

                                              The football team had a gain of 3 yards.
                                                yards
A gain tells us that 3 is a positive number.

                                                           The elevation of the Dead Sea is 1,302 feet below sea level.
                                                                      feet
Below sea level tells us that 1,302 is a negative number.

                                                   A checking account is overdrawn by $40.

Overdrawn tells us that 40 is a negative number.

TRY IT 3.25   Translate into an expression with integers:
              The football team had a gain of
184 3 · Integers

     TRY IT 3.26      Translate into an expression with integers:

                      The scuba diver was       below the surface of the water.

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Introduction to Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24introinteger)
     Simplifying the Opposites of Negative Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24neginteger)
     Comparing Absolute Value of Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24abvalue)
     Comparing Integers Using Inequalities (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24usinginequal)

        SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Locate Positive and Negative Numbers on the Number Line

For the following exercises, draw a number line and locate and label the given points on that number line.

1.                                     2.                          3.               

4.                

Order Positive and Negative Numbers on the Number Line

In the following exercises, order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

5.                                     6.                          7.               
                                                                                    

8. 
     
                    

Find Opposites

In the following exercises, find the opposite of each number.

9.                                     10.                         11.              

12.               

In the following exercises, simplify.

13.                                    14.                         15.

16.

In the following exercises, evaluate.

17.                                    18.                         19.

                                                                      
                                                                      

20.

   
   

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         3.1 · Introduction to Integers 185

Simplify Expressions with Absolute Value

In the following exercises, simplify each absolute value expression.

21.                                  22.                              23.       
                                                                              

24.       
     

In the following exercises, evaluate each absolute value expression.

25.                                  26.                              27. 
                                                                         

28. 
   

In the following exercises, fill in         to compare each expression.

29.                                  30.                              31. 
                                                                         

32. 

      

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

33.                                  34.                                 35.

36.                                  37.                                 38.

39.                                  40.                                 41.

42.

Translate Word Phrases into Expressions with Integers

Translate each phrase into an expression with integers. Do not simplify.

43.  the opposite of                 44.  the opposite of             45.  the opposite of
    the opposite of                      the opposite of                  the opposite of
    negative three                       negative nine                    negative twelve
    minus negative                       minus negative                   minus negative

46.  the opposite of                 47. a temperature of             48. a temperature of
    the opposite of                        below zero                                        below zero
    negative sixty
    minus                            50. an elevation of               51. a football play loss of
                                            below sea level
49. an elevation of
      below sea level

52. a football play gain of          53. a stock gain of                 54. a stock loss of

55. a golf score one above par 56. a golf score of below par
186 3 · Integers

Everyday Math

57. Elevation The highest elevation in the United    58. Extreme temperatures The highest recorded

States is Mount McKinley, Alaska, at                 temperature on Earth is             recorded in

above sea level. The lowest elevation is Death       the Sahara Desert in 1922. The lowest recorded

Valley, California, at  below sea level. Use         temperature is below                recorded in

integers to write the elevation of:                  Antarctica in 1983. Use integers to write the:

 Mount McKinley  Death Valley                         highest recorded temperature
                                                      lowest recorded temperature

59. State budgets In June, 2011, the state of        60. College enrollments Across the United States,

Pennsylvania estimated it would have a budget        community college enrollment grew by

surplus of              That same month, Texas       students from  to        In California,

estimated it would have a budget deficit of          community college enrollment declined by

                  Use integers to write the budget:  students from            to         Use integers

 surplus  deficit                                    to write the change in enrollment:

                                                      growth  decline

Writing Exercises

61. Give an example of a negative number from your   62. What are the three uses of the "-" sign in algebra?
      life experience.                                     Explain how they differ.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

3.2 Add Integers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Model addition of integers
           Simplify expressions with integers
           Evaluate variable expressions with integers
           Translate word phrases to algebraic expressions
           Add integers in applications

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  3.2 · Add Integers 187

BE PREPARED 3.3  Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                 Evaluate  when

                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.13.

                 Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.

                 Translate the sum of and negative into an algebraic expression.
                 If you missed this problem, review Table 2.7

Model Addition of Integers

Now that we have located positive and negative numbers on the number line, it is time to discuss arithmetic operations
with integers.

Most students are comfortable with the addition and subtraction facts for positive numbers. But doing addition or
subtraction with both positive and negative numbers may be more difficult. This difficulty relates to the way the brain
learns.

The brain learns best by working with objects in the real world and then generalizing to abstract concepts. Toddlers learn

quickly that if they have two cookies and their older brother steals one, they have only one left. This is a concrete

example of  Children learn their basic addition and subtraction facts from experiences in their everyday lives.

Eventually, they know the number facts without relying on cookies.

Addition and subtraction of negative numbers have fewer real world examples that are meaningful to us. Math teachers
have several different approaches, such as number lines, banking, temperatures, and so on, to make these concepts
real.

We will model addition and subtraction of negatives with two color counters. We let a blue counter represent a positive
and a red counter will represent a negative.

If we have one positive and one negative counter, the value of the pair is zero. They form a neutral pair. The value of this
neutral pair is zero as summarized in Figure 3.17.

               Figure 3.17 A blue counter represents A red counter represents Together they add to zero.
          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Addition of signed Numbers" will help you develop a better
  understanding of adding integers.
We will model four addition facts using the numbers

  EXAMPLE 3.14
Model:
188 3 · Integers                                          means the sum of and .

            Solution
         Interpret the expression.
         Model the first number. Start with 5 positives.

         Model the second number. Add 3 positives.

         Count the total number of counters.
         The sum of 5 and 3 is 8.

TRY IT 3.27 Model the expression.
TRY IT 3.28 Model the expression.

  EXAMPLE 3.15                                            means the sum of and .
Model:

     Solution
  Interpret the expression.
  Model the first number. Start with 5 negatives.

  Model the second number. Add 3 negatives.

  Count the total number of counters.
  The sum of -5 and -3 is -8.

       TRY IT 3.29 Model the expression.

       TRY IT 3.30 Model the expression.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.2 · Add Integers 189

Example 3.14 and Example 3.15 are very similar. The first example adds positives and positives--both positives. The

second example adds negatives and negatives--both negatives. In each case, we got a result of  positives

or negatives. When the signs are the same, the counters are all the same color.

Now let's see what happens when the signs are different.

EXAMPLE 3.16

Model:                                                    means the sum of and .
     Solution

  Interpret the expression.

Model the first number. Start with 5 negatives.

Model the second number. Add 3 positives.

Remove any neutral pairs.

  Count the result.
  The sum of -5 and 3 is -2.
Notice that there were more negatives than positives, so the result is negative.

       TRY IT 3.31 Model the expression, and then simplify:

       TRY IT 3.32 Model the expression, and then simplify:

  EXAMPLE 3.17                                            means the sum of and .
Model:

     Solution
  Interpret the expression.

  Model the first number. Start with 5 positives.
190 3 · Integers

Model the second number. Add 3 negatives.

Remove any neutral pairs.

Count the result.
The sum of 5 and -3 is 2.

    TRY IT 3.33 Model the expression, and then simplify:
    TRY IT 3.34 Model the expression:

EXAMPLE 3.18

Modeling Addition of Positive and Negative Integers
Model each addition.

 4 + 2  -3 + 6     4 + (-5)       -2 + (-3)
     Solution



Start with 4 positives.
Add two positives.
How many do you have?



Start with 3 negatives.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              3.2 · Add Integers 191

Add 6 positives.

Remove neutral pairs.
How many are left?

                                      .



Start with 4 positives.
Add 5 negatives.

Remove neutral pairs.

How many are left?
                                        .



Start with 2 negatives.

Add 3 negatives.

How many do you have?                      .

TRY IT 3.35 Model each addition.
192 3 · Integers

                   3 + 4  -1 + 4  4 + (-6)  -2 + (-2)

TRY IT 3.36  5 + 1  -3 + 7  2 + (-8)  -3 + (-4)

Simplify Expressions with Integers

Now that you have modeled adding small positive and negative integers, you can visualize the model in your mind to
simplify expressions with any integers.

For example, if you want to add                you don't have to count out blue counters and red counters.

Picture blue counters with red counters lined up underneath. Since there would be more negative counters than

positive counters, the sum would be negative. Because      there are more negative counters.

Let's try another one. We'll add               Imagine red counters and more red counters, so we have red

counters all together. This means the sum is

Look again at the results of Example 3.14 - Example 3.17.

                  both positive, sum positive              both negative, sum negative

                  When the signs are the same, the counters would be all the same color, so add them.

                  different signs, more negatives          different signs, more positives

                                 Sum negative              sum positive

When the signs are different, some counters would make neutral pairs; subtract to see how many are left.

Table 3.1 Addition of Positive and Negative Integers

  EXAMPLE 3.19                                 from        The answer will be negative because there are more negatives

Simplify:

 Solution 
 Since the signs are different, we subtract

than positives.

 The signs are different so we subtract        from  The answer will be positive because there are more positives than

negatives

TRY IT 3.37       Simplify each expression:

                                               

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.2 · Add Integers 193

TRY IT 3.38   Simplify each expression:

                

EXAMPLE 3.20

Simplify:

     Solution
Since the signs are the same, we add. The answer will be negative because there are only negatives.

       TRY IT 3.39 Simplify the expression:

       TRY IT 3.40 Simplify the expression:

The techniques we have used up to now extend to more complicated expressions. Remember to follow the order of
operations.

  EXAMPLE 3.21
Simplify:

     Solution

  Simplify inside the parentheses.
  Multiply.
  Add left to right.

       TRY IT 3.41 Simplify the expression:

       TRY IT 3.42 Simplify the expression:

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

Remember that to evaluate an expression means to substitute a number for the variable in the expression. Now we can
use negative numbers as well as positive numbers when evaluating expressions.

  EXAMPLE 3.22
Evaluate
194 3 · Integers

 Solution 

 Evaluate         when

Simplify.

 Evaluate         when

Simplify.

TRY IT 3.43 Evaluate each expression for the given values:

                                   

TRY IT 3.44                 Evaluate each expression for the given values:  when

                                 

EXAMPLE 3.23

When              evaluate

 Solution 

 Evaluate         when

Simplify.

 Evaluate         when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            3.2 · Add Integers 195

Simplify.
Add.

TRY IT 3.45 When           evaluate

                           

TRY IT 3.46

                           

Next we'll evaluate an expression with two variables.

EXAMPLE 3.24

Evaluate   when       and

Solution

Multiply.
Add.

TRY IT 3.47 Evaluate the expression:
TRY IT 3.48 Evaluate the expression:

EXAMPLE 3.25

Evaluate      when    and

     Solution                                  for and for
This expression has two variables. Substitute
196 3 · Integers

Add inside the parentheses.
Simplify

TRY IT 3.49 Evaluate:

                                 when        and

TRY IT 3.50 Evaluate:

                                 when        and

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

All our earlier work translating word phrases to algebra also applies to expressions that include both positive and
negative numbers. Remember that the phrase the sum indicates addition.

  EXAMPLE 3.26
Translate and simplify: the sum of and

     Solution
  The sum of -9 and 5 indicates addition. the sum of and

  Translate.

  Simplify.

TRY IT 3.51       Translate and simplify the expression:
                  the sum of and

TRY IT 3.52       Translate and simplify the expression:
                  the sum of and

EXAMPLE 3.27

Translate and simplify: the sum of and       increased by

     Solution
The phrase increased by indicates addition.

                  The sum of and , increased by

Translate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               3.2 · Add Integers 197

Simplify.
Add.

TRY IT 3.53    Translate and simplify:

               the sum of and           increased by

TRY IT 3.54    Translate and simplify:

               the sum of and           increased by

Add Integers in Applications

Recall that we were introduced to some situations in everyday life that use positive and negative numbers, such as

temperatures, banking, and sports. For example, a debt of could be represented as  Let's practice translating and

solving a few applications.

Solving applications is easy if we have a plan. First, we determine what we are looking for. Then we write a phrase that
gives the information to find it. We translate the phrase into math notation and then simplify to get the answer. Finally,
we write a sentence to answer the question.

EXAMPLE 3.28

The temperature in Buffalo, NY, one morning started at    below zero Fahrenheit. By noon, it had warmed up
                What was the temperature at noon?

     Solution
We are asked to find the temperature at noon.

Write a phrase for the temperature.  The temperature warmed up 12 degrees from 7 degrees below zero.

Translate to math notation.          -7 + 12

Simplify.                            5

Write a sentence to answer the question. The temperature at noon was 5 degrees Fahrenheit.

Table 3.2

TRY IT 3.55    The temperature in Chicago at 5 A.M. was   below zero Celsius. Six hours later, it had

               warmed up                                  What is the temperature at 11 A.M.?

TRY IT 3.56    A scuba diver was swimming                 below the surface and then dove down another
               What is her new depth?

EXAMPLE 3.29

A football team took possession of the football on their  In the next three plays, they lost            gained

and then lost                On what yard line was the ball at the end of those three plays?
198 3 · Integers

     Solution
We are asked to find the yard line the ball was on at the end of three plays.

Write a word phrase for the position of the ball. Start at 42, then lose 6, gain 4, lose 8.

Translate to math notation.                            42 - 6 + 4 - 8

Simplify.                                              32

Write a sentence to answer the question.               At the end of the three plays, the ball is on the 32-yard line.

Table 3.3

     TRY IT 3.57  The Bears took possession of the football on their           In the next three plays, they lost

                                 gained   then lost                    On what yard line was the ball at the end of those

                  three plays?

     TRY IT 3.58  The Chargers began with the football on their                They gained   lost

                  and then gained         on the next three plays. Where was the ball at the end of these plays?

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Adding Integers with Same Sign Using Color Counters (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24samesigncount)
     Adding Integers with Different Signs Using Counters (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24diffsigncount)
     Ex1: Adding Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Ex1Add)
     Ex2: Adding Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Ex2Add)

        SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Model Addition of Integers

In the following exercises, model the expression to simplify.

63.                              64.                                   65.

66.                              67.                                   68.

69.                              70.

Simplify Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

71.                              72.                                   73.

74.                              75.                                   76.

77.                              78.                                   79.

80.                              81.                                   82.

83.                              84.                                   85.

86.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            3.2 · Add Integers 199

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

87.       when                       88.         when                  89.         when

                                                                                          

90.       when                       91. When           evaluate:      92. When           evaluate:

                                                                             

93. When        evaluate:            94. When           evaluate:      95.         when,              ,

                                           
                                           

96.     when,         ,              97.         when,     ,           98.         when,           ,

99.       when,             ,        100.          when,            ,  101.        when,                 ,

102.      when,                ,

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression and then simplify.

103. The sum of and                  104. The sum of and               105. more than

106. more than                       107.        added to              108. added to

109. more than the sum of            110. more than the sum of         111. the sum of and
             and                                  and                          increased by

112. the sum of and
        increased by

Add Integers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve.

113. Temperature The                 114. Temperature The              115. Credit Cards Lupe owes
                                                                                     on her credit card.
      temperature in St. Paul,             temperature in Chicago
                                                                               Then she charges
      Minnesota was            at          was          at 6 am. By            more. What is the new
                                                                               balance?
      sunrise. By noon the                 afternoon the

      temperature had risen                temperature had risen

          What was the                           What was the

      temperature at noon?                 afternoon temperature?

116. Credit Cards Frank owes         117. Football A team lost         118. Card Games April lost
                on his credit card.
                                                   the first play.                 the first turn. Over
        Then he charges
        more. What is the new              Then they lost                    the next three turns, she
        balance?
                                           gained          and then          lost         gained

                                           lost         What was the               and then lost

                                           change in overall yardage               What was the

                                           over the four plays?              change in cards over the

                                                                             four turns?
200 3 · Integers

119. Football The Rams took          120. Football The Cowboys        121. Scuba Diving A scuba
                                                                              diver swimming
possession of the football           began with the ball on                   below the surface dove
                                                                                        deeper; the
on their own                         their own                                pressure got to them and
                                                                              they rose five feet. What
In the next three plays,             They gained                lost          is their new depth?

they lost                    gained        and then gained

                  then lost                on the next three

On what yard line was the            plays. Where was the ball

ball at the end of those             at the end of these plays?

three plays?

122. Gas Consumption: Ozzie
        rode their motorcycle for
                         using

Then they stopped and
got

Represent the change in
gas amount as an integer.

Everyday Math

123. Stock Market The week of September 15, 2008, was
        one of the most volatile weeks ever for the U.S. stock
        market. The change in the Dow Jones Industrial Average
        each day was:

        What was the overall change for the week?

124. Stock Market During the week of June 22, 2009, the
        change in the Dow Jones Industrial Average each day
        was:

What was the overall change for the week?

Writing Exercises

125. Explain why the sum of and is negative, but  126. Give an example from your life experience of
        the sum of and and is positive.                   adding two negative numbers.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             3.3 · Subtract Integers 201

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

3.3 Subtract Integers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Model subtraction of integers
           Simplify expressions with integers
           Evaluate variable expressions with integers
           Translate words phrases to algebraic expressions
           Subtract integers in applications

       BE PREPARED 3.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.

BE PREPARED 3.5  Translate the difference of and into an algebraic expression.
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 1.36.

BE PREPARED 3.6  Add:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.20.

Model Subtraction of Integers

Remember the story in the last section about the toddler and the cookies? Children learn how to subtract numbers
through their everyday experiences. Real-life experiences serve as models for subtracting positive numbers, and in some
cases, such as temperature, for adding negative as well as positive numbers. But it is difficult to relate subtracting
negative numbers to common life experiences. Most people do not have an intuitive understanding of subtraction when
negative numbers are involved. Math teachers use several different models to explain subtracting negative numbers.

We will continue to use counters to model subtraction. Remember, the blue counters represent positive numbers and
the red counters represent negative numbers.

Perhaps when you were younger, you read            as five take away three. When we use counters, we can think of
subtraction the same way.

MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Subtraction of Signed Numbers" will help you develop a better
understanding of subtracting integers.

We will model four subtraction facts using the numbers and

  EXAMPLE 3.30                                              means take away .
Model:

     Solution
  Interpret the expression.

  Model the first number. Start with 5 positives.
202 3 · Integers

Take away the second number. So take away 3 positives.

Find the counters that are left.

                                                                     .
                                                        The difference between and is .

TRY IT 3.59 Model the expression:
TRY IT 3.60 Model the expression:

  EXAMPLE 3.31                                                       means take away .
Model:

     Solution
  Interpret the expression.

  Model the first number. Start with 5 negatives.

Take away the second number. So take away 3 negatives.

Find the number of counters that are left.

                                                                               .
                                                        The difference between and is .

       TRY IT 3.61 Model the expression:

       TRY IT 3.62 Model the expression:

Notice that Example 3.30 and Example 3.31 are very much alike.
  · First, we subtracted positives from positives to get positives.
  · Then we subtracted negatives from negatives to get negatives.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              3.3 · Subtract Integers 203

Each example used counters of only one color, and the "take away" model of subtraction was easy to apply.

Now let's see what happens when we subtract one positive and one negative number. We will need to use both positive
and negative counters and sometimes some neutral pairs, too. Adding a neutral pair does not change the value.

EXAMPLE 3.32

Model:                                           means take away .
     Solution

  Interpret the expression.

Model the first number. Start with 5 negatives.

Take away the second number.
So we need to take away 3 positives.

But there are no positives to take away.
Add neutral pairs until you have 3 positives.

Now take away 3 positives.

Count the number of counters that are left.

                                                                   .  and is .
                                                 The difference of

TRY IT 3.63 Model the expression:
TRY IT 3.64 Model the expression:

  EXAMPLE 3.33
Model:
204 3 · Integers                                                  means take away .

            Solution
          Interpret the expression.
          Model the first number. Start with 5 positives.
          Take away the second number, so take away 3 negatives.
          But there are no negatives to take away.
          Add neutral pairs until you have 3 negatives.

          Then take away 3 negatives.

Count the number of counters that are left.

                                                                  The difference of and is .

TRY IT 3.65 Model the expression:
TRY IT 3.66 Model the expression:

EXAMPLE 3.34

Model each subtraction.           6 - (-6)   -8 - (-3)

 8 - 2  -5 - 4

     Solution

 

                                 This means take away .

Start with 8 positives.

Take away 2 positives.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         3.3 · Subtract Integers 205

How many are left?

                                         This means take away .

Start with 5 negatives.

You need to take away 4 positives.
Add 4 neutral pairs to get 4 positives.

Take away 4 positives.
How many are left?

                                                 This means take away .

Start with 6 positives.
Add 6 neutrals to get 6 negatives to take away.
Remove 6 negatives.
206 3 · Integers

          How many are left?

     

                                                  This means take away .
          Start with 8 negatives.
          Take away 3 negatives.
          How many are left?

TRY IT 3.67   Model each subtraction.   4-1                                -6 - 8
TRY IT 3.68                             7-3                                -4 - 2
               7 - (-8)  -7 - (-2)

              Model each subtraction.

               4 - (-6)  -8 - (-1)

EXAMPLE 3.35

Model each subtraction expression:

 Solution 



We start with 2 positives.

We need to take away 8 positives, but we have only 2.

Add neutral pairs until there are 8 positives to take away.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             3.3 · Subtract Integers 207

Then take away eight positives.

Find the number of counters that are left.
There are 6 negatives.



We start with 3 negatives.
We need to take away 8 negatives, but we have only 3.
Add neutral pairs until there are 8 negatives to take away.

Then take away the 8 negatives.

Find the number of counters that are left.
There are 5 positives.

TRY IT 3.69 Model each subtraction expression.

  

TRY IT 3.70 Model each subtraction expression.

  

Simplify Expressions with Integers

Do you see a pattern? Are you ready to subtract integers without counters? Let's do two more subtractions. We'll think
about how we would model these with counters, but we won't actually use the counters.

· Subtract
    Think: We start with negative counters.
    We have to subtract positives, but there are no positives to take away.
    So we add neutral pairs to get the positives. Now we take away the positives.
    So what's left? We have the original negatives plus more negatives from the neutral pair. The result is
    negatives.
208 3 · Integers

    Notice, that to subtract we added negatives.
· Subtract

    Think: We start with positives.
    We have to subtract negatives, but there are no negatives to take away.
    So we add neutral pairs to the positives. Now we take away the negatives.
    What's left? We have the original positives plus more positives from the neutral pairs. The result is
    positives.

Notice that to subtract          we added

While we may not always use the counters, especially when we work with large numbers, practicing with them first gave
us a concrete way to apply the concept, so that we can visualize and remember how to do the subtraction without the
counters.

Have you noticed that subtraction of signed numbers can be done by adding the opposite? You will often see the idea,
the Subtraction Property, written as follows:

Subtraction Property

Look at these two examples.

We see that       gives the same answer as

Of course, when we have a subtraction problem that has only positive numbers, like the first example, we just do the

subtraction. We already knew how to subtract     long ago. But knowing that                       gives the same answer as

helps when we are subtracting negative numbers.

EXAMPLE 3.36

Simplify:

 Solution 
 

                                                                                             and

Subtract to simplify.

Add to simplify.

Subtracting 8 from 13 is the same as adding -8 to 13.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     3.3 · Subtract Integers 209



                                                                                                and
Subtract to simplify.
Add to simplify.
Subtracting 9 from -17 is the same as adding -9 to -17.

       TRY IT 3.71 Simplify each expression:            
                                                       
                    

       TRY IT 3.72 Simplify each expression:

                    

Now look what happens when we subtract a negative.

We see that       gives the same result as  Subtracting a negative number is like adding a positive.
  EXAMPLE 3.37                                                     and
                          
Simplify:

 Solution
 

Subtract to simplify.

Add to simplify.

Subtracting -15 from 9 is the same as adding 15 to 9.



                                                                                              and
Subtract to simplify.
210 3 · Integers

Add to simplify.
Subtracting -4 from -7 is the same as adding 4 to -7

TRY IT 3.73 Simplify each expression:

                                                      

TRY IT 3.74 Simplify each expression:

                                                      

Look again at the results of Example 3.30 - Example 3.33.

                                 2 positives               2 negatives

                  When there would be enough counters of the color to take away, subtract.

                  5 negatives, want to subtract 3 positives 5 positives, want to subtract 3 negatives

                                 need neutral pairs        need neutral pairs

                  When there would not be enough of the counters to take away, add neutral pairs.

                  Table 3.4 Subtraction of Integers

  EXAMPLE 3.38
Simplify:

     Solution
  We are taking 58 negatives away from 74 negatives.

  Subtract.

TRY IT 3.75 Simplify the expression:
TRY IT 3.76 Simplify the expression:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                              3.3 · Subtract Integers 211

  EXAMPLE 3.39
Simplify:

     Solution
We use the order of operations to simplify this expression, performing operations inside the parentheses first. Then we
subtract from left to right.

  Simplify inside the parentheses first.
  Subtract from left to right.
  Subtract.

       TRY IT 3.77 Simplify the expression:

       TRY IT 3.78 Simplify the expression:

  EXAMPLE 3.40
Simplify:

     Solution
We use the order of operations to simplify this expression. First we multiply, and then subtract from left to right.

  Multiply first.
  Subtract from left to right.
  Subtract.

       TRY IT 3.79 Simplify the expression:

       TRY IT 3.80 Simplify the expression:

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

Now we'll practice evaluating expressions that involve subtracting negative numbers as well as positive numbers.
212 3 · Integers

  EXAMPLE 3.41    when           , substitute for in the expression.

Evaluate

 Solution 
 To evaluate

  Subtract.       when           substitute for in the expression.

 To evaluate

Subtract.

TRY IT 3.81 Evaluate each expression:

                                 

TRY IT 3.82       Evaluate each expression:

                                   

  EXAMPLE 3.42                   substitute for in the expression.

Evaluate

 Solution 
 To evaluate

  Subtract.

 To evaluate

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.3 · Subtract Integers 213

Subtract.

TRY IT 3.83 Evaluate each expression:

                              

TRY IT 3.84   Evaluate each expression:

                              

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

When we first introduced the operation symbols, we saw that the expression  may be read in several ways as shown
below.

                                           Figure 3.18

Be careful to get and in the right order!

EXAMPLE 3.43

Translate and then simplify:

 the difference of and         subtract from

     Solution

 A difference means subtraction. Subtract the numbers in the order they are given.

  Translate.
  Simplify.

 Subtract means to take away from
214 3 · Integers

Translate.
Simplify.

TRY IT 3.85 Translate and simplify:

                   the difference of and                                  subtract from

TRY IT 3.86 Translate and simplify:

                   the difference of and                                  subtract from

Subtract Integers in Applications

It's hard to find something if we don't know what we're looking for or what to call it. So when we solve an application
problem, we first need to determine what we are asked to find. Then we can write a phrase that gives the information to
find it. We'll translate the phrase into an expression and then simplify the expression to get the answer. Finally, we
summarize the answer in a sentence to make sure it makes sense.

...

     HOW TO

Solve Application Problems.

Step 1.           Identify what you are asked to find.
Step 2.           Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
Step 3.           Translate the phrase to an expression.
Step 4.           Simplify the expression.
Step 5.           Answer the question with a complete sentence.

EXAMPLE 3.44

In the morning, the temperature in Urbana, Illinois was degrees Fahrenheit. By mid-afternoon, the temperature had
dropped to degrees Fahrenheit. What was the difference between the morning and afternoon temperatures?

Solution

Step 1. Identify what we are asked to find.           the difference between the morning and afternoon
                                                      temperatures

Step 2. Write a phrase that gives the information to  the difference of and
find it.

Step 3. Translate the phrase to an expression.
The word difference indicates subtraction.

Step 4. Simplify the expression.

Step 5. Write a complete sentence that answers the    The difference in temperature was degrees Fahrenheit.
question.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 3.3 · Subtract Integers 215

TRY IT 3.87              In the morning, the temperature in Anchorage, Alaska was                          By mid-

                         afternoon the temperature had dropped to         below zero. What was the difference

                         between the morning and afternoon temperatures?

TRY IT 3.88              The temperature in Denver was  degrees Fahrenheit at lunchtime. By sunset the temperature
                         had dropped to                       What was the difference between the lunchtime and
                         sunset temperatures?

Geography provides another application of negative numbers with the elevations of places below sea level.

EXAMPLE 3.45

Dinesh hiked from Mt. Whitney, the highest point in California, to Death Valley, the lowest point. The elevation of Mt.

Whitney is         feet above sea level and the elevation of Death Valley is feet below sea level. What is the difference

in elevation between Mt. Whitney and Death Valley?

Solution

Step 1. What are we asked to find?                      The difference in elevation between Mt. Whitney and
                                                        Death Valley

Step 2. Write a phrase.                                 elevation of Mt. Whitney-elevation of Death Valley

Step 3. Translate.

Step 4. Simplify.

Step 5. Write a complete sentence that answers the      The difference in elevation is    feet.
question.

TRY IT 3.89              One day, John hiked to the             summit of Haleakala volcano in Hawaii. The next day,

                         while scuba diving, he dove to a cave     below sea level. What is the difference between the

                         elevation of the summit of Haleakala and the depth of the cave?

TRY IT 3.90              The submarine Nautilus is at           below the surface of the water and the submarine

                         Explorer is  below the surface of the water. What is the difference in the position of the

                         Nautilus and the Explorer?

Managing your money can involve both positive and negative numbers. You might have overdraft protection on your
checking account. This means the bank lets you write checks for more money than you have in your account (as long as
they know they can get it back from you!)

EXAMPLE 3.46

Leslie has in her checking account and she writes a check for

 What is the balance after she writes the check?
 She writes a second check for        What is the new balance after this check?

 Leslie's friend told her that she had lost a check for that Leslie had given her with her birthday card. What is
the balance in Leslie's checking account now?
216 3 · Integers

  Solution                       The balance of the account



What are we asked to find?

Write a phrase.                  minus

Translate

Simplify.

Write a sentence answer.         The balance is .

                                 The new balance

What are we asked to find?

Write a phrase.                  minus

Translate

Simplify.

Write a sentence answer.         She is overdrawn by .

                                 The new balance

What are we asked to find?

Write a phrase.                  more than

Translate

Simplify.

Write a sentence answer.         The balance is now .

TRY IT 3.91       Araceli has in her checking account and writes a check for
TRY IT 3.92
                   What is the balance after she writes the check?
                   She writes a second check for             What is the new balance?

                   The check for that she sent a charity was never cashed. What is the balance in
                  Araceli's checking account now?

                  Genevieve's bank account was overdrawn and the balance is

                   She deposits a check for that she earned babysitting. What is the new balance?
                   She deposits another check for            Is she out of debt yet? What is her new balance?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        3.3 · Subtract Integers 217

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity "Elevator Magic" will provide you with another view of the topics covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Adding and Subtracting Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24AddSubtrInteg)
    Subtracting Integers with Color Counters (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Subtrinteger)
    Subtracting Integers Basics (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Subtractbasic)
    Subtracting Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24introintegerr)
    Integer Application (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24integerappp)

        SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Model Subtraction of Integers

In the following exercises, model each expression and simplify.

127.                           128.                              129.
                                                                 132.
130.                           131.
                                                                 137. 
133.                           134.                                  

Simplify Expressions with Integers                               140. 
                                                                     
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.
                                                                 145.
135.                           136.                              148.
                                                                 151.
                                                                 154.
138.                           139.                              157.
                                                                 160.
                               142.                              163.
141.                                                             166.
                                                                 169.
                                                                 172.
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.            175.

143.                           144.

146.                           147.

149.                           150.

152.                           153.

155.                           156.

158.                           159.

161.                           162.

164.                           165.

167.                           168.

170.                           171.

173.                           174.
218 3 · Integers

176.                                    177.                                      178.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression for the given values.

179.                                    180.                                      181.

                                                                                                    

182.                                    183.                                      184.

                  

185.                                    186.

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression and then simplify.

187.  The difference of                 188.  The difference of                   189.  The difference of

        and                                     and                                       and

     Subtract from                           Subtract from                             Subtract from

190.  The difference of                 191.    less than                         192.       less than
                                                    minus                                        minus
        and

     Subtract from

193.              less than             194.         less than
                  subtracted from                    subtracted from

Subtract Integers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve the following applications.

195. Temperature One                    196. Temperature On                       197. Temperature On January
        morning, the temperature                Thursday, the
        in Urbana, Illinois, was                temperature in Spincich                 15, the high temperature
                              By                Lake, Michigan, was
        evening, the temperature                                      By Friday,        in Anaheim, California,
        had dropped                             the temperature had
                              What was          dropped                                 was                   That
        the temperature that                    What was the
        evening?                                temperature on Friday?                  same day, the high

                                                                                        temperature in

                                                                                        Embarrass, Minnesota

                                                                                        was

                                                                                        What was the difference

                                                                                        between the temperature

                                                                                        in Anaheim and the

                                                                                        temperature in

                                                                                        Embarrass?

198. Temperature On January             199. Football At the first                200. Football At the first
        21, the high temperature
        in Palm Springs,                      down, the Warriors                        down, the Barons football
        California, was and
        the high temperature in               football team had the ball                team had the ball on their
        Whitefield, New
        Hampshire was                         on their              On                              On the next
        What was the difference
        between the temperature               the next three downs,                     three downs, they lost
        in Palm Springs and the
        temperature in                        they gained           lost                          gained
        Whitefield?
                                                        and lost                        and lost          What

                                              What was the yard line at                 was the yard line at the

                                              the end of the third                      end of the third down?

                                              down?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 219

201. Checking Account John   202. Checking Account Ellie       203. Checking Account Gina

has         in his checking  has              in her checking  has             in her checking

account. He writes a         account. She writes a             account. She writes a

check for      What is the   check for        What is          check for               What is

new balance in his           the new balance in her            the new balance in her

checking account?            checking account?                 checking account?

204. Checking Account Frank  205. Checking Account Bill        206. Checking Account Patty

has in his checking          has a balance of            in    has a balance of        in

account. He writes a         his checking account. He          her checking account. She

check for        What is     deposits to the                   deposits to the

the new balance in his       account. What is the new          account. What is the new

checking account?            balance?                          balance?

Everyday Math

207. Camping Rene is on an Alpine hike. The    208. Scuba Diving Shelly's scuba watch is guaranteed

temperature is Rene's sleeping bag is rated              to be watertight to           She is diving at

"comfortable to           How much can the                     on the face of an underwater canyon.

temperature change before it is too cold for             By how many feet can she change her depth

Rene's sleeping bag?                                     before her watch is no longer guaranteed?

Writing Exercises

209. Explain why the difference of and is      210. Why is the result of subtracting            the

                                                         same as the result of adding

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

3.4 Multiply and Divide Integers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Multiply integers
           Divide integers
           Simplify expressions with integers
           Evaluate variable expressions with integers
           Translate word phrases to algebraic expressions

       BE PREPARED 3.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Translate the quotient of and into an algebraic expression.
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 1.67.

BE PREPARED 3.8              Add:
                             If you missed this problem, review Example 3.21.
220 3 · Integers

BE PREPARED 3.9

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.23.

Multiply Integers

Since multiplication is mathematical shorthand for repeated addition, our counter model can easily be applied to show
multiplication of integers. Let's look at this concrete model to see what patterns we notice. We will use the same
examples that we used for addition and subtraction.

We remember that       means add     times. Here, we are using the model shown in Figure 3.19 just to help us
discover the pattern.

                                                                             Figure 3.19

Now consider what it means to multiply by It means subtract times. Looking at subtraction as taking away, it
means to take away times. But there is nothing to take away, so we start by adding neutral pairs as shown in Figure
3.20.

                                     Figure 3.20

In both cases, we started with neutral pairs. In the case on the left, we took away times and the result was

To multiply            we took away  times and the result was So we found that

Notice that for multiplication of two signed numbers, when the signs are the same, the product is positive, and when the
signs are different, the product is negative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 221

Multiplication of Signed Numbers

The sign of the product of two numbers depends on their signs.

                                   Same signs Product

                                   ·Two positives               Positive
                                   ·Two negatives               Positive

                                   Different signs              Product

                                   ·Positive · negative         Negative
                                   ·Negative · positive         Negative

EXAMPLE 3.47

Multiply each of the following:

 Solution                          



  Multiply, noting that the signs are different and so the product is negative.
Table 3.5

 

  Multiply, noting that the signs are the same and so the product is positive.
Table 3.6

 

  Multiply, noting that the signs are different and so the product is negative.
Table 3.7
222 3 · Integers



  The signs are the same, so the product is positive.
Table 3.8

  TRY IT 3.93 Multiply:

                                                               

  TRY IT 3.94 Multiply:

                  1. 
                  2. 
                  3. 
                  4. 

When we multiply a number by the result is the same number. What happens when we multiply a number by  Let's
multiply a positive number and then a negative number by to see what we get.

Each time we multiply a number by we get its opposite.
  Multiplication by
  Multiplying a number by gives its opposite.

  EXAMPLE 3.48
Multiply each of the following:

 Solution 
 

  The signs are different, so the product will be negative.
  Notice that -7 is the opposite of 7.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 223



The signs are the same, so the product will be positive.
Notice that 11 is the opposite of -11.

  TRY IT 3.95 Multiply.

                               

  TRY IT 3.96 Multiply.

                               

Divide Integers

Division is the inverse operation of multiplication. So,  because                In words, this expression says that
                                                                                 If we look at some examples of
  can be divided into groups of each because adding five three times gives

multiplying integers, we might figure out the rules for dividing integers.

Division of signed numbers follows the same rules as multiplication. When the signs are the same, the quotient is
positive, and when the signs are different, the quotient is negative.

Division of Signed Numbers

The sign of the quotient of two numbers depends on their signs.

                                 Same signs Quotient

                                 ·Two positives           Positive
                                 ·Two negatives           Positive

                                 Different signs                 Quotient

                               ·Positive & negative              Negative
                               ·Negative & positive              Negative

Remember, you can always check the answer to a division problem by multiplying.

EXAMPLE 3.49

Divide each of the following:

              
224 3 · Integers

            Solution

     

  Divide, noting that the signs are different and so the quotient is negative.
Table 3.9

 

  Divide, noting that the signs are the same and so the quotient is positive.
Table 3.10

TRY IT 3.97 Divide:

                                 

TRY IT 3.98 Divide:

                                 

Just as we saw with multiplication, when we divide a number by the result is the same number. What happens when
we divide a number by Let's divide a positive number and then a negative number by to see what we get.

When we divide a number by, we get its opposite.
  Division by
  Dividing a number by gives its opposite.

  EXAMPLE 3.50
Divide each of the following:

 Solution 
 

  The dividend, 16, is being divided by -1.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 225

  Dividing a number by -1 gives its opposite.
  Notice that the signs were different, so the result was negative.
Table 3.11

 

    The dividend, -20, is being divided by -1.
  Dividing a number by -1 gives its opposite.
Table 3.12
Notice that the signs were the same, so the quotient was positive.

TRY IT 3.99 Divide:

                        

TRY IT 3.100 Divide:

                        

Simplify Expressions with Integers

Now we'll simplify expressions that use all four operations-addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division-with
integers. Remember to follow the order of operations.

EXAMPLE 3.51

     Solution
We use the order of operations. Multiply first and then add and subtract from left to right.

Multiply first.
Add.
Subtract.

TRY IT 3.101 Simplify:
TRY IT 3.102 Simplify:
226 3 · Integers

  EXAMPLE 3.52
Simplify:

 Solution 

The exponent tells how many times to multiply the base.

 The exponent is and the base is We raise to the fourth power.

  Write in expanded form.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.

 The exponent is and the base is We raise to the fourth power and then take the opposite.

  Write in expanded form.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.
  Multiply.

TRY IT 3.103 Simplify:

                                 

TRY IT 3.104 Simplify:

                                 

EXAMPLE 3.53

     Solution
According to the order of operations, we simplify inside parentheses first. Then we will multiply and finally we will
subtract.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 227

  Subtract the parentheses first.
  Multiply.
  Subtract.

       TRY IT 3.105 Simplify:

       TRY IT 3.106 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 3.54
Simplify:

     Solution
We simplify the exponent first, then multiply and divide.

  Simplify the exponent.
  Multiply.
  Divide.

       TRY IT 3.107 Simplify:

       TRY IT 3.108 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 3.55
     Solution

First we will multiply and divide from left to right. Then we will add.
228 3 · Integers

  Divide.
  Multiply.
  Add.

       TRY IT 3.109 Simplify:

       TRY IT 3.110 Simplify:

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

Now we can evaluate expressions that include multiplication and division with integers. Remember that to evaluate an
expression, substitute the numbers in place of the variables, and then simplify.

  EXAMPLE 3.56

     Solution

Simplify exponents.
Multiply.
Subtract.
Add.

Keep in mind that when we substitute  for we use parentheses to show the multiplication. Without parentheses, it
would look like

TRY IT 3.111 Evaluate:

TRY IT 3.112 Evaluate:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 229

EXAMPLE 3.57
   Solution

Substitute    and  .
Multiply.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 3.113 Evaluate:

       TRY IT 3.114 Evaluate:

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

Once again, all our prior work translating words to algebra transfers to phrases that include both multiplying and
dividing integers. Remember that the key word for multiplication is product and for division is quotient.

  EXAMPLE 3.58
Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible: the product of and

     Solution
The word product tells us to multiply.

                     the product of and
  Translate.
  Simplify.

TRY IT 3.115 Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible:
TRY IT 3.116 Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible:

  EXAMPLE 3.59
Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible: the quotient of and
230 3 · Integers

            Solution
       The word quotient tells us to divide.

                            the quotient of -56 and -7
         Translate.
         Simplify.

      TRY IT 3.117 Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible:
      TRY IT 3.118 Translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible:

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Multiplying Integers Using Color Counters (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Multiplyinteg)
      Multiplying Integers Using Color Counters With Neutral Pairs (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Multiplyneutr)
      Multiplying Integers Basics (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Multiplybasic)
      Dividing Integers Basics (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Dividebasic)
      Ex. Dividing Integers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Divideinteger)
      Multiplying and Dividing Signed Numbers (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24Multidivisign)

        SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Multiply Integers

In the following exercises, multiply each pair of integers.

211.                                 212.                    213.

214.                                 215.                    216.

217.                                 218.                    219.

220.                                 221.                    222.

Divide Integers

In the following exercises, divide.

223.                                 224.                    225.

226.                                 227.                    228.

229.                                 230.                    231.

232.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            3.4 · Multiply and Divide Integers 231

Simplify Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

233.                       234.                                   235.

236.                       237.                                   238.

239.                       240.                                   241.

242.                       243.                                   244.

245.                       246.                                   247.

248.                       249.                                   250.

251.                       252.                                   253.

254.                       255.                                   256.

257.                       258.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

259.                       260.                                   261.

                                                                      
                                                                      
262.                       263.                                                             when
                                                                  264.
    
             
265.
             when          266.                        when       267.                when
                                                                          and
268.         when          269.                        when                          when
        and                        and                            270.         and

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible.

271. The product of and 15 272. The product of and                273. The quotient of and

274. The quotient of and   275. The quotient of              and  276. The quotient of and
                                   the sum of and            and          the sum of and
277. The product of and
        the difference of  278. The product of
                                   the difference of

Everyday Math                                            280. Weight loss In the first week of a diet program,

279. Stock market Javier owns shares of stock in             eight women lost an average of       each.
        one company. On Tuesday, the stock price
        dropped per share. What was the total effect         What was the total weight change for the eight
        on Javier's portfolio?
                                                             women?
Writing Exercises
                                                         282. In your own words, state the rules for dividing
281. In your own words, state the rules for                      two integers.
        multiplying two integers.
232 3 · Integers

283. Why is                      284. Why is

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

3.5 Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether an integer is a solution of an equation
           Solve equations with integers using the Addition and Subtraction Properties of Equality
           Model the Division Property of Equality
           Solve equations using the Division Property of Equality
           Translate to an equation and solve

       BE PREPARED 3.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.22.

BE PREPARED 3.11

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.33.

BE PREPARED 3.12                 Translate into an algebraic expression less than
                                 If you missed this problem, review Table 1.3.

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

In Solve Equations with the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality, we saw that a solution of an equation is a
value of a variable that makes a true statement when substituted into that equation. In that section, we found solutions
that were whole numbers. Now that we've worked with integers, we'll find integer solutions to equations.

The steps we take to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation are the same whether the solution is a
whole number or an integer.

             ...

                 HOW TO

How to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

Step 1.           Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.
Step 3.           Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

                  Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
                    If it is true, the number is a solution.
                    If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 233

  EXAMPLE 3.60
Determine whether each of the following is a solution of

 Solution  
  Substitute 4 for x in the equation to determine if it is true.

Multiply.
Subtract.

Since      does not result in a true equation, is not a solution to the equation.

 Substitute -4 for x in the equation to determine if it is true.

Multiply.
Subtract.

Since      results in a true equation, is a solution to the equation.

 Substitute -9 for x in the equation to determine if it is true.

Substitute -9 for x.
Multiply.
Subtract.

Since      does not result in a true equation, is not a solution to the equation.

TRY IT 3.119          Determine whether each of the following is a solution of
TRY IT 3.120
                            

                      Determine whether each of the following is a solution of

                            
234 3 · Integers

     Solve Equations with Integers Using the Addition and Subtraction Properties of
     Equality

       In Solve Equations with the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality, we solved equations similar to the two
       shown here using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality. Now we can use them again with integers.

       When you add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an equation, you still have equality.
         Properties of Equalities
                                            Subtraction Property of Equality Addition Property of Equality

  EXAMPLE 3.61
Solve:

     Solution

  Subtract 9 from each side to undo the addition.
  Simplify.
Check the result by substituting into the original equation.

  Substitute -4 for y

Since  makes                     a true statement, we found the solution to this equation.

TRY IT 3.121 Solve:

TRY IT 3.122 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                         3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 235

  EXAMPLE 3.62
Solve:

     Solution

Add 6 to each side to undo the subtraction.
Simplify.
Check the result by substituting into the original equation:
Substitute for

The solution to  is
                        a true statement, we found the solution to this equation.
Since  makes

TRY IT 3.123 Solve:

TRY IT 3.124 Solve:

Model the Division Property of Equality

All of the equations we have solved so far have been of the form       or  We were able to isolate the

variable by adding or subtracting the constant term. Now we'll see how to solve equations that involve division.

We will model an equation with envelopes and counters in Figure 3.21.

                                                                             Figure 3.21

Here, there are two identical envelopes that contain the same number of counters. Remember, the left side of the
workspace must equal the right side, but the counters on the left side are "hidden" in the envelopes. So how many
counters are in each envelope?

To determine the number, separate the counters on the right side into groups of the same size. So counters divided
into groups means there must be counters in each group (since

What equation models the situation shown in Figure 3.22? There are two envelopes, and each contains counters.
Together, the two envelopes must contain a total of counters. So the equation that models the situation is
236 3 · Integers

We can divide both sides of the equation by              Figure 3.22
                                             as we did with the envelopes and counters.

We found that each envelope contains         Does this check? We know  so it works. Three counters in
each of two envelopes does equal six.

Figure 3.23 shows another example.

                                             Figure 3.23

Now we have identical envelopes and          How many counters are in each envelope? We have to separate the

                  into           Since       there must be  in each envelope. See Figure 3.24.

The equation that models the situation is         Figure 3.24
                                             We can divide both sides of the equation by

Does this check? It does because
          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Division Property of Equality" will help you develop a better
  understanding of how to solve equations using the Division Property of Equality.

  EXAMPLE 3.63
Write an equation modeled by the envelopes and counters, and then solve it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                              3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 237

Solution

There are            or    unknown values, on the left that match the  on the right. Let's call the unknown

quantity in the envelopes

Write the equation.

Divide both sides by 4.

Simplify.

There are  in each envelope.

TRY IT 3.125 Write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters. Then solve it.

TRY IT 3.126 Write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters. Then solve it.

Solve Equations Using the Division Property of Equality

The previous examples lead to the Division Property of Equality. When you divide both sides of an equation by any
nonzero number, you still have equality.

  Division Property of Equality
238 3 · Integers

         EXAMPLE 3.64
            Solution

       To isolate we need to undo multiplication.

         Divide each side by 7.
         Simplify.
       Check the solution.

         Substitute -7 for x.

       Therefore, is the solution to the equation.
              TRY IT 3.127 Solve:
              TRY IT 3.128 Solve:

         EXAMPLE 3.65
       Solve:

            Solution
       To isolate we need to undo the multiplication.

         Divide each side by -3.
         Simplify
       Check the solution.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 239

Substitute -21 for y.

Since this is a true statement,  is the solution to the equation.
       TRY IT 3.129 Solve:

TRY IT 3.130 Solve:

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the past several examples, we were given an equation containing a variable. In the next few examples, we'll have to
first translate word sentences into equations with variables and then we will solve the equations.

  EXAMPLE 3.66
Translate and solve: five more than is equal to

     Solution
                                             five more than is equal to

  Translate

  Subtract from both sides.

  Simplify.

Check the answer by substituting it into the original equation.

TRY IT 3.131           Translate and solve:
                       Seven more than is equal to .

TRY IT 3.132 Translate and solve:
240 3 · Integers

         EXAMPLE 3.67
       Translate and solve: the difference of and is

            Solution
                                         the difference of and is

          Translate.
          Add to each side.
          Simplify.

       Check the answer by substituting it into the original equation.

TRY IT 3.133  Translate and solve:
              The difference of and is .

TRY IT 3.134  Translate and solve:
              The difference of and is .

  EXAMPLE 3.68                           is the product of and
Translate and solve: the number          is the product of and

     Solution
                          the number of

Translate.

Divide by .

Simplify.

Check the answer by substituting it into the original equation.

TRY IT 3.135  Translate and solve:
              The number is the product of
                                                                        and .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 241

      TRY IT 3.136  Translate and solve:
                    The number is the product of
                                                         and .

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      One-Step Equations With Adding Or Subtracting (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24onestepaddsub)
      One-Step Equations With Multiplying Or Dividing (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24onestepmuldiv)

        SECTION 3.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.

285.                286.                                 287.

                                                             
                                                             

288.

      
      

Solve Equations Using the Addition and Subtraction Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, solve for the unknown.

289.                290.                                        291.

292.                293.                                        294.

295.                296.                                        297.

298.                299.                                        300.

Model the Division Property of Equality

In the following exercises, write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters and then solve it.

301.                302.                                              303.

304.
242 3 · Integers

Solve Equations Using the Division Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the division property of equality and check the solution.

305.                                  306.                              307.

308.                                  309.                              310.

311.                                  312.                              313.

314.                                  315.                              316.

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

317. Four more than is equal          318. Nine more than  is equal     319. The sum of eight and is
        to 1.                                 to 5.                                 .

320. The sum of two and is            321. The difference of and        322. The difference of and
            .                                 three is .                        is .

323. The number -42 is the            324. The number -54 is the        325. The product of -15 and
        product of -7 and .                   product of -9 and .               is 75.

326. The product of -18 and           327. -6 plus is equal to 4.       328. -2 plus is equal to 1.
        is 36.

329. Nine less than is -4.            330. Thirteen less than is
                                                    .

Mixed Practice                        332.                              333. 
                                                                            
In the following exercises, solve.
                                      335.                              336.
331. 
                                      338.                               339.
                                      341.                               342.
334.                                  344.                               345.
    

337.
340.
343.
346.

Everyday Math

347. Cookie packaging A               348. Kindergarten class

      package of                 has        Connie's kindergarten

      equal rows of cookies.                class has              She

      Find the number of                    wants them to get into

      cookies in each row, by               equal groups. Find the

      solving the equation                  number of children in

                                            each group, by solving

                                            the equation

Writing Exercises

349. Is modeling the Division Property of Equality         350. Suppose you are using envelopes and counters
        with envelopes and counters helpful to
        understanding how to solve the equation                     to model solving the equations    and
                      Explain why or why not.
                                                                        Explain how you would solve each

                                                                    equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               3.5 · Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality 243

351. Frida started to solve the equation   by  352. Raoul started to solve the equation                          by

adding to both sides. Explain why Frida's      subtracting from both sides. Explain why

method will not solve the equation.            Raoul's method will not solve the equation.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?
244 3 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

absolute value The absolute value of a number is its distance from 0 on the number line.
integers Integers are counting numbers, their opposites, and zero ... -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3 ...
negative number A negative number is less than zero.
opposites The opposite of a number is the number that is the same distance from zero on the number line, but on the

    opposite side of zero.

Key Concepts

3.1 Introduction to Integers

· Opposite Notation

  means the opposite of the number

 The notation is read the opposite of

· Absolute Value Notation

 The absolute value of a number is written as .

  for all numbers.

3.2 Add Integers

  · Addition of Positive and Negative Integers

                        both positive, sum positive  both negative, sum negative

              When the signs are the same, the counters would be all the same color, so add them.

              different signs, more negatives        different signs, more positives

                                 Sum negative        sum positive

  When the signs are different, some counters would make neutral pairs; subtract to see how many are left.

3.3 Subtract Integers

  · Subtraction of Integers

                                 2 positives         2 negatives

                        When there would be enough counters of the color to take away, subtract.

    5 negatives, want to subtract 3 positives 5 positives, want to subtract 3 negatives
  Table 3.13

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              3 · Chapter Review 245

                          need neutral pairs                     need neutral pairs

When there would not be enough of the counters to take away, add neutral pairs.

Table 3.13

  · Subtraction Property
      
      

  · Solve Application Problems
       Step 1. Identify what you are asked to find.
       Step 2. Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
       Step 3. Translate the phrase to an expression.
       Step 4. Simplify the expression.
       Step 5. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

3.4 Multiply and Divide Integers

  · Multiplication of Signed Numbers
       To determine the sign of the product of two signed numbers:

                                                                          Same Signs Product

                                                  Two positives  Positive
                                                  Two negatives  Positive

                                              Different Signs Product

                             Positive · negative                 Negative
                             Negative · positive                 Negative

· Division of Signed Numbers
    To determine the sign of the quotient of two signed numbers:

                                                                       Same Signs Quotient

                                              Two positives      Positive
                                              Two negatives      Positive

                             Different Signs Quotient

                             Positive · negative                 Negative
                             Negative · Positive                 Negative

· Multiplication by          gives its opposite:
    Multiplying a number by

· Division by                gives its opposite:
    Dividing a number by

3.5 Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of Equality

  · How to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

       Step 1. Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
246 3 · Exercises

       Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
       Step 3. Determine whether the resulting equation is true.

           If it is true, the number is a solution.
           If it is not true, the number is not a solution.
  · Properties of Equalities

                                        Subtraction Property of Equality Addition Property of Equality

· Division Property of Equality

       For any numbers              and

      If  , then                 .

Exercises

Review Exercises

Introduction to Integers

Locate Positive and Negative Numbers on the Number Line

In the following exercises, locate and label the integer on the number line.

353.                                   354.                    355.

356.                                   357.                    358.

Order Positive and Negative Numbers

In the following exercises, order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

359.                                   360.                    361.

362.                                   363.                    364.

Find Opposites

In the following exercises, find the opposite of each number.

365.                                   366.                    367.

368.

In the following exercises, simplify.

369.                                   370.   

In the following exercises, evaluate.

371.                                   372.

                                           
                                           

Simplify Absolute Values

In the following exercises, simplify.

373.                                   374.                    375.

376.                                   377.                    378.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   3 · Exercises 247

In the following exercises, evaluate.

379.                                   380.                       381.

382.

In the following exercises, fill in          for each of the following pairs of numbers.
383.
386.                                   384.                       385.

In the following exercises, simplify.

387.                                   388.                       389.

390.                                   391.                       392.

393.                                   394.

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, translate each of the following phrases into expressions with positive or negative numbers.

395. the opposite of                   396. the opposite of       397. negative

398. minus negative                    399. a temperature of      400. an elevation of
                                               below zero                 below sea level

Add Integers

Model Addition of Integers

In the following exercises, model the following to find the sum.

401.                                   402.                       403.

404.

Simplify Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

405.                                   406.                       407.

408.                                   409.                       410.

411.                                   412.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

413.                                   414.                       415.

                                                       
    

416.

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression and then simplify.

417.                                   418.                       419.

420.
248 3 · Exercises

Add Integers in Applications            422. Credit Frida owed on
                                                her credit card. Then she
In the following exercises, solve.              charged more. What
                                                was her new balance?
421. Temperature On
        Monday, the high
        temperature in Denver
        was
        Tuesday's high
        temperature was
                        more. What
        was the high temperature
        on Tuesday?

Subtract Integers

Model Subtraction of Integers

In the following exercises, model the following.

423.                                    424.                                   425.

426.

Simplify Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

427.                                    428.                                   429.

430.                                    431.                                   432.

433.                                    434.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

435.                                    436.                                   437.

                                              
                                              

438.

Translate Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression and then simplify.

439. the difference of                  440. subtract from

Subtract Integers in Applications

In the following exercises, solve the given applications.

441. Temperature One                    442. Temperature On January
        morning the temperature                 4, the high temperature in
        in Bangor, Maine was                    Laredo, Texas was
                         By afternoon,                           and the high
        it had dropped                          in Houlton, Maine was
                         What was the                              What was
        afternoon temperature?                  the difference in
                                                temperature of Laredo
                                                and Houlton?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                3 · Exercises 249

Multiply and Divide Integers

Multiply Integers

In the following exercises, multiply.

443.                                   444.                          445.

446.

Divide Integers

In the following exercises, divide.

447.                                   448.                          449.

450.                                   451.                          452.

Simplify Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

453.                                   454.                          455.

456.                                   457.                          458.

459.                                   460.

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Integers

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression.

461.                                   462.                          463.

464.

Translate Word Phrases to Algebraic Expressions

In the following exercises, translate to an algebraic expression and simplify if possible.

465. the product of and                466. the quotient of and the
                                               sum of and

Solve Equations using Integers; The Division Property of Equality

Determine Whether a Number is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.

467.                                   468.

                                                       
                                             

Using the Addition and Subtraction Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, solve.

469.                                   470.                          471.

472.
250 3 · Exercises

Model the Division Property of Equality

In the following exercises, write the equation modeled by the envelopes and counters. Then solve it.

473.                                   474.

Solve Equations Using the Division Property of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the division property of equality and check the solution.

475.                                   476.                    477.

478.

Translate to an Equation and Solve.

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

479.                                         480.                    481. Four more than is

482.

Everyday Math

483. Describe how you have
        used two topics from this
        chapter in your life
        outside of your math
        class during the past
        month.

Practice Test

484. Locate and label
        and on a number line.

In the following exercises, compare the numbers, using

485.                                   486. 
                                           

In the following exercises, find the opposite of each number.

487.               

In the following exercises, simplify.

488.                                   489.                    490.

491.                                   492.                    493.

494.                                   495.                    496.

497.                                   498.                    499.

500.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              3 · Exercises 251

In the following exercises, evaluate.

501.                                   502.                             503.

504.

In the following exercises, translate each phrase into an algebraic expression and then simplify, if possible.

505. the difference of -7 and          506. the quotient of    and the
        -4                                     sum of and

In the following exercises, solve.

507. Early one morning, the            508. Collette owed      on her

      temperature in Syracuse                credit card. Then she

      was  By noon, it had                   charged  What was

      risen What was the                     her new balance?

      temperature at noon?

In the following exercises, solve.

509.                                   510.                             511.

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

512.                                   513.
252 3 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
              4 · Introduction to Fractions 253

4  FRACTIONS

Figure 4.1 Bakers combine ingredients to make delicious breads and pastries. (credit: Agustín Ruiz, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  4.1 Visualize Fractions
  4.2 Multiply and Divide Fractions
  4.3 Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions
  4.4 Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators
  4.5 Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators
  4.6 Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers
  4.7 Solve Equations with Fractions

      Introduction to Fractions

Often in life, whole amounts are not exactly what we need. A baker must use a little more than a cup of milk or part of a
teaspoon of sugar. Similarly a carpenter might need less than a foot of wood and a painter might use part of a gallon of
paint. In this chapter, we will learn about numbers that describe parts of a whole. These numbers, called fractions, are
very useful both in algebra and in everyday life. You will discover that you are already familiar with many examples of
fractions!

4.1 Visualize Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Understand the meaning of fractions
           Model improper fractions and mixed numbers
           Convert between improper fractions and mixed numbers
           Model equivalent fractions
           Find equivalent fractions
           Locate fractions and mixed numbers on the number line
           Order fractions and mixed numbers

       BE PREPARED 4.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.
254 4 · Fractions

BE PREPARED 4.2                  Fill in the blank with or
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.2.

Understand the Meaning of Fractions

Andy and Bobby love pizza. On Monday night, they share a pizza equally. How much of the pizza does each one get? Are
you thinking that each boy gets half of the pizza? That's right. There is one whole pizza, evenly divided into two parts, so
each boy gets one of the two equal parts.

In math, we write to mean one out of two parts.

On Tuesday, Andy and Bobby share a pizza with their parents, Fred and Christy, with each person getting an equal
amount of the whole pizza. How much of the pizza does each person get? There is one whole pizza, divided evenly into
four equal parts. Each person has one of the four equal parts, so each has of the pizza.

On Wednesday, the family invites some friends over for a pizza dinner. There are a total of  people. If they share the
pizza equally, each person would get of the pizza.

Fractions

A fraction is written  where and are integers and  In a fraction, is called the numerator and is called
the denominator.

A fraction is a way to represent parts of a whole. The denominator represents the number of equal parts the whole has
been divided into, and the numerator represents how many parts are included. The denominator, cannot equal zero
because division by zero is undefined.

In Figure 4.2, the circle has been divided into three parts of equal size. Each part represents of the circle. This type of
model is called a fraction circle. Other shapes, such as rectangles, can also be used to model fractions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           4.1 · Visualize Fractions 255

                                                                              Figure 4.2
          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Model Fractions will help you develop a better understanding of
  fractions, their numerators and denominators.
What does the fraction represent? The fraction means two of three equal parts.

  EXAMPLE 4.1
Name the fraction of the shape that is shaded in each of the figures.

     Solution
We need to ask two questions. First, how many equal parts are there? This will be the denominator. Second, of these
equal parts, how many are shaded? This will be the numerator.



Five out of eight parts are shaded. Therefore, the fraction of the circle that is shaded is



Two out of nine parts are shaded. Therefore, the fraction of the square that is shaded is
       TRY IT 4.1 Name the fraction of the shape that is shaded in each figure:
256 4 · Fractions

              TRY IT 4.2 Name the fraction of the shape that is shaded in each figure:

         EXAMPLE 4.2
       Shade of the circle.

            Solution

    The denominator is so we divide the circle into four equal parts  .
    The numerator is so we shade three of the four parts  .

          of the circle is shaded.
              TRY IT 4.3 Shade of the circle.

              TRY IT 4.4 Shade of the rectangle.

       In Example 4.1 and Example 4.2, we used circles and rectangles to model fractions. Fractions can also be modeled as
       manipulatives called fraction tiles, as shown in Figure 4.3. Here, the whole is modeled as one long, undivided rectangular
       tile. Beneath it are tiles of equal length divided into different numbers of equally sized parts.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          4.1 · Visualize Fractions 257

                                                                              Figure 4.3

We'll be using fraction tiles to discover some basic facts about fractions. Refer to Figure 4.3 to answer the following
questions:

How many tiles does it take to make one whole tile?                                       It takes two halves to make
                                                                                          a whole, so two out of two

                                                                                                       is

How many tiles does it take to make one whole tile?                                         It takes three thirds, so
                                                                                          three out of three is

How many tiles does it take to make one whole tile?                                        It takes four fourths, so
                                                                                          four out of four is

How many tiles does it take to make one whole tile?                                       It takes six sixths, so six
                                                                                             out of six is

 What if the whole were divided into equal parts? (We have not shown fraction tiles       It takes twenty-fourths,
to represent this, but try to visualize it in your mind.) How many tiles does it take to             so

                                              make one whole tile?

It takes twenty-fourths, so
This leads us to the Property of One.

  Property of One
  Any number, except zero, divided by itself is one.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Fractions Equivalent to One" will help you develop a better
  understanding of fractions that are equivalent to one

  EXAMPLE 4.3
Use fraction circles to make wholes using the following pieces:

 fourths  fifths  sixths
258 4 · Fractions

            Solution

TRY IT 4.5 Use fraction circles to make wholes with the following pieces: thirds.

TRY IT 4.6 Use fraction circles to make wholes with the following pieces: eighths.

What if we have more fraction pieces than we need for whole? We'll look at this in the next example.

EXAMPLE 4.4

Use fraction circles to make wholes using the following pieces:

 halves                fifths  thirds

     Solution         whole with half left over.

 halves make

 fifths make whole with fifths left over.

 thirds make wholes with third left over.

       TRY IT 4.7 Use fraction circles to make wholes with the following pieces: thirds.
       TRY IT 4.8 Use fraction circles to make wholes with the following pieces: halves.

Model Improper Fractions and Mixed Numbers

In Example 4.4 (b), you had eight equal fifth pieces. You used five of them to make one whole, and you had three fifths

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         4.1 · Visualize Fractions 259

left over. Let us use fraction notation to show what happened. You had eight pieces, each of them one fifth, so  which
altogether you had eight fifths, which we can write as The fraction is one whole, plus three fifths, or
is read as one and three-fifths.

The number is called a mixed number. A mixed number consists of a whole number and a fraction.

Mixed Numbers

A mixed number consists of a whole number and a fraction where     It is written as follows.

Fractions such as  and are called improper fractions. In an improper fraction, the numerator is greater than or

equal to the denominator, so its value is greater than or equal to one. When a fraction has a numerator that is smaller

than the denominator, it is called a proper fraction, and its value is less than one. Fractions such as  and are

proper fractions.

Proper and Improper Fractions

The fraction is a proper fraction if  and an improper fraction if

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Improper Fractions" and "Mixed Numbers" will help you develop
  a better understanding of how to convert between improper fractions and mixed numbers.

  EXAMPLE 4.5
Name the improper fraction modeled. Then write the improper fraction as a mixed number.

     Solution                                               of the circle. There are four pieces shaded, so there are four
Each circle is divided into three pieces, so each piece is

thirds or The figure shows that we also have one whole circle and one third, which is So,

TRY IT 4.9 Name the improper fraction. Then write it as a mixed number.

TRY IT 4.10 Name the improper fraction. Then write it as a mixed number.
260 4 · Fractions

  EXAMPLE 4.6

Draw a figure to model

     Solution
The denominator of the improper fraction is Draw a circle divided into eight pieces and shade all of them. This takes
care of eight eighths, but we have eighths. We must shade three of the eight parts of another circle.

So,

     TRY IT 4.11 Draw a figure to model
     TRY IT 4.12 Draw a figure to model

EXAMPLE 4.7

Use a model to rewrite the improper fraction as a mixed number.

     Solution      sixths  We know that six sixths makes one whole.
We start with

That leaves us with five more sixths, which is
So,

       TRY IT 4.13 Use a model to rewrite the improper fraction as a mixed number:
       TRY IT 4.14 Use a model to rewrite the improper fraction as a mixed number:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              4.1 · Visualize Fractions 261

EXAMPLE 4.8

Use a model to rewrite the mixed number as an improper fraction.

     Solution                                                                so the whole is  Together five fifths
The mixed number means one whole plus four fifths. The denominator is
and four fifths equals nine fifths.

So,

     TRY IT 4.15 Use a model to rewrite the mixed number as an improper fraction:

     TRY IT 4.16 Use a model to rewrite the mixed number as an improper fraction:

Convert between Improper Fractions and Mixed Numbers

In Example 4.7, we converted the improper fraction to the mixed number using fraction circles. We did this by
grouping six sixths together to make a whole; then we looked to see how many of the pieces were left. We saw that

    made one whole group of six sixths plus five more sixths, showing that

The division expression (which can also be written as  ) tells us to find how many groups of are in  To convert

an improper fraction to a mixed number without fraction circles, we divide.

EXAMPLE 4.9

Convert to a mixed number.
     Solution

Divide the denominator into the numerator.        Remember means             .

Identify the quotient, remainder and divisor.

Write the mixed number as                      .

So,
262 4 · Fractions

TRY IT 4.17 Convert the improper fraction to a mixed number:

TRY IT 4.18 Convert the improper fraction to a mixed number:

...

     HOW TO

Convert an improper fraction to a mixed number.

Step 1. Divide the denominator into the numerator.

Step 2. Identify the quotient, remainder, and divisor.

Step 3. Write the mixed number as quotient              .

  EXAMPLE 4.10                   to a mixed number.
Convert the improper fraction

     Solution

Divide the denominator into the numerator.              Remember, means  .

Identify the quotient, remainder, and divisor.

Write the mixed number as quotient              .

                                                           So,

TRY IT 4.19 Convert the improper fraction to a mixed number:

TRY IT 4.20 Convert the improper fraction to a mixed number:

In Example 4.8, we changed       to an improper fraction by first seeing that the whole is a set of five fifths. So we had five
fifths and four more fifths.

Where did the nine come from? There are nine fifths--one whole (five fifths) plus four fifths. Let us use this idea to see
how to convert a mixed number to an improper fraction.

  EXAMPLE 4.11

Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    4.1 · Visualize Fractions 263

  Solution

Multiply the whole number by the denominator.
The whole number is 4 and the denominator is 3.
Simplify.
Add the numerator to the product.
The numerator of the mixed number is 2.
Simplify.
Write the final sum over the original denominator.
The denominator is 3.

     TRY IT 4.21 Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction:

     TRY IT 4.22 Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction:

           ...

              HOW TO

Convert a mixed number to an improper fraction.
Step 1. Multiply the whole number by the denominator.
Step 2. Add the numerator to the product found in Step 1.
Step 3. Write the final sum over the original denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4.12            to an improper fraction.
Convert the mixed number

     Solution

Multiply the whole number by the denominator.
264 4 · Fractions

The whole number is 10 and the denominator is 7.

Simplify.
Add the numerator to the product.
The numerator of the mixed number is 2.
Simplify.
Write the final sum over the original denominator.
The denominator is 7.

     TRY IT 4.23 Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction:

     TRY IT 4.24 Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction:

Model Equivalent Fractions

Let's think about Andy and Bobby and their favorite food again. If Andy eats of a pizza and Bobby eats of the pizza,

have they eaten the same amount of pizza? In other words, does  We can use fraction tiles to find out whether

Andy and Bobby have eaten equivalent parts of the pizza.

Equivalent Fractions

Equivalent fractions are fractions that have the same value.

Fraction tiles serve as a useful model of equivalent fractions. You may want to use fraction tiles to do the following
activity. Or you might make a copy of Figure 4.3 and extend it to include eighths, tenths, and twelfths.

Start with a tile. How many fourths equal one-half? How many of the tiles exactly cover the tile?

Since two tiles cover the tile, we see that is the same as or
How many of the tiles cover the tile?

Since three tiles cover the tile, we see that is the same as

So,                The fractions are equivalent fractions.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       4.1 · Visualize Fractions 265

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the activity "Equivalent Fractions" will help you develop a better understanding of what it means when two
fractions are equivalent.

EXAMPLE 4.13

Use fraction tiles to find equivalent fractions. Show your result with a figure.

 How many eighths equal one-half?    How many tenths equal one-half?
 How many twelfths equal one-half?

     Solution

 It takes four tiles to exactly cover the tile, so

 It takes five tiles to exactly cover the tile, so

 It takes six tiles to exactly cover the tile, so

Suppose you had tiles marked  How many of them would it take to equal Are you thinking ten tiles? If you are,
you're right, because                and are all equivalent fractions.

We have shown that

TRY IT 4.25 Use fraction tiles to find equivalent fractions: How many eighths equal one-fourth?

TRY IT 4.26 Use fraction tiles to find equivalent fractions: How many twelfths equal one-fourth?

Find Equivalent Fractions

We used fraction tiles to show that there are many fractions equivalent to For example,  and are all equivalent

to When we lined up the fraction tiles, it took four of the tiles to make the same length as a tile. This showed that

See Example 4.13.

We can show this with pizzas, too. Figure 4.4(a) shows a single pizza, cut into two equal pieces with  shaded. Figure
4.4(b) shows a second pizza of the same size, cut into eight pieces with shaded.
266 4 · Fractions

                                                   Figure 4.4

This is another way to show that is equivalent to

How can we use mathematics to change into How could you take a pizza that is cut into two pieces and cut it into

eight pieces? You could cut each of the two larger pieces into four smaller pieces! The whole pizza would then be cut into
eight pieces instead of just two. Mathematically, what we've described could be written as:

These models lead to the Equivalent Fractions Property, which states that if we multiply the numerator and denominator
of a fraction by the same number, the value of the fraction does not change.

Equivalent Fractions Property

If and are numbers where                  and      then

When working with fractions, it is often necessary to express the same fraction in different forms. To find equivalent
forms of a fraction, we can use the Equivalent Fractions Property. For example, consider the fraction one-half.

So, we say that    and are equivalent fractions.

EXAMPLE 4.14

Find three fractions equivalent to

     Solution                       we multiply the numerator and denominator by the same number (but not zero). Let
To find a fraction equivalent to
us multiply them by and

So,                and are equivalent to

     TRY IT 4.27 Find three fractions equivalent to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                4.1 · Visualize Fractions 267

TRY IT 4.28 Find three fractions equivalent to

EXAMPLE 4.15

Find a fraction with a denominator of that is equivalent to

     Solution
To find equivalent fractions, we multiply the numerator and denominator by the same number. In this case, we need to
multiply the denominator by a number that will result in

Since we can multiply by to get          we can find the equivalent fraction by multiplying both the numerator and
denominator by

TRY IT 4.29 Find a fraction with a denominator of that is equivalent to

TRY IT 4.30 Find a fraction with a denominator of that is equivalent to

Locate Fractions and Mixed Numbers on the Number Line

Now we are ready to plot fractions on a number line. This will help us visualize fractions and understand their values.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Number Line Part " will help you develop a better understanding of
  the location of fractions on the number line.

Let us locate               and on the number line.

We will start with the whole numbers and because they are the easiest to plot.

The proper fractions listed are and We know proper fractions have values less than one, so and are located

between the whole numbers and The denominators are both so we need to divide the segment of the number

line between and into five equal parts. We can do this by drawing four equally spaced marks on the number line,

which we can then label as       and

Now plot points at and

The only mixed number to plot is Between what two whole numbers is Remember that a mixed number is a

whole number plus a proper fraction, so  Since it is greater than but not a whole unit greater, is between

and We need to divide the portion of the number line between and into three equal pieces (thirds) and plot at

the first mark.

Finally, look at the improper fractions  and Locating these points will be easier if you change each of them to a
mixed number.
268 4 · Fractions

       Here is the number line with all the points plotted.

EXAMPLE 4.16

Locate and label the following on a number line:             and

     Solution                          It is between and To do this, divide the distance between and into four
Start by locating the proper fraction
equal parts. Then plot

Next, locate the mixed number It is between and on the number line. Divide the number line between and
into five equal parts, and then plot one-fifth of the way between and .

Now locate the improper fractions and .
It is easier to plot them if we convert them to mixed numbers first.

Divide the distance between and into thirds.

Next let us plot We write it as a mixed number,              . Plot it between and

The number line shows all the numbers located on the number line.

       TRY IT 4.31 Locate and label the following on a number line:
       TRY IT 4.32 Locate and label the following on a number line:
In Introduction to Integers, we defined the opposite of a number. It is the number that is the same distance from zero on
the number line but on the opposite side of zero. We saw, for example, that the opposite of is and the opposite of
    is

Fractions have opposites, too. The opposite of is It is the same distance from on the number line, but on the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.1 · Visualize Fractions 269

opposite side of

Thinking of negative fractions as the opposite of positive fractions will help us locate them on the number line. To locate
       on the number line, first think of where is located. It is an improper fraction, so we first convert it to the mixed

number and see that it will be between and on the number line. So its opposite,  will be between and

on the number line.

EXAMPLE 4.17

Locate and label the following on the number line:         and

     Solution
Draw a number line. Mark in the middle and then mark several units to the left and right.

To locate divide the interval between and into four equal parts. Each part represents one-quarter of the distance.
So plot at the first mark.

To locate divide the interval between and into four equal parts. Plot at the first mark to the left of

Since is between and divide the interval between and       into three equal parts. Plot at the first mark to the
                                                           and Divide the interval between and into
right of Then since      is the opposite of it is between

three equal parts. Plot  at the first mark to the left of

To locate and it may be helpful to rewrite them as the mixed numbers and

Since is between and      divide the interval between      and into two equal parts. Plot at the mark. Then since
       is between and    divide the interval between        and into two equal parts. Plot at the mark.

TRY IT 4.33 Locate and label each of the given fractions on a number line:
TRY IT 4.34 Locate and label each of the given fractions on a number line:
270 4 · Fractions

Order Fractions and Mixed Numbers

We can use the inequality symbols to order fractions. Remember that  means that        is to the right of  on the

number line. As we move from left to right on a number line, the values increase.

EXAMPLE 4.18

Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

  Solution                                              









  TRY IT 4.35 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

                                                                                   

  TRY IT 4.36 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

                                                                                   

  MEDIA

  ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
  Introduction to Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24Introtofract)
  Identify Fractions Using Pattern Blocks (http://www.openstax.org/l/24FractPattBloc)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 4.1 · Visualize Fractions 271

        SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

In the following exercises, name the fraction of each figure that is shaded.

1.          2.

In the following exercises, shade parts of circles or squares to model the following fractions.

3.          4.                 5.

6.          7.                 8.

9.          10.

In the following exercises, use fraction circles to make wholes using the following pieces.

11. thirds  12. eighths        13. sixths

14. thirds  15. fifths         16. fourths

In the following exercises, name the improper fractions. Then write each improper fraction as a mixed number.

17.         18.                    19.
272 4 · Fractions

In the following exercises, draw fraction circles to model the given fraction.

20.                              21.                            22.

23.                              24.                            25.

26.                              27.

In the following exercises, rewrite the improper fraction as a mixed number.

28.                              29.                            30.

31.                              32.                            33.

34.                              35.

In the following exercises, rewrite the mixed number as an improper fraction.

36.                              37.                            38.

39.                              40.                            41.

42.                              43.

In the following exercises, use fraction tiles or draw a figure to find equivalent fractions.

44. How many sixths equal        45. How many twelfths equal    46. How many eighths equal
      one-third?                       one-third?                     three-fourths?

47. How many twelfths equal      48. How many fourths equal     49. How many sixths equal
      three-fourths?                   three-halves?                  three-halves?

In the following exercises, find three fractions equivalent to the given fraction. Show your work, using figures or algebra.

50.                              51.                            52.

53.                              54.                            55.

In the following exercises, plot the numbers on a number line.

56.                              57.                            58.

59.                              60.                            61.

62.                              63.

In the following exercises, order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

64.                              65.                            66.

67.                              68.                            69.

70.                              71.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        4.1 · Visualize Fractions 273

Everyday Math

72. Music Measures A choreographed dance is             73. Music Measures Fractions are used often in
      broken into counts. A count has one step in a           music. In time, there are four quarter notes in
      count, a count has two steps in a count and a
      count has three steps in a count. How many steps        one measure.
      would be in a count? What type of count has
      four steps in it?                                     How many measures would eight quarter

74. Baking Nina is making five pans of fudge to serve         notes make?
      after a music recital. For each pan, she needs
      cup of walnuts.                                       The song "Happy Birthday to You" has

    How many cups of walnuts does she need for                quarter notes. How many measures are there in
                                                              "Happy Birthday to You?"
      five pans of fudge?

    Do you think it is easier to measure this

      amount when you use an improper fraction or a
      mixed number? Why?

Writing Exercises

75. Give an example from your life experience           76. Explain how you locate the improper fraction
      (outside of school) where it was important to           on a number line on which only the whole
      understand fractions.                                   numbers from through are marked.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
274 4 · Fractions

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

4.2 Multiply and Divide Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify fractions
           Multiply fractions
           Find reciprocals
           Divide fractions

       BE PREPARED 4.3 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Find the prime factorization of
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.48.

   BE PREPARED 4.4               Draw a model of the fraction
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.2.

   BE PREPARED 4.5               Find two fractions equivalent to
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.14.

Simplify Fractions

In working with equivalent fractions, you saw that there are many ways to write fractions that have the same value, or
represent the same part of the whole. How do you know which one to use? Often, we'll use the fraction that is in
simplified form.
A fraction is considered simplified if there are no common factors, other than in the numerator and denominator. If a
fraction does have common factors in the numerator and denominator, we can reduce the fraction to its simplified form
by removing the common factors.

  Simplified Fraction

  A fraction is considered simplified if there are no common factors in the numerator and denominator.

For example,

· is simplified because there are no common factors of and

·  is not simplified because is a common factor of and

The process of simplifying a fraction is often called reducing the fraction. In the previous section, we used the Equivalent
Fractions Property to find equivalent fractions. We can also use the Equivalent Fractions Property in reverse to simplify
fractions. We rewrite the property to show both forms together.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 275

Equivalent Fractions Property

If       are numbers where     then

Notice that is a common factor in the numerator and denominator. Anytime we have a common factor in the
numerator and denominator, it can be removed.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Simplify a fraction.

Step 1.  Rewrite the numerator and denominator to show the common factors. If needed, factor the numerator and
         denominator into prime numbers.
Step 2.  Simplify, using the equivalent fractions property, by removing common factors.
Step 3.  Multiply any remaining factors.

  EXAMPLE 4.19
Simplify:

     Solution
To simplify the fraction, we look for any common factors in the numerator and the denominator.

  Notice that 5 is a factor of both 10 and 15.

  Factor the numerator and denominator.

  Remove the common factors.

  Simplify.

       TRY IT 4.37 Simplify: .
       TRY IT 4.38 Simplify: .

To simplify a negative fraction, we use the same process as in Example 4.19. Remember to keep the negative sign.
  EXAMPLE 4.20

Simplify:
276 4 · Fractions

            Solution
         We notice that 18 and 24 both have factors of 6.
         Rewrite the numerator and denominator showing the common factor.

         Remove common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 4.39 Simplify:
              TRY IT 4.40 Simplify:
       After simplifying a fraction, it is always important to check the result to make sure that the numerator and denominator
       do not have any more factors in common. Remember, the definition of a simplified fraction: a fraction is considered
       simplified if there are no common factors in the numerator and denominator.
       When we simplify an improper fraction, there is no need to change it to a mixed number.
         EXAMPLE 4.21
       Simplify:
            Solution

         Rewrite the numerator and denominator, showing the common factors, 8.

         Remove common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 4.41 Simplify:
              TRY IT 4.42 Simplify:

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Simplify a fraction.
         Step 1. Rewrite the numerator and denominator to show the common factors. If needed, factor the numerator and

                     denominator into prime numbers.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                            4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 277

  Step 2. Simplify, using the equivalent fractions property, by removing common factors.
  Step 3. Multiply any remaining factors

Sometimes it may not be easy to find common factors of the numerator and denominator. A good idea, then, is to factor
the numerator and the denominator into prime numbers. (You may want to use the factor tree method to identify the
prime factors.) Then divide out the common factors using the Equivalent Fractions Property.

  EXAMPLE 4.22
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use factor trees to factor the numerator and
  denominator.

  Rewrite the numerator and denominator as
  the product of the primes.
  Remove the common factors.
  Simplify.
  Multiply any remaining factors.

       TRY IT 4.43 Simplify:
       TRY IT 4.44 Simplify:
We can also simplify fractions containing variables. If a variable is a common factor in the numerator and denominator,
we remove it just as we do with an integer factor.
  EXAMPLE 4.23
Simplify:
     Solution

  Rewrite numerator and denominator showing common factors.
278 4 · Fractions

Remove common factors.
Simplify.

TRY IT 4.45 Simplify:

TRY IT 4.46 Simplify:

Multiply Fractions                                                                                To multiply and

A model may help you understand multiplication of fractions. We will use fraction tiles to model
    think of

Start with fraction tiles for three-fourths. To find one-half of three-fourths, we need to divide them into two equal groups.
Since we cannot divide the three tiles evenly into two parts, we exchange them for smaller tiles.

We see is equivalent to          Taking half of the six tiles gives us three tiles, which is
Therefore,

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Fraction Multiplication" will help you develop a better
understanding of how to multiply fractions.

EXAMPLE 4.24

Use a diagram to model

     Solution      of the rectangle.
First shade in

We will take of this so we heavily shade of the shaded region.

Notice that out of the pieces are heavily shaded. This means that of the rectangle is heavily shaded.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 279

Therefore, of is or

    TRY IT 4.47 Use a diagram to model:

    TRY IT 4.48 Use a diagram to model:

Look at the result we got from the model in Example 4.24. We found that  Do you notice that we could have

gotten the same answer by multiplying the numerators and multiplying the denominators?

Multiply the numerators, and multiply the denominators.
Simplify.

This leads to the definition of fraction multiplication. To multiply fractions, we multiply the numerators and multiply the
denominators. Then we write the fraction in simplified form.

Fraction Multiplication

If  and are numbers where  and           then

  EXAMPLE 4.25
Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

     Solution

  Multiply the numerators; multiply the denominators.
  Simplify.
There are no common factors, so the fraction is simplified.

       TRY IT 4.49 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:
       TRY IT 4.50 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:
When multiplying fractions, the properties of positive and negative numbers still apply. It is a good idea to determine the
sign of the product as the first step. In Example 4.26 we will multiply two negatives, so the product will be positive.
280 4 · Fractions

         EXAMPLE 4.26
       Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

            Solution

         The signs are the same, so the product is positive. Multiply the numerators, multiply the denominators.
         Simplify.
         Look for common factors in the numerator and denominator. Rewrite showing common factors.
         Remove common factors.
       Another way to find this product involves removing common factors earlier.

         Determine the sign of the product. Multiply.
         Show common factors and then remove them.
         Multiply remaining factors.
       We get the same result.

              TRY IT 4.51 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:
              TRY IT 4.52 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:
         EXAMPLE 4.27
       Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:
            Solution

         Determine the sign of the product; multiply.
         Are there any common factors in the numerator and the denominator?
          We know that 7 is a factor of 14 and 21, and 5 is a factor of 20 and 15.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 281

Rewrite showing common factors.
Remove the common factors.
Multiply the remaining factors.

TRY IT 4.53 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

TRY IT 4.54 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

When multiplying a fraction by an integer, it may be helpful to write the integer as a fraction. Any integer,  can be

written as So,  for example.

  EXAMPLE 4.28

Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:




     Solution

 

Write 56 as a fraction.
Determine the sign of the product; multiply.
Simplify.



Write -20x as a fraction.
Determine the sign of the product; multiply.

Show common factors and then remove them.

Multiply remaining factors; simplify.               -48x
282 4 · Fractions

TRY IT 4.55 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

                                         

TRY IT 4.56 Multiply, and write the answer in simplified form:

                                   

Find Reciprocals

The fractions and are related to each other in a special way. So are   and  Do you see how? Besides looking

like upside-down versions of one another, if we were to multiply these pairs of fractions, the product would be

Such pairs of numbers are called reciprocals.

Reciprocal

The reciprocal of the fraction is where        and

A number and its reciprocal have a product of

To find the reciprocal of a fraction, we invert the fraction. This means that we place the numerator in the denominator
and the denominator in the numerator.

To get a positive result when multiplying two numbers, the numbers must have the same sign. So reciprocals must have
the same sign.

To find the reciprocal, keep the same sign and invert the fraction. The number zero does not have a reciprocal. Why? A

number and its reciprocal multiply to Is there any number so that      No. So, the number does not have a

reciprocal.

EXAMPLE 4.29

Find the reciprocal of each number. Then check that the product of each number and its reciprocal is

                                 
Solution

To find the reciprocals, we keep the sign and invert the fractions.

                                               The reciprocal of is .

Find the reciprocal of .

Check:

Multiply the number and its reciprocal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 283

Multiply numerators and denominators.
Simplify.



Find the reciprocal of .
Simplify.
Check:



Find the reciprocal of .
Check:



Find the reciprocal of .
Write as a fraction.
Write the reciprocal of .
Check:

TRY IT 4.57 Find the reciprocal:

                                         

TRY IT 4.58 Find the reciprocal:

                                         

In a previous chapter, we worked with opposites and absolute values. Table 4.1 compares opposites, absolute values,
284 4 · Fractions

and reciprocals.

                                 Opposite  Absolute Value  Reciprocal

                   has opposite sign is never negative has same sign, fraction inverts

                   Table 4.1

  EXAMPLE 4.30
Fill in the chart for each fraction in the left column:

                                               Number Opposite Absolute Value Reciprocal

     Solution
To find the opposite, change the sign. To find the absolute value, leave the positive numbers the same, but take the
opposite of the negative numbers. To find the reciprocal, keep the sign the same and invert the fraction.

                                               Number Opposite Absolute Value Reciprocal

TRY IT 4.59        Fill in the chart for each number given:
                     Number Opposite Absolute Value Reciprocal

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 285

TRY IT 4.60       Fill in the chart for each number given:
                    Number Opposite Absolute Value Reciprocal

Divide Fractions

Why is             We previously modeled this with counters. How many groups of  counters can be made from a
group of  counters?

There are groups of counters. In other words, there are four s in So,

What about dividing fractions? Suppose we want to find the quotient:   We need to figure out how many s there

are in We can use fraction tiles to model this division. We start by lining up the half and sixth fraction tiles as shown in

Figure 4.5. Notice, there are three tiles in so

                                                                            Figure 4.5

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Fraction Division" will help you develop a better understanding
of dividing fractions.

  EXAMPLE 4.31                          Start with one tile. Line up tiles underneath the tile.

Model:
     Solution

We want to determine how many s are in

There are two s in
So,

       TRY IT 4.61 Model:
       TRY IT 4.62 Model:
286 4 · Fractions

EXAMPLE 4.32

Model:                                                  We can model this as shown.

     Solution
We are trying to determine how many s there are in

Because there are eight s in

    TRY IT 4.63 Model:

    TRY IT 4.64 Model:

Let's use money to model              in another way. We often read as a `quarter', and we know that a quarter is one-fourth

of a dollar as shown in Figure 4.6. So we can think of        as, "How many quarters are there in two dollars?" One dollar

is quarters, so dollars would be quarters. So again,

                   Figure 4.6 The U.S. coin called a quarter is worth one-fourth of a dollar.

Using fraction tiles, we showed that              Notice that        also. How are and related? They are

reciprocals. This leads us to the procedure for fraction division.

Fraction Division

If  and are numbers where                         and          then

To divide fractions, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

We need to say                   and  to be sure we don't divide by zero.

EXAMPLE 4.33

Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
     Solution

Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
Multiply. The product is negative.

    TRY IT 4.65 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 287

       TRY IT 4.66 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
  EXAMPLE 4.34
Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:

     Solution

  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 4.67 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
       TRY IT 4.68 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
  EXAMPLE 4.35
Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
     Solution

  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply. Remember to determine the sign first.
  Rewrite to show common factors.
  Remove common factors and simplify.

       TRY IT 4.69 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
       TRY IT 4.70 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
  EXAMPLE 4.36
Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:
288 4 · Fractions

            Solution

         Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
         Multiply.
         Rewrite showing common factors.
         Remove common factors.
         Simplify.

     TRY IT 4.71 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:

     TRY IT 4.72 Divide, and write the answer in simplified form:

     MEDIA
     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Simplifying Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SimplifyFrac)
     Multiplying Fractions (Positive Only) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24MultiplyFrac)
     Multiplying Signed Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24MultSigned)
     Dividing Fractions (Positive Only) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24DivideFrac)
     Dividing Signed Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24DivideSign)

        SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Fractions

In the following exercises, simplify each fraction. Do not convert any improper fractions to mixed numbers.

77.                              78.                                   79.

80.                              81.                                   82.

83.                              84.                                   85.

86.                              87.                                   88.

89.                              90.                                   91.

92.                              93.                                   94.

Multiply Fractions

In the following exercises, use a diagram to model.

95.                              96.                                   97.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        4.2 · Multiply and Divide Fractions 289

98.

In the following exercises, multiply, and write the answer in simplified form.

99.                      100.                              101.

102.                     103.                              104.

105.                     106.                              107.

108.                     109.                              110.

111.                     112.                              113.

114.                     115.                              116.

117.                     118.                              119.

120.                     121.                              122.

123.                     124.                              125.

126.

Find Reciprocals

In the following exercises, find the reciprocal.

127.                     128.                                               129.
                                                                            132.
130.                     131.                                               135.
                                                           137. Fill in the chart.
133.                     134.

136. Fill in the chart.

      Opposite           Absolute  Reciprocal                                 Opposite  Absolute  Reciprocal
                           Value                                                          Value

Divide Fractions

In the following exercises, model each fraction division.

138.                     139.                              140.

141.

In the following exercises, divide, and write the answer in simplified form.

142.                     143.                              144.
290 4 · Fractions

145.                             146.                        147.

148.                             149.                        150.

151.                             152.                        153.

154.                             155.                        156.

157.                             158.                        159.

160.                             161.                        162.

163.                             164.                        165.

166.                             167.

Everyday Math

168. Baking A recipe for chocolate chip cookies calls        169. Baking Nina is making pans of fudge to serve
        for cup brown sugar. Imelda wants to double                  after a music recital. For each pan, she needs
        the recipe.
                                                                     cup of condensed milk.
     How much brown sugar will Imelda need?
                                                                  How much condensed milk will Nina need?
        Show your calculation. Write your result as an
        improper fraction and as a mixed number.                     Show your calculation. Write your result as an
                                                                     improper fraction and as a mixed number.
     Measuring cups usually come in sets of
                                                                  Measuring cups usually come in sets of
                        and cup. Draw a diagram to show
                                                                                     and cup. Draw a diagram to show
        two different ways that Imelda could measure
        the brown sugar needed to double the recipe.                 two different ways that Nina could measure the
                                                                     condensed milk she needs.
170. Portions Don purchased a bulk package of
        candy that weighs pounds. He wants to sell the       171. Portions Kristen has yards of ribbon. She
        candy in little bags that hold pound. How                    wants to cut it into equal parts to make hair
        many little bags of candy can he fill from the bulk          ribbons for her daughter's dolls. How long will
        package?                                                     each doll's hair ribbon be?

Writing Exercises

172. Explain how you find the reciprocal of a fraction.      173. Explain how you find the reciprocal of a negative
                                                                     fraction.
174. Rafael wanted to order half a medium pizza at a
        restaurant. The waiter told him that a medium        175. Give an example from everyday life that
        pizza could be cut into or slices. Would he
        prefer out of slices or out of slices? Rafael        demonstrates how  is
        replied that since he wasn't very hungry, he
        would prefer out of slices. Explain what is
        wrong with Rafael's reasoning.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                 4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 291

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

4.3 Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Multiply and divide mixed numbers
           Translate phrases to expressions with fractions
           Simplify complex fractions
           Simplify expressions written with a fraction bar

       BE PREPARED 4.6 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Divide and reduce, if possible:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 3.21.

BE PREPARED 4.7 Multiply and write the answer in simplified form:  .

                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.25.

BE PREPARED 4.8  Convert into an improper fraction.
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.11.

Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers

In the previous section, you learned how to multiply and divide fractions. All of the examples there used either proper or
improper fractions. What happens when you are asked to multiply or divide mixed numbers? Remember that we can
convert a mixed number to an improper fraction. And you learned how to do that in Visualize Fractions.

  EXAMPLE 4.37

Multiply:

     Solution

  Convert to an improper fraction.
  Multiply.
  Look for common factors.
  Remove common factors.
  Simplify.

Notice that we left the answer as an improper fraction, and did not convert it to a mixed number. In algebra, it is
preferable to write answers as improper fractions instead of mixed numbers. This avoids any possible confusion
between and

       TRY IT 4.73 Multiply, and write your answer in simplified form:
292 4 · Fractions

              TRY IT 4.74 Multiply, and write your answer in simplified form:

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Multiply or divide mixed numbers.
         Step 1. Convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions.
         Step 2. Follow the rules for fraction multiplication or division.
         Step 3. Simplify if possible.

         EXAMPLE 4.38
       Multiply, and write your answer in simplified form:

            Solution

         Convert mixed numbers to improper fractions.
         Multiply.
         Look for common factors.
         Remove common factors.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 4.75 Multiply, and write your answer in simplified form.
              TRY IT 4.76 Multiply, and write your answer in simplified form.
         EXAMPLE 4.39
       Divide, and write your answer in simplified form:
            Solution

         Convert mixed numbers to improper fractions.
         Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
         Multiply.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 293

  Look for common factors.
  Remove common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 4.77 Divide, and write your answer in simplified form:
       TRY IT 4.78 Divide, and write your answer in simplified form:

  EXAMPLE 4.40
Divide:

     Solution

  Convert mixed numbers to improper fractions.
  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply.
  Look for common factors.
  Remove common factors.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 4.79 Divide, and write your answer in simplified form:
       TRY IT 4.80 Divide, and write your answer in simplified form:

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Fractions

The words quotient and ratio are often used to describe fractions. In Subtract Whole Numbers, we defined quotient as
the result of division. The quotient of and is the result you get from dividing by or Let's practice translating
some phrases into algebraic expressions using these terms.

  EXAMPLE 4.41
Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: "the quotient of and
294 4 · Fractions

            Solution
       The keyword is quotient; it tells us that the operation is division. Look for the words of and and to find the numbers to
       divide.

       This tells us that we need to divide by

              TRY IT 4.81 Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: the quotient of and

              TRY IT 4.82 Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: the quotient of and

         EXAMPLE 4.42
       Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: the quotient of the difference of and and

            Solution
       We are looking for the quotient of the difference of and , and This means we want to divide the difference of and

         by

       TRY IT 4.83 Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: the quotient of the difference of and and

       TRY IT 4.84 Translate the phrase into an algebraic expression: the quotient of the sum of and and

Simplify Complex Fractions

Our work with fractions so far has included proper fractions, improper fractions, and mixed numbers. Another kind of
fraction is called complex fraction, which is a fraction in which the numerator or the denominator contains a fraction.
Some examples of complex fractions are:

To simplify a complex fraction, remember that the fraction bar means division. So the complex fraction  can be
written as

  EXAMPLE 4.43

Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 295

Solution

  Rewrite as division.
  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply.
  Look for common factors.
  Remove common factors and simplify.

       TRY IT 4.85 Simplify:

       TRY IT 4.86 Simplify:

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Simplify a complex fraction.
  Step 1. Rewrite the complex fraction as a division problem.
  Step 2. Follow the rules for dividing fractions.
  Step 3. Simplify if possible.

  EXAMPLE 4.44
Simplify:

     Solution

  Rewrite as division.
  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply; the product will be negative.
296 4 · Fractions

         Look for common factors.
         Remove common factors and simplify.

              TRY IT 4.87 Simplify:
              TRY IT 4.88 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 4.45
       Simplify:
            Solution

         Rewrite as division.
         Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
         Multiply.
         Look for common factors.
         Remove common factors and simplify.

              TRY IT 4.89 Simplify:
              TRY IT 4.90 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 4.46
       Simplify:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 297

Solution

  Rewrite as division.
  Change the mixed number to an improper fraction.
  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Multiply.
  Look for common factors.
  Remove common factors and simplify.

       TRY IT 4.91 Simplify:

       TRY IT 4.92 Simplify:

Simplify Expressions with a Fraction Bar

Where does the negative sign go in a fraction? Usually, the negative sign is placed in front of the fraction, but you will
sometimes see a fraction with a negative numerator or denominator. Remember that fractions represent division. The
fraction could be the result of dividing a negative by a positive, or of dividing a positive by a negative. When
the numerator and denominator have different signs, the quotient is negative.

If both the numerator and denominator are negative, then the fraction itself is positive because we are dividing a
negative by a negative.

  Placement of Negative Sign in a Fraction
  For any positive numbers and

  EXAMPLE 4.47
Which of the following fractions are equivalent to
298 4 · Fractions

     Solution
The quotient of a positive and a negative is a negative, so is negative. Of the fractions listed, and are also
negative.

       TRY IT 4.93 Which of the following fractions are equivalent to

TRY IT 4.94 Which of the following fractions are equivalent to

Fraction bars act as grouping symbols. The expressions above and below the fraction bar should be treated as if they

were in parentheses. For example,  means       The order of operations tells us to simplify the

numerator and the denominator first--as if there were parentheses--before we divide.

We'll add fraction bars to our set of grouping symbols from Use the Language of Algebra to have a more complete set
here.

Grouping Symbols

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Simplify an expression with a fraction bar.
  Step 1. Simplify the numerator.
  Step 2. Simplify the denominator.
  Step 3. Simplify the fraction.

  EXAMPLE 4.48
Simplify:

     Solution

  Simplify the expression in the numerator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 299

Simplify the expression in the denominator.

Simplify the fraction.                       6

       TRY IT 4.95 Simplify:
       TRY IT 4.96 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 4.49
Simplify:

     Solution

Use the order of operations. Multiply in the numerator and use the exponent in the denominator.
Simplify the numerator and the denominator.
Simplify the fraction.

       TRY IT 4.97 Simplify:
       TRY IT 4.98 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 4.50
Simplify:

     Solution

Use the order of operations (parentheses first, then exponents).
Simplify the numerator and denominator.
Simplify the fraction.
300 4 · Fractions

              TRY IT 4.99 Simplify:
              TRY IT 4.100 Simplify:

         EXAMPLE 4.51
       Simplify:

            Solution

Multiply.
Simplify.
Divide.

      TRY IT 4.101 Simplify:

      TRY IT 4.102 Simplify:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Division Involving Mixed Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24DivisionMixed)
      Evaluate a Complex Fraction (http://www.openstax.org/l/24ComplexFrac)

        SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, multiply and write the answer in simplified form.

176.                                  177.  178.

179.                                  180.  181.

182.                                  183.

In the following exercises, divide, and write your answer in simplified form.

184.                                  185.  186.

187.                                  188.  189.

190.                                  191.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 4.3 · Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions 301

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Fractions

In the following exercises, translate each English phrase into an algebraic expression.

192. the quotient of and               193. the quotient of and             194. the quotient of and

195. the quotient of and               196. the quotient of and the         197. the quotient of and the
                                               sum of and                           difference of and

Simplify Complex Fractions
In the following exercises, simplify the complex fraction.

198.                                   199.                                 200.

201.                                   202.                                 203.

204.                                   205.                                 206.

207.                                   208.                                 209.

210.                                   211.                                 212.

213.

Simplify Expressions with a Fraction Bar

In the following exercises, identify the equivalent fractions.

214. Which of the following            215. Which of the following          216. Which of the following
        fractions are equivalent to            fractions are equivalent to          fractions are equivalent to

217. Which of the following
        fractions are equivalent to

In the following exercises, simplify.

218.                                   219.                                 220.

221.                                   222.                                 223.

224.                                   225.                                 226.

227.                                   228.                                 229.

230.                                   231.                                 232.

233.                                   234.                                 235.

236.                                   237.                                 238.
302 4 · Fractions

239.                                240.                   241.

242.                                243.                   244.

245.                                246.                   247.

Everyday Math

248. Baking A recipe for chocolate chip cookies calls      249. Baking A booth at the county fair sells fudge by
        for cups of flour. Graciela wants to double the            the pound. Their award winning "Chocolate
                                                                   Overdose" fudge contains cups of chocolate
      recipe.
                                                                   chips per pound.
      1.  How much flour will Graciela need? Show
                                                                How many cups of chocolate chips are in a
      your calculation. Write your result as an
                                                                   half-pound of the fudge?
      improper fraction and as a mixed number.
                                                                The owners of the booth make the fudge in
      2.  Measuring cups usually come in sets with
                                                                      -pound batches. How many chocolate chips do
      cups for          and cup. Draw a                            they need to make a -pound batch? Write your
                                                                   results as improper fractions and as a mixed
      diagram to show two different ways that                      numbers.
      Graciela could measure out the flour needed
      to double the recipe.

Writing Exercises

250. Explain how to find the reciprocal of a mixed         251. Explain how to multiply mixed numbers.
        number.

252. Randy thinks that  is                Explain what is  253. Explain why  and are equivalent.

      wrong with Randy's thinking.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

4.4 Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Model fraction addition
           Add fractions with a common denominator
           Model fraction subtraction
           Subtract fractions with a common denominator

       BE PREPARED 4.9 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.22.

       BE PREPARED 4.10 Draw a model of the fraction

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   4.4 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators 303

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 4.2.

BE PREPARED 4.11      Simplify:
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 4.48.

Model Fraction Addition                           quarters equals  quarters.

How many quarters are pictured? One quarter plus

Remember, quarters are really fractions of a dollar. Quarters are another way to say fourths. So the picture of the coins
shows that

Let's use fraction circles to model the same example,

  Start with one piece.

Add two more pieces.

  The result is .

So again, we see that

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Fraction Addition" will help you develop a better understanding
  of adding fractions
  EXAMPLE 4.52
Use a model to find the sum
304 4 · Fractions

            Solution
          Start with three pieces.

          Add two pieces.

How many pieces are there?

There are five pieces, or five-eighths. The model shows that
       TRY IT 4.103 Use a model to find each sum. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

TRY IT 4.104 Use a model to find each sum. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

Add Fractions with a Common Denominator

Example 4.52 shows that to add the same-size pieces--meaning that the fractions have the same denominator--we just
add the number of pieces.

Fraction Addition

If and are numbers where            then

  To add fractions with a common denominator, add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4.53
Find the sum:

Access for free at openstax.org
          4.4 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators 305

Solution

Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 4.105 Find each sum:
       TRY IT 4.106 Find each sum:

  EXAMPLE 4.54
Find the sum:

     Solution

  Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
Note that we cannot simplify this fraction any more. Since and are not like terms, we cannot combine them.

       TRY IT 4.107 Find the sum:
       TRY IT 4.108 Find the sum:

  EXAMPLE 4.55
Find the sum:

     Solution
We will begin by rewriting the first fraction with the negative sign in the numerator.

Rewrite the first fraction with the negative in the numerator.
Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
306 4 · Fractions

         Simplify the numerator.
         Rewrite with negative sign in front of the fraction.

              TRY IT 4.109 Find the sum:
              TRY IT 4.110 Find the sum:
         EXAMPLE 4.56
       Find the sum:
            Solution

         Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
         Combine like terms.

              TRY IT 4.111 Find the sum:
              TRY IT 4.112 Find the sum:
         EXAMPLE 4.57
       Find the sum:
            Solution

         Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
         Add.
         Simplify the fraction.

              TRY IT 4.113 Find each sum:
              TRY IT 4.114 Find each sum:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                     4.4 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators 307

Model Fraction Subtraction

Subtracting two fractions with common denominators is much like adding fractions. Think of a pizza that was cut into
slices. Suppose five pieces are eaten for dinner. This means that, after dinner, there are seven pieces (or of the pizza)
left in the box. If Leonardo eats of these remaining pieces (or of the pizza), how much is left? There would be
pieces left (or of the pizza).

Let's use fraction circles to model the same example,
Start with seven pieces. Take away two pieces. How many twelfths are left?

Again, we have five twelfths,

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Fraction Subtraction" will help you develop a better
  understanding of subtracting fractions.

EXAMPLE 4.58

Use fraction circles to find the difference:

     Solution    pieces. Take away one        piece. Count how many fifths are left. There are three  pieces left.
Start with four

       TRY IT 4.115 Use a model to find each difference. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

       TRY IT 4.116 Use a model to find each difference. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

Subtract Fractions with a Common Denominator

We subtract fractions with a common denominator in much the same way as we add fractions with a common
denominator.
308 4 · Fractions

Fraction Subtraction             then
If and are numbers where

  To subtract fractions with a common denominator, we subtract the numerators and place the difference over the
  common denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4.59
Find the difference:

     Solution

Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator.
Simplify the numerator.
Simplify the fraction by removing common factors.

       TRY IT 4.117 Find the difference:
       TRY IT 4.118 Find the difference:

  EXAMPLE 4.60
Find the difference:

     Solution

  Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator.
The fraction is simplified because we cannot combine the terms in the numerator.

       TRY IT 4.119 Find the difference:
       TRY IT 4.120 Find the difference:
  EXAMPLE 4.61
Find the difference:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           4.4 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators 309

     Solution           can be written as
Remember, the fraction

  Subtract the numerators.
  Simplify.
  Rewrite with the negative sign in front of the fraction.

       TRY IT 4.121 Find the difference:
       TRY IT 4.122 Find the difference:
Now lets do an example that involves both addition and subtraction.
  EXAMPLE 4.62
Simplify:
     Solution

  Combine the numerators over the common denominator.
  Simplify the numerator, working left to right.
  Subtract the terms in the numerator.
  Rewrite with the negative sign in front of the fraction.

       TRY IT 4.123 Simplify:
       TRY IT 4.124 Simplify:
       MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Adding Fractions With Pattern Blocks (http://www.openstax.org/l/24AddFraction)
      Adding Fractions With Like Denominators (http://www.openstax.org/l/24AddLikeDenom)
      Subtracting Fractions With Like Denominators (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SubtrLikeDeno)
310 4 · Fractions

        SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Model Fraction Addition

In the following exercises, use a model to add the fractions. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

254.                             255.             256.

257.

Add Fractions with a Common Denominator

In the following exercises, find each sum.

258.                             259.             260.

261.                             262.             263.

264.                             265.             266.

267.                             268.             269.

270.                             271.             272.

273.                             274.             275.

276.                             277.

Model Fraction Subtraction

In the following exercises, use a model to subtract the fractions. Show a diagram to illustrate your model.

278.                             279.

Subtract Fractions with a Common Denominator

In the following exercises, find the difference.

280.                             281.             282.

283.                             284.             285.

286.                             287.             288.

289.                             290.             291.

292.                             293.             294.

295.                             296.             297.

298.                             299.             300.

301.                             302.             303.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and write your answers in simplified form.

304.                             305.             306.

307.                             308.             309.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 311

310.                    311.

Everyday Math                                                313. Baking Janet needs of a cup of flour for a
                                                                     recipe she is making. She only has of a cup of
312. Trail Mix Jacob is mixing together nuts and                     flour and will ask to borrow the rest from her
        raisins to make trail mix. He has of a pound                 next-door neighbor. How much flour does she
        of nuts and of a pound of raisins. How much                  have to borrow?
        trail mix can he make?
                                                             315. After a party, Lupe has of a cheese pizza,
Writing Exercises                                                    of a pepperoni pizza, and of a veggie pizza
                                                                     left. Will all the slices fit into pizza box? Explain
314. Greg dropped his case of drill bits and three of                your reasoning.
        the bits fell out. The case has slots for the drill
        bits, and the slots are arranged in order from
        smallest to largest. Greg needs to put the bits
        that fell out back in the case in the empty slots.
        Where do the three bits go? Explain how you
        know.
        Bits in case: , , ___, ___, , , ___, , , .
        Bits that fell out: , , .

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

4.5 Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the least common denominator (LCD)
           Convert fractions to equivalent fractions with the LCD
           Add and subtract fractions with different denominators
           Identify and use fraction operations
           Use the order of operations to simplify complex fractions
           Evaluate variable expressions with fractions

       BE PREPARED 4.12 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Find two fractions equivalent to
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 4.14.

      BE PREPARED 4.13  Simplify:
                        If you missed this problem, review Example 4.48.
312 4 · Fractions

    Find the Least Common Denominator

      In the previous section, we explained how to add and subtract fractions with a common denominator. But how can we
      add and subtract fractions with unlike denominators?
      Let's think about coins again. Can you add one quarter and one dime? You could say there are two coins, but that's not
      very useful. To find the total value of one quarter plus one dime, you change them to the same kind of unit--cents. One
      quarter equals cents and one dime equals cents, so the sum is cents. See Figure 4.7.

Figure 4.7 Together, a quarter and a dime are worth cents, or of a dollar.

Similarly, when we add fractions with different denominators we have to convert them to equivalent fractions with a

common denominator. With the coins, when we convert to cents, the denominator is  Since there are cents in

one dollar, cents is and cents is  So we add         to get              which is cents.

You have practiced adding and subtracting fractions with common denominators. Now let's see what you need to do
with fractions that have different denominators.

First, we will use fraction tiles to model finding the common denominator of and

We'll start with one tile and tile. We want to find a common fraction tile that we can use to match both and
exactly.

If we try the pieces, of them exactly match the piece, but they do not exactly match the piece.

If we try the pieces, they do not exactly cover the piece or the piece.

If we try the pieces, we see that exactly of them cover the piece, and exactly of them cover the piece.

If we were to try the pieces, they would also work.

Even smaller tiles, such as and would also exactly cover the piece and the piece.

The denominator of the largest piece that covers both fractions is the least common denominator (LCD) of the two
fractions. So, the least common denominator of and is

Notice that all of the tiles that cover and have something in common: Their denominators are common multiples of
  and the denominators of and The least common multiple (LCM) of the denominators is and so we say that

is the least common denominator (LCD) of the fractions and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 313

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Finding the Least Common Denominator" will help you develop a better
  understanding of the LCD.

  Least Common Denominator
  The least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions is the least common multiple (LCM) of their denominators.
To find the LCD of two fractions, we will find the LCM of their denominators. We follow the procedure we used earlier to
find the LCM of two numbers. We only use the denominators of the fractions, not the numerators, when finding the LCD.
  EXAMPLE 4.63
Find the LCD for the fractions and

     Solution

  Factor each denominator into its primes.

List the primes of 12 and the primes of 18
lining them up in columns when possible.

Bring down the columns.

Multiply the factors. The product is the LCM.  LCM
                                               LCD of and is 36.
The LCM of 12 and 18 is 36, so the LCD of
and is 36.

       TRY IT 4.125 Find the least common denominator for the fractions: and

       TRY IT 4.126 Find the least common denominator for the fractions: and

To find the LCD of two fractions, find the LCM of their denominators. Notice how the steps shown below are similar to
the steps we took to find the LCM.
314 4 · Fractions

    ...

         HOW TO

Find the least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions.

Step 1.  Factor each denominator into its primes.
Step 2.  List the primes, matching primes in columns when possible.
Step 3.  Bring down the columns.
Step 4.  Multiply the factors. The product is the LCM of the denominators.
Step 5.  The LCM of the denominators is the LCD of the fractions.

  EXAMPLE 4.64

Find the least common denominator for the fractions and
     Solution

To find the LCD, we find the LCM of the denominators.
Find the LCM of and

The LCM of and is  So, the LCD of and is

    TRY IT 4.127 Find the least common denominator for the fractions: and

    TRY IT 4.128 Find the least common denominator for the fractions: and

Convert Fractions to Equivalent Fractions with the LCD                            pieces exactly covered and

Earlier, we used fraction tiles to see that the LCD of when is We saw that three
two pieces exactly covered so

We say that and are equivalent fractions and also that and are equivalent fractions.

We can use the Equivalent Fractions Property to algebraically change a fraction to an equivalent one. Remember, two
fractions are equivalent if they have the same value. The Equivalent Fractions Property is repeated below for reference.

Equivalent Fractions Property

If       are whole numbers where  then

To add or subtract fractions with different denominators, we will first have to convert each fraction to an equivalent
fraction with the LCD. Let's see how to change and to equivalent fractions with denominator without using

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 315

models.                                                   their LCD.
  EXAMPLE 4.65
                                                                                 The LCD of and is 12.
Convert and to equivalent fractions with denominator
     Solution

  Find the LCD.

Find the number to multiply 4 to get 12.

Find the number to multiply 6 to get 12.

Use the Equivalent Fractions Property to convert each fraction to an equivalent
fraction with the LCD, multiplying both the numerator and denominator of each
fraction by the same number.

Simplify the numerators and denominators.

We do not reduce the resulting fractions. If we did, we would get back to our original fractions and lose the common
denominator.

TRY IT 4.129    Change to equivalent fractions with the LCD:
                   and LCD

TRY IT 4.130    Change to equivalent fractions with the LCD:
                       and LCD

...

     HOW TO

Convert two fractions to equivalent fractions with their LCD as the common denominator.

Step 1.  Find the LCD.
Step 2.  For each fraction, determine the number needed to multiply the denominator to get the LCD.
Step 3.  Use the Equivalent Fractions Property to multiply both the numerator and denominator by the number you
         found in Step 2.
Step 4.  Simplify the numerator and denominator.

  EXAMPLE 4.66  to equivalent fractions with denominator  their LCD.
Convert and
316 4 · Fractions

Solution

                                                   The LCD is 120. We will start at Step 2.

Find the number that must multiply 15 to get 120.

Find the number that must multiply 24 to get 120.

Use the Equivalent Fractions Property.

Simplify the numerators and denominators.

TRY IT 4.131           Change to equivalent fractions with the LCD:
                           and LCD

TRY IT 4.132           Change to equivalent fractions with the LCD:
                           and LCD

Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators

Once we have converted two fractions to equivalent forms with common denominators, we can add or subtract them by
adding or subtracting the numerators.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Add or subtract fractions with different denominators.

Step 1.  Find the LCD.
Step 2.  Convert each fraction to an equivalent form with the LCD as the denominator.
Step 3.  Add or subtract the fractions.
Step 4.  Write the result in simplified form.

  EXAMPLE 4.67
Add:

     Solution

Find the LCD of 2, 3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                      4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 317

  Change into equivalent fractions with the LCD 6.
  Simplify the numerators and denominators.
  Add.
Remember, always check to see if the answer can be simplified. Since and have no common factors, the fraction
cannot be reduced.

       TRY IT 4.133 Add:
       TRY IT 4.134 Add:
  EXAMPLE 4.68
Subtract:
     Solution

  Find the LCD of 2 and 4.

  Rewrite as equivalent fractions using the LCD 4.
  Simplify the first fraction.
  Subtract.
  Simplify.
One of the fractions already had the least common denominator, so we only had to convert the other fraction.

       TRY IT 4.135 Simplify:
       TRY IT 4.136 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 4.69
Add:
318 4 · Fractions

            Solution

         Find the LCD of 12 and 18.

         Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD.
         Simplify the numerators and denominators.
         Add.
      Because is a prime number, it has no factors in common with The answer is simplified.

              TRY IT 4.137 Add:
              TRY IT 4.138 Add:
      When we use the Equivalent Fractions Property, there is a quick way to find the number you need to multiply by to get
      the LCD. Write the factors of the denominators and the LCD just as you did to find the LCD. The "missing" factors of each
      denominator are the numbers you need.

The LCD, has factors of and factors of                              We multiplied the numerator and denominator of

Twelve has two factors of but only one of --so it is `missing` one
    by to get an equivalent fraction with denominator

Eighteen is missing one factor of --so you multiply the numerator and denominator by to get an equivalent
fraction with denominator We will apply this method as we subtract the fractions in the next example.

EXAMPLE 4.70

Subtract:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 319

     Solution

  Find the LCD.

  15 is 'missing' three factors of 2
  24 is 'missing' a factor of 5
  Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD.
  Simplify each numerator and denominator.
  Subtract.
  Rewrite showing the common factor of 3.
  Remove the common factor to simplify.

       TRY IT 4.139 Subtract:
       TRY IT 4.140 Subtract:
  EXAMPLE 4.71
Add:
     Solution

  Find the LCD.

  Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD.
  Simplify each numerator and denominator.
  Add.
320 4 · Fractions

         Rewrite showing the common factor of 2.
         Remove the common factor to simplify.

              TRY IT 4.141 Add:
              TRY IT 4.142 Add:
       In the next example, one of the fractions has a variable in its numerator. We follow the same steps as when both
       numerators are numbers.
         EXAMPLE 4.72
       Add:
            Solution
       The fractions have different denominators.

         Find the LCD.

         Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD.
         Simplify the numerators and denominators.
         Add.
       We cannot add and since they are not like terms, so we cannot simplify the expression any further.

              TRY IT 4.143 Add:
              TRY IT 4.144 Add:

     Identify and Use Fraction Operations

       By now in this chapter, you have practiced multiplying, dividing, adding, and subtracting fractions. The following table
       summarizes these four fraction operations. Remember: You need a common denominator to add or subtract fractions,
       but not to multiply or divide fractions

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 321

Summary of Fraction Operations
Fraction multiplication: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

Fraction division: Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

Fraction addition: Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator. If the fractions have
different denominators, first convert them to equivalent forms with the LCD.

Fraction subtraction: Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator. If the
fractions have different denominators, first convert them to equivalent forms with the LCD.

EXAMPLE 4.73

Simplify:

  Solution     

First we ask ourselves, "What is the operation?"

 The operation is addition.

Do the fractions have a common denominator? No.

Find the LCD.

  Rewrite each fraction as an equivalent fraction with the LCD.
  Simplify the numerators and denominators.
  Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.
  Check to see if the answer can be simplified. It cannot.

 The operation is division. We do not need a common denominator.
322 4 · Fractions

To divide fractions, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
Multiply.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 4.145       Simplify each expression:
  TRY IT 4.146
                                 

                     Simplify each expression:

                                 

EXAMPLE 4.74

Simplify:

  Solution         

 The operation is subtraction. The fractions do not have a common denominator.

Rewrite each fraction as an equivalent fraction with the LCD, 30.

  Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator.

 The operation is multiplication; no need for a common denominator.

  To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.
  Rewrite, showing common factors.
  Remove common factors to simplify.

  TRY IT 4.147 Simplify:

                                 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 323

TRY IT 4.148 Simplify:

                             

Use the Order of Operations to Simplify Complex Fractions

In Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions, we saw that a complex fraction is a fraction in which the
numerator or denominator contains a fraction. We simplified complex fractions by rewriting them as division problems.
For example,

Now we will look at complex fractions in which the numerator or denominator can be simplified. To follow the order of
operations, we simplify the numerator and denominator separately first. Then we divide the numerator by the
denominator.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Simplify complex fractions.

Step 1.  Simplify the numerator.
Step 2.  Simplify the denominator.
Step 3.  Divide the numerator by the denominator.
Step 4.  Simplify if possible.

  EXAMPLE 4.75

Simplify:
     Solution

Simplify the numerator.
Simplify the term with the exponent in the denominator.
Add the terms in the denominator.
Divide the numerator by the denominator.
Rewrite as multiplication by the reciprocal.
Multiply.
324 4 · Fractions

TRY IT 4.149 Simplify:               .

TRY IT 4.150 Simplify:               .

  EXAMPLE 4.76
Simplify:

     Solution

Rewrite numerator with the LCD of 6 and denominator with LCD of 12.

Add in the numerator. Subtract in the denominator.

Divide the numerator by the denominator.
Rewrite as multiplication by the reciprocal.

Rewrite, showing common factors.

Simplify.                                                            2

TRY IT 4.151 Simplify:            .

TRY IT 4.152 Simplify:            .

Evaluate Variable Expressions with Fractions

We have evaluated expressions before, but now we can also evaluate expressions with fractions. Remember, to evaluate
an expression, we substitute the value of the variable into the expression and then simplify.

EXAMPLE 4.77

Evaluate           when

                   

Access for free at openstax.org
     Solution        when                                                           4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 325

 To evaluate                    substitute for in the expression.

  Simplify.          when       we substitute for in the expression.

 To evaluate

Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD, 12.
Simplify the numerators and denominators.
Add.

TRY IT 4.153         Evaluate:    when
TRY IT 4.154
                                 

                     Evaluate:    when

                                

EXAMPLE 4.78

Evaluate       when

     Solution  for in the expression.
We substitute

Rewrite as equivalent fractions with the LCD, 6.
326 4 · Fractions

Subtract.
Simplify.

TRY IT 4.155 Evaluate:                     when
TRY IT 4.156 Evaluate:                     when

EXAMPLE 4.79

Evaluate           when          and

     Solution                                    the exponent applies only to
Substitute the values into the expression. In

Simplify exponents first.
Multiply. The product will be negative.
Simplify.
Remove the common factors.
Simplify.

TRY IT 4.157 Evaluate.                     when  and

TRY IT 4.158 Evaluate.                     when  and

EXAMPLE 4.80

Evaluate when                         and

     Solution
We substitute the values into the expression and simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             4.5 · Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators 327

Add in the numerator first.
Simplify.

      TRY IT 4.159 Evaluate: when                       and

      TRY IT 4.160  Evaluate:        when               and

        SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Least Common Denominator (LCD)

In the following exercises, find the least common denominator (LCD) for each set of fractions.

316. and                       317. and                      318. and

319. and                       320. and                      321. and

322. and                       323. and                      324.                  and

325.  and

Convert Fractions to Equivalent Fractions with the LCD

In the following exercises, convert to equivalent fractions using the LCD.

326. and LCD                   327. and LCD                  328.                  and LCD

329. and LCD                   330. and    LCD               331.                  and  LCD

332.  and LCD                  333.        and LCD

Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators

In the following exercises, add or subtract. Write the result in simplified form.

334.                           335.                          336.

337.                           338.                          339.

340.                           341.                          342.

343.                           344.                          345.

346.                           347.                          348.

349.                           350.                          351.
328 4 · Fractions

352.                                   353.                354.

355.                                   356.                357.

358.                                   359.                360.

361.                                   362.                363.

364.                                   365.                366.

367.                                   368.                369.

Identify and Use Fraction Operations

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations. Write your answers in simplified form.

370.                                   371.                372.   

373.                                   374.                375.   

376.                                   377.                378.
    
                                             

379.                                   380.                381.

382.                                   383.                384.

385.                                   386.                387.

388.                                   389.

Use the Order of Operations to Simplify Complex Fractions
In the following exercises, simplify.

390.                                   391.                392.

393.                                   394.                395.

396.                                   397.                398.

399.                                   400.                401.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

402.                                   403.                404.

405.                                   406.                407.

408.                                   409.                410.

411.                                   412.                413.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 329

414.                     415.

In the following exercises, evaluate the given expression. Express your answers in simplified form, using improper
fractions if necessary.

416.    when             417.  when                        418.              when

                                                                             

419.          when       420.  when                        421.        when

                                                                             

422.    when             423.    when                      424.        when        and

                                   

425.    when        and  426.  when                        and 427.    when        and

428.    when             429.  when                        430.        when

431.    when

Everyday Math                                              433. Baking Vanessa is baking chocolate chip cookies
                                                                   and oatmeal cookies. She needs cups of
432. Decorating Laronda is making covers for the                   sugar for the chocolate chip cookies, and
        throw pillows on her sofa. For each pillow cover,          cups for the oatmeal cookies How much sugar
        she needs yard of print fabric and yard of                 does she need altogether?
        solid fabric. What is the total amount of fabric
        Laronda needs for each pillow cover?

Writing Exercises                                          435. Explain how to find the LCD of two fractions.

434. Explain why it is necessary to have a common
        denominator to add or subtract fractions.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

4.6 Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Model addition of mixed numbers with a common denominator
           Add mixed numbers with a common denominator
           Model subtraction of mixed numbers
           Subtract mixed numbers with a common denominator
           Add and subtract mixed numbers with different denominators
330 4 · Fractions

BE PREPARED 4.14                 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
                                 Draw a model of the fraction
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.6.

BE PREPARED 4.15                 Change to a mixed number.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.9.

BE PREPARED 4.16                 Change to an improper fraction.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.11.

Model Addition of Mixed Numbers with a Common Denominator

So far, we've added and subtracted proper and improper fractions, but not mixed numbers. Let's begin by thinking about
addition of mixed numbers using money.

If Ron has dollar and quarter, he has dollars.

If Don has dollars and quarter, he has dollars.

What if Ron and Don put their money together? They would have dollars and quarters. They add the dollars and add
the quarters. This makes dollars. Because two quarters is half a dollar, they would have and a half dollars, or
dollars.

When you added the dollars and then added the quarters, you were adding the whole numbers and then adding the
fractions.

We can use fraction circles to model this same example:

Start with         one whole and one
    .              pieces

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 331

Add           two wholes and one
more.         pieces

The sum is: three wholes and two 's

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Model Mixed Number Addition/Subtraction" will help you develop a
better understanding of adding and subtracting mixed numbers.

EXAMPLE 4.81

Model         and give the sum.

     Solution                                                          pieces for the fractions.
We will use fraction circles, whole circles for the whole numbers and

two wholes and one

plus one whole and two s

  sum is three wholes and three s
This is the same as wholes. So,

       TRY IT 4.161 Use a model to add the following. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.
       TRY IT 4.162 Use a model to add the following. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.
332 4 · Fractions

EXAMPLE 4.82

Model              and give the sum as a mixed number.

     Solution                                                          pieces for the fractions.
We will use fraction circles, whole circles for the whole numbers and

one whole and three s

plus two wholes and three s.

sum is three wholes and six s

Adding the whole circles and fifth pieces, we got a sum of  We can see that is equivalent to      so we add that to
the to get

TRY IT 4.163 Model, and give the sum as a mixed number. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

TRY IT 4.164 Model, and give the sum as a mixed number. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

Add Mixed Numbers

Modeling with fraction circles helps illustrate the process for adding mixed numbers: We add the whole numbers and
add the fractions, and then we simplify the result, if possible.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Add mixed numbers with a common denominator.
  Step 1. Add the whole numbers.
  Step 2. Add the fractions.
  Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 333

  EXAMPLE 4.83
Add:

     Solution

  Add the whole numbers.

  Add the fractions.

  Simplify the fraction.

       TRY IT 4.165 Find the sum:
       TRY IT 4.166 Find the sum:
In Example 4.83, the sum of the fractions was a proper fraction. Now we will work through an example where the sum is
an improper fraction.
  EXAMPLE 4.84
Find the sum:
     Solution

Add the whole numbers and then add the fractions.
Rewrite as a mixed number.
334 4 · Fractions

Add.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 4.167 Find the sum:
       TRY IT 4.168 Find the sum:
An alternate method for adding mixed numbers is to convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions and then add the
improper fractions. This method is usually written horizontally.
  EXAMPLE 4.85
Add by converting the mixed numbers to improper fractions:
     Solution

  Convert to improper fractions.
  Add the fractions.
  Simplify the numerator.
  Rewrite as a mixed number.
  Simplify the fraction.
Since the problem was given in mixed number form, we will write the sum as a mixed number.

       TRY IT 4.169 Find the sum by converting the mixed numbers to improper fractions:

TRY IT 4.170 Find the sum by converting the mixed numbers to improper fractions:

Table 4.2 compares the two methods of addition, using the expression  as an example. Which way do you

Access for free at openstax.org
prefer?                                                                                                           4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 335

                                 Mixed Numbers Improper Fractions

                                                       Table 4.2

Model Subtraction of Mixed Numbers

Let's think of pizzas again to model subtraction of mixed numbers with a common denominator. Suppose you just baked
a whole pizza and want to give your brother half of the pizza. What do you have to do to the pizza to give him half? You
have to cut it into at least two pieces. Then you can give him half.
We will use fraction circles (pizzas!) to help us visualize the process.
Start with one whole.

Algebraically, you would write:

  EXAMPLE 4.86
Use a model to subtract:
336 4 · Fractions

            Solution

              TRY IT 4.171 Use a model to subtract:
              TRY IT 4.172 Use a model to subtract:
       What if we start with more than one whole? Let's find out.
         EXAMPLE 4.87
       Use a model to subtract:
            Solution

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 337

       TRY IT 4.173 Use a model to subtract:

       TRY IT 4.174 Use a model to subtract:

In the next example, we'll subtract more than one whole.
  EXAMPLE 4.88

Use a model to subtract:
     Solution

       TRY IT 4.175 Use a model to subtract:

       TRY IT 4.176 Use a model to subtract:

What if you start with a mixed number and need to subtract a fraction? Think about this situation: You need to put three
quarters in a parking meter, but you have only a bill and one quarter. What could you do? You could change the dollar
bill into quarters. The value of quarters is the same as one dollar bill, but the quarters are more useful for the
parking meter. Now, instead of having a bill and one quarter, you have quarters and can put quarters in the meter.
This models what happens when we subtract a fraction from a mixed number. We subtracted three quarters from one
dollar and one quarter.
We can also model this using fraction circles, much like we did for addition of mixed numbers.

  EXAMPLE 4.89

Use a model to subtract:
338 4 · Fractions

            Solution

         Rewrite vertically. Start with one whole and one fourth.

         Since the fractions have denominator 4, cut the whole into 4 pieces.
         You now have and which is .

         Take away .
         There is left.

              TRY IT 4.177 Use a model to subtract. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

              TRY IT 4.178 Use a model to subtract. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

     Subtract Mixed Numbers with a Common Denominator

       Now we will subtract mixed numbers without using a model. But it may help to picture the model in your mind as you
       read the steps.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Subtract mixed numbers with common denominators.
         Step 1. Rewrite the problem in vertical form.
         Step 2. Compare the two fractions.

                        If the top fraction is larger than the bottom fraction, go to Step 3.
                        If not, in the top mixed number, take one whole and add it to the fraction part, making a mixed number

                           with an improper fraction.
         Step 3. Subtract the fractions.
         Step 4. Subtract the whole numbers.
         Step 5. Simplify, if possible.

         EXAMPLE 4.90
       Find the difference:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 339

Solution

Rewrite the problem in vertical form.
Since is less than , take 1 from the 5 and add it to the
Subtract the fractions.

  Subtract the whole parts.
  The result is in simplest form.

Since the problem was given with mixed numbers, we leave the result as mixed numbers.

       TRY IT 4.179 Find the difference:

       TRY IT 4.180 Find the difference:

Just as we did with addition, we could subtract mixed numbers by converting them first to improper fractions. We should
write the answer in the form it was given, so if we are given mixed numbers to subtract we will write the answer as a
mixed number.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Subtract mixed numbers with common denominators as improper fractions.
  Step 1. Rewrite the mixed numbers as improper fractions.
  Step 2. Subtract the numerators.
  Step 3. Write the answer as a mixed number, simplifying the fraction part, if possible.

  EXAMPLE 4.91
Find the difference by converting to improper fractions:
340 4 · Fractions

  Solution

Rewrite as improper fractions.
Subtract the numerators.
Rewrite as a mixed number.

      TRY IT 4.181 Find the difference by converting the mixed numbers to improper fractions:

      TRY IT 4.182 Find the difference by converting the mixed numbers to improper fractions:

Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers with Different Denominators

To add or subtract mixed numbers with different denominators, we first convert the fractions to equivalent fractions with
the LCD. Then we can follow all the steps we used above for adding or subtracting fractions with like denominators.

EXAMPLE 4.92

Add:

     Solution                                                                                         Then we will add
Since the denominators are different, we rewrite the fractions as equivalent fractions with the LCD,
and simplify.

We write the answer as a mixed number because we were given mixed numbers in the problem.
       TRY IT 4.183 Add:
       TRY IT 4.184 Add:

Access for free at openstax.org
              4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 341

EXAMPLE 4.93

Subtract:

     Solution                                                                                                     Once in
Since the denominators of the fractions are different, we will rewrite them as equivalent fractions with the LCD
that form, we will subtract. But we will need to borrow first.

We were given mixed numbers, so we leave the answer as a mixed number.
       TRY IT 4.185 Find the difference:
       TRY IT 4.186 Find the difference:

  EXAMPLE 4.94
Subtract:

     Solution
We can see the answer will be negative since we are subtracting from Generally, when we know the answer will be
negative it is easier to subtract with improper fractions rather than mixed numbers.

  Change to equivalent fractions with the LCD.

  Rewrite as improper fractions.
  Subtract.
  Rewrite as a mixed number.

       TRY IT 4.187 Subtract:
       TRY IT 4.188 Subtract:
342 4 · Fractions

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Adding Mixed Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24AddMixed)
      Subtracting Mixed Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SubtractMixed)

        SECTION 4.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Model Addition of Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, use a model to find the sum. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

436.                              437.            438.

439.

Add Mixed Numbers with a Common Denominator

In the following exercises, add.

440.                              441.            442.

443.                              444.            445.

446.                              447.

Model Subtraction of Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, use a model to find the difference. Draw a picture to illustrate your model.

448.                              449.

Subtract Mixed Numbers with a Common Denominator

In the following exercises, find the difference.

450.                              451.            452.

453.                              454.            455.

456.                              457.

Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers with Different Denominators
In the following exercises, write the sum or difference as a mixed number in simplified form.

458.                              459.            460.

461.                              462.            463.

464.                              465.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and write the result as a mixed number in simplified form.

466.                              467.            468.

469.                              470.            471.

472.                              473.            474.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     4.6 · Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers 343

475.               476.                                 477.

478.               479.                                 480.

481.               482.                                 483.

484.               485.                                 486.

487.               488.                                 489.

Everyday Math

490. Sewing Renata is sewing matching shirts for her    491. Sewing Pauline has yards of fabric to make a
        husband and son. According to the patterns she          jacket. The jacket uses yards. How much
        will use, she needs yards of fabric for her             fabric will she have left after making the jacket?
        husband's shirt and yards of fabric for her
        son's shirt. How much fabric does she need to   493. Framing a picture Tessa bought a picture frame
        make both shirts?                                       for her son's graduation picture. The picture is
                                                                inches wide. The picture frame is inches wide
492. Printing Nishant is printing invitations on his            on each side. How wide will the framed picture
        computer. The paper is inches wide, and he              be?
        sets the print area to have a -inch border on
        each side. How wide is the print area on the
        sheet of paper?

Writing Exercises

494. Draw a diagram and use it to explain how to add    495. Edgar will have to pay  in tolls to drive to

                                                        the city.

                                                         Explain how he can make change from a

                                                        bill before he leaves so that he has the exact

                                                        amount he needs.

                                                         How is Edgar's situation similar to how you

                                                        subtract

496. Add       twice, first by leaving them as          497. Subtract     twice, first by leaving them as

      mixed numbers and then by rewriting as            mixed numbers and then by rewriting as
      improper fractions. Which method do you prefer,   improper fractions. Which method do you prefer,
      and why?                                          and why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
344 4 · Fractions

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

4.7 Solve Equations with Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether a fraction is a solution of an equation
           Solve equations with fractions using the Addition, Subtraction, and Division Properties of Equality
           Solve equations using the Multiplication Property of Equality
           Translate sentences to equations and solve

  BE PREPARED 4.17                 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz. If you miss a problem, go back to the
                                   section listed and review the material.

                                   Evaluate  when

                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 3.23.

  BE PREPARED 4.18                 Solve:
                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 3.61.

  BE PREPARED 4.19                 Solve:
                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 4.28.

Determine Whether a Fraction is a Solution of an Equation

As we saw in Solve Equations with the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality and Solve Equations Using
Integers; The Division Property of Equality, a solution of an equation is a value that makes a true statement when
substituted for the variable in the equation. In those sections, we found whole number and integer solutions to
equations. Now that we have worked with fractions, we are ready to find fraction solutions to equations.

The steps we take to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation are the same whether the solution is a
whole number, an integer, or a fraction.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

Step 1.  Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.  Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
Step 3.  Determine whether the resulting equation is true. If it is true, the number is a solution. If it is not true, the
         number is not a solution.

EXAMPLE 4.95

Determine whether each of the following is a solution of

  Solution                       



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 345

Change to fractions with a LCD of 10.

Subtract.

Since      does not result in a true equation, is not a solution to the equation.

 

Subtract.

Since      results in a true equation, is a solution to the equation

 

Subtract.

Since      does not result in a true equation, is not a solution to the equation.

TRY IT 4.189  Determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.
TRY IT 4.190                 :

                                         

              Determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.
346 4 · Fractions

                                     :

                                               

Solve Equations with Fractions using the Addition, Subtraction, and Division
Properties of Equality

In Solve Equations with the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality and Solve Equations Using Integers; The
Division Property of Equality, we solved equations using the Addition, Subtraction, and Division Properties of Equality.
We will use these same properties to solve equations with fractions.

Addition, Subtraction, and Division Properties of Equality

For any numbers and

                                 if     then                Addition Property of Equality

                                 if     then                Subtraction Property of Equality

                                 if     then                Division Property of Equality

                                    Table 4.3

In other words, when you add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an equation, or divide both sides by
the same quantity, you still have equality.

  EXAMPLE 4.96
Solve:

     Solution

Subtract from each side to undo the addition.

Simplify on each side of the equation.

Simplify the fraction.

Check:

Substitute         .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 347

Rewrite as fractions with the LCD.
Add.

Since       makes       a true statement, we know we have found the solution to this equation.

       TRY IT 4.191 Solve:

       TRY IT 4.192 Solve:

We used the Subtraction Property of Equality in Example 4.96. Now we'll use the Addition Property of Equality.
  EXAMPLE 4.97

Solve:
     Solution

Add from each side to undo the subtraction.

Simplify on each side of the equation.

Simplify the fraction.

Check:

Substitute  .

Change to common denominator.

Subtract.

Since       makes the equation true, we know that  is the solution to the equation.

TRY IT 4.193 Solve:
TRY IT 4.194 Solve:
348 4 · Fractions

       The next example may not seem to have a fraction, but let's see what happens when we solve it.
         EXAMPLE 4.98

       Solve:
            Solution

Divide both sides by 10 to undo the multiplication.

Simplify.
Check:

Substitute  into the original equation.

  Simplify.
  Multiply.
The solution to the equation was the fraction We leave it as an improper fraction.

TRY IT 4.195 Solve:

TRY IT 4.196 Solve:

Solve Equations with Fractions Using the Multiplication Property of Equality

Consider the equation            We want to know what number divided by gives So to "undo" the division, we will need

to multiply by The Multiplication Property of Equality will allow us to do this. This property says that if we start with
two equal quantities and multiply both by the same number, the results are equal.

The Multiplication Property of Equality

For any numbers and

If you multiply both sides of an equation by the same quantity, you still have equality.

Let's use the Multiplication Property of Equality to solve the equation
  EXAMPLE 4.99

Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 349

Solution

Use the Multiplication Property of Equality to multiply both sides by . This will isolate the variable.
Multiply.
Simplify.

The equation is true.

TRY IT 4.197 Solve:
TRY IT 4.198 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 4.100         We must multiply by to isolate

Solve:
     Solution

Here, is divided by

Multiply both sides by

Multiply.

Simplify.
Check:

Substitute           .

The equation is true.

TRY IT 4.199 Solve:
350 4 · Fractions

TRY IT 4.200 Solve:

Solve Equations with a Coefficient of

Look at the equation         Does it look as if  is already isolated? But there is a negative sign in front of  so it is not

isolated.

There are three different ways to isolate the variable in this type of equation. We will show all three ways in Example
4.101.

EXAMPLE 4.101

Solve:                                           and then use the Division Property of Equality to isolate

     Solution
One way to solve the equation is to rewrite as

  Rewrite as .
  Divide both sides by -1.
  Simplify each side.
Another way to solve this equation is to multiply both sides of the equation by

Multiply both sides by -1.
Simplify each side.

The third way to solve the equation is to read   as "the opposite of ." What number has  as its opposite? The

opposite of is           So

For all three methods, we isolated is isolated and solved the equation.

Check:

Substitute            .

Simplify. The equation is true.

       TRY IT 4.201 Solve:
       TRY IT 4.202 Solve:

Solve Equations with a Fraction Coefficient

When we have an equation with a fraction coefficient we can use the Multiplication Property of Equality to make the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 351

coefficient equal to
For example, in the equation:

The coefficient of is To solve for       we need its coefficient to be Since the product of a number and its reciprocal is
   our strategy here will be to isolate  by multiplying by the reciprocal of We will do this in Example 4.102.

  EXAMPLE 4.102
Solve:

     Solution

Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of the coefficient.

Simplify.
Multiply.
Check:

Substitute       .

Rewrite as a fraction.

Multiply. The equation is true.

Notice that in the equation              we could have divided both sides by to get by itself. Dividing is the same as

multiplying by the reciprocal, so we would get the same result. But most people agree that multiplying by the reciprocal
is easier.

TRY IT 4.203 Solve:
TRY IT 4.204 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 4.103

Solve:

     Solution
The coefficient is a negative fraction. Remember that a number and its reciprocal have the same sign, so the reciprocal
of the coefficient must also be negative.
352 4 · Fractions

Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of .

Simplify; reciprocals multiply to one.
Multiply.
Check:

Let                .

Multiply. It checks.

     TRY IT 4.205 Solve:

     TRY IT 4.206 Solve:

Translate Sentences to Equations and Solve

Now we have covered all four properties of equality--subtraction, addition, division, and multiplication. We'll list them all
together here for easy reference.

                      Subtraction Property of Equality:  Addition Property of Equality:

                      For any real numbers  and          For any real numbers  and

                      if         then                    if  then

                      Division Property of Equality:     Multiplication Property of Equality:

                      For any numbers       and where    For any real numbers  and

                      if         then                    if  then

When you add, subtract, multiply or divide the same quantity from both sides of an equation, you still have equality.
In the next few examples, we'll translate sentences into equations and then solve the equations. It might be helpful to
review the translation table in Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions.

  EXAMPLE 4.104

Translate and solve: divided by is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 353

  Solution
Translate.

Multiply both sides by .

Simplify.

Check:                Is  divided by equal to ?

Translate.

Simplify. It checks.

       TRY IT 4.207 Translate and solve: divided by is equal to
       TRY IT 4.208 Translate and solve: divided by is equal to

  EXAMPLE 4.105
Translate and solve: The quotient of and is

     Solution
  Translate.

Multiply both sides by .

Simplify.             Is the quotient of  and equal to ?
Check:

Translate.

Simplify. It checks.

TRY IT 4.209 Translate and solve: The quotient of and is
TRY IT 4.210 Translate and solve: The quotient of and is
354 4 · Fractions

         EXAMPLE 4.106
       Translate and solve: Two-thirds of is

            Solution
         Translate.

Multiply both sides by .

Simplify.             Is two-thirds of equal to ?
Check:
Translate.

Simplify. It checks.

       TRY IT 4.211 Translate and solve: Two-fifths of is     The quotient of and is .
       TRY IT 4.212 Translate and solve: Three-fourths of is
  EXAMPLE 4.107
Translate and solve: The quotient of and is
     Solution

  Translate.

  Multiply both sides by to isolate .
  Simplify.
  Remove common factors and multiply.
  Check:
  Is the quotient of and equal to ?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 355

  Rewrite as division.
  Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.
  Simplify.
Our solution checks.

TRY IT 4.213 Translate and solve. The quotient of and is
TRY IT 4.214 Translate and solve The quotient of and is

EXAMPLE 4.108

Translate and solve: The sum of three-eighths and  is three and one-half.
     Solution

Translate.

  Use the Subtraction Property of Equality to subtract
  from both sides.
  Combine like terms on the left side.

  Convert mixed number to improper fraction.

  Convert to equivalent fractions with LCD of 8.

  Subtract.

  Write as a mixed number.

We write the answer as a mixed number because the original problem used a mixed number.
Check:
Is the sum of three-eighths and equal to three and one-half?
356 4 · Fractions

  Add.
  Simplify.
The solution checks.

      TRY IT 4.215 Translate and solve: The sum of five-eighths and is one-fourth.

      TRY IT 4.216 Translate and solve: The difference of one-and-three-fourths and is five-sixths.

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Solve One Step Equations With Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SolveOneStep)
      Solve One Step Equations With Fractions by Adding or Subtracting (http://www.openstax.org/l/24OneStepAdd)
      Solve One Step Equations With Fraction by Multiplying (http://www.openstax.org/l/24OneStepMulti)

        SECTION 4.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether a Fraction is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.

498.                  :             499.  :                500.  :

                                                                 
                                                                 

501.               :

      
      

Solve Equations with Fractions using the Addition, Subtraction, and Division Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, solve.

502.                                503.                   504.

505.                                506.                   507.

508.                                509.                   510.

511.                                512.                   513.

514.                                515.                   516.

517.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 4.7 · Solve Equations with Fractions 357

Solve Equations with Fractions Using the Multiplication Property of Equality
In the following exercises, solve.

518.                                519.                                   520.

521.                                522.                                   523.

524.                                525.                                   526.

527.                                528.                                   529.

530.                                531.                                   532.

533.                                534.                                   535.

536.                                537.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, solve.

538.                                539.                                   540.

541.                                542.                                   543.

544.                                545.                                   546.

547.                                548.                                   549.

Translate Sentences to Equations and Solve

In the following exercises, translate to an algebraic equation and solve.

550. divided by eight is            551. divided by six is                 552. divided by is

553. divided by is                  554. The quotient of and               555. The quotient of and
                                            is                                     is

556. The quotient of and            557. The quotient of and               558. Three-fourths of is
        twelve is                           nine is

559. Two-fifths of is               560. Seven-tenths of is                561. Four-ninths of is

562. divided by equals              563. The quotient of and is 564. Three-fourths of is
        negative

565. The quotient of and is         566. The sum of five-sixths and        567. The sum of three-fourths
                                              is                                   and is

568. The difference of and          569. The difference of and
        one-fourth is                       one-third is

Everyday Math                                          571. Playhouse The table in a child's playhouse is

570. Shopping Teresa bought a pair of shoes on sale            of an adult-size table. The playhouse table is
        for . The sale price was of the regular                inches high. Find the height of an adult-size table
        price. Find the regular price of the shoes by          by solving the equation
        solving the equation
358 4 · Fractions

Writing Exercises

572. Example 4.100 describes three methods to solve   573. Richard thinks the solution to the equation
                                                                           is Explain why Richard is wrong.
the equation                     Which method do you

prefer? Why?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            4 · Chapter Review 359

Chapter Review

Key Terms

complex fraction A complex fraction is a fraction in which the numerator or the denominator contains a fraction.
equivalent fractions Equivalent fractions are two or more fractions that have the same value.
fraction A fraction is written . In a fraction, is the numerator and is the denominator. A fraction represents parts

of a whole. The denominator is the number of equal parts the whole has been divided into, and the numerator

indicates how many parts are included.

least common denominator (LCD) The least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions is the least common

multiple (LCM) of their denominators.

mixed number A mixed number consists of a whole number and a fraction where                 . It is written as , where

           .                                 is proper if         and improper if        .
proper and improper fractions The fraction

reciprocal The reciprocal of the fraction is where         and       .

simplified fraction A fraction is considered simplified if there are no common factors in the numerator and
    denominator.

Key Concepts

4.1 Visualize Fractions

  · Property of One

 Any number, except zero, divided by itself is one.

     , where     .

· Mixed Numbers

 A mixed number consists of a whole number and a fraction where                       .

 It is written as follows:

· Proper and Improper Fractions              and an improper fraction if           .
    The fraction is a proper fraction if

· Convert an improper fraction to a mixed number.

Step 1. Divide the denominator into the numerator.

Step 2. Identify the quotient, remainder, and divisor.

Step 3. Write the mixed number as quotient              .

· Convert a mixed number to an improper fraction.
    Step 1. Multiply the whole number by the denominator.
    Step 2. Add the numerator to the product found in Step 1.
    Step 3. Write the final sum over the original denominator.

· Equivalent Fractions Property

 If and are numbers where                 ,       , then          .

4.2 Multiply and Divide Fractions

· Equivalent Fractions Property

 If  are numbers where                 ,     , then        and          .

· Simplify a fraction.
    Step 1. Rewrite the numerator and denominator to show the common factors. If needed, factor the numerator and
               denominator into prime numbers.
    Step 2. Simplify, using the equivalent fractions property, by removing common factors.
    Step 3. Multiply any remaining factors.

· Fraction Multiplication

 If  and are numbers where                   and          , then           .

· Reciprocal
    A number and its reciprocal have a product of .
360 4 · Chapter Review

                                 Opposite       Absolute Value            Reciprocal

                                 has opposite sign is never negative has same sign, fraction inverts

                                 Table 4.4

· Fraction Division

 If  and are numbers where                   ,         and        , then

    4.1
 To divide fractions, multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

4.3 Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions

  · Multiply or divide mixed numbers.
      Step 1. Convert the mixed numbers to improper fractions.
      Step 2. Follow the rules for fraction multiplication or division.
      Step 3. Simplify if possible.

· Simplify a complex fraction.
    Step 1. Rewrite the complex fraction as a division problem.
    Step 2. Follow the rules for dividing fractions.
    Step 3. Simplify if possible.

· Placement of negative sign in a fraction.

 For any positive numbers and ,                        .

· Simplify an expression with a fraction bar.
    Step 1. Simplify the numerator.
    Step 2. Simplify the denominator.
    Step 3. Simplify the fraction.

4.4 Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators

  · Fraction Addition

 If and are numbers where                   , then                .

 To add fractions, add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator.

· Fraction Subtraction

 If and are numbers where                   , then                .

 To subtract fractions, subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator.

4.5 Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators

  · Find the least common denominator (LCD) of two fractions.
      Step 1. Factor each denominator into its primes.
      Step 2. List the primes, matching primes in columns when possible.
      Step 3. Bring down the columns.
      Step 4. Multiply the factors. The product is the LCM of the denominators.
      Step 5. The LCM of the denominators is the LCD of the fractions.

· Equivalent Fractions Property

 If , and are whole numbers where                   ,       then

     and

· Convert two fractions to equivalent fractions with their LCD as the common denominator.
    Step 1. Find the LCD.
    Step 2. For each fraction, determine the number needed to multiply the denominator to get the LCD.
    Step 3. Use the Equivalent Fractions Property to multiply the numerator and denominator by the number from Step
               2.
    Step 4. Simplify the numerator and denominator.

· Add or subtract fractions with different denominators.
    Step 1. Find the LCD.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             4 · Chapter Review 361

    Step 2. Convert each fraction to an equivalent form with the LCD as the denominator.
    Step 3. Add or subtract the fractions.
    Step 4. Write the result in simplified form.

· Summary of Fraction Operations
    Fraction multiplication: Multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators.

        4.2
    Fraction division: Multiply the first fraction by the reciprocal of the second.

    4.3
 Fraction addition: Add the numerators and place the sum over the common denominator. If the fractions have

    different denominators, first convert them to equivalent forms with the LCD.

    4.4
 Fraction subtraction: Subtract the numerators and place the difference over the common denominator. If the

    fractions have different denominators, first convert them to equivalent forms with the LCD.

4.5

· Simplify complex fractions.
    Step 1. Simplify the numerator.
    Step 2. Simplify the denominator.
    Step 3. Divide the numerator by the denominator.
    Step 4. Simplify if possible.

4.6 Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers

  · Add mixed numbers with a common denominator.
      Step 1. Add the whole numbers.
      Step 2. Add the fractions.
      Step 3. Simplify, if possible.

· Subtract mixed numbers with common denominators.
    Step 1. Rewrite the problem in vertical form.
    Step 2. Compare the two fractions.
               If the top fraction is larger than the bottom fraction, go to Step 3.
               If not, in the top mixed number, take one whole and add it to the fraction part, making a mixed number
               with an improper fraction.
    Step 3. Subtract the fractions.
    Step 4. Subtract the whole numbers.
    Step 5. Simplify, if possible.

· Subtract mixed numbers with common denominators as improper fractions.
    Step 1. Rewrite the mixed numbers as improper fractions.
    Step 2. Subtract the numerators.
    Step 3. Write the answer as a mixed number, simplifying the fraction part, if possible.

4.7 Solve Equations with Fractions

  · Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.
      Step 1. Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Determine whether the resulting equation is true. If it is true, the number is a solution. If it is not true, the
                  number is not a solution.

· Addition, Subtraction, and Division Properties of Equality
    For any numbers a, b, and c,

    if  , then  . Addition Property of Equality
 if     , then  . Subtraction Property of Equality
362 4 · Exercises

       if  , then                ,  . Division Property of Equality

· The Multiplication Property of Equality

       For any numbers and                   , then  .

       If you multiply both sides of an equation by the same quantity, you still have equality.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Visualize Fractions

In the following exercises, name the fraction of each figure that is shaded.

574.                                   575.

In the following exercises, name the improper fractions. Then write each improper fraction as a mixed number.

576.                                   577.

In the following exercises, convert the improper fraction to a mixed number.

578.                                   579.

In the following exercises, convert the mixed number to an improper fraction.

580.                                   581.                          582. Find three fractions

                                                                              equivalent to Show

                                                                              your work, using figures
                                                                              or algebra.

583. Find three fractions
        equivalent to Show

        your work, using figures
        or algebra.

In the following exercises, locate the numbers on a number line.

584.                                   585.

In the following exercises, order each pair of numbers, using or

586.                                   587.

Multiply and Divide Fractions
In the following exercises, simplify.

588.                                   589.                          590.

591.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    4 · Exercises 363

In the following exercises, multiply.

592.                                   593.                          594.
                                                                     597.
595.                                   596.

In the following exercises, find the reciprocal.

598.                                   599.                                 600.
                                                           602. Fill in the chart.
601.
                                                                                Opposite
                                                                                          Absolute  Reciprocal
                                                                                            Value

In the following exercises, divide.

603.                                   604.                          605.

606.                                   607.

Multiply and Divide Mixed Numbers and Complex Fractions

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

608.                                   609.                          610.

611.

In the following exercises, translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression.

612. the quotient of and               613. the quotient of and the
                                               difference of and

In the following exercises, simplify the complex fraction

614.                                   615.                          616.

617.

In the following exercises, simplify.

618.                                   619.                          620.
364 4 · Exercises

Add and Subtract Fractions with Common Denominators

In the following exercises, add.

621.                                   622.                        623.

624.                                   625.

In the following exercises, subtract.

626.                                   627.                        628.

629.                                   630.                        631.

Add and Subtract Fractions with Different Denominators

In the following exercises, find the least common denominator.

632. and                               633. and                    634. and

635.  and

In the following exercises, change to equivalent fractions using the given LCD.

636. and LCD                           637. and LCD                638.          and LCD

639.  and LCD

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operations and simplify.

640.                                   641.                        642.

643.                                   644.                        645.

646.                                   647.                        648.

649.                                   650.

In the following exercises, evaluate.

651.      when                         652.  when             and

               

Add and Subtract Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, perform the indicated operation.

653.                                   654.                        655.

656.                                   657.                        658.

659.                                   660.

Solve Equations with Fractions

In the following exercises, determine whether the each number is a solution of the given equation.

661.               :                   662.      :

                                             
                                             

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  4 · Exercises 365

In the following exercises, solve the equation.

663.                                   664.                        665.
                                                                   670. The quotient of and
666.                                   667.
                                                                           is
In the following exercises, translate and solve.
                                                                   677.
668. The sum of two-thirds             669. The difference of and  680.
        and is                                 one-tenth is        683.
                                                                   686.
671. Three-eighths of is

Practice Test

Convert the improper fraction to a mixed number.
672.

Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction.
673.

Locate the numbers on a number line.

674.       and

In the following exercises, simplify.

675.                                   676.

678.                                   679.

681.                                   682.

684.                                   685.

687.                                   688.                        689.

690.                                   691.                        692.

693.                                   694.                        695.

696.                                   697.

Evaluate.

698.       when

               

In the following exercises, solve the equation.

699.                                   700.                        701.

702.                                   703.                        704. Translate and solve: The
                                                                           quotient of and is
                                                                                 Solve for
366 4 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5 · Introduction to Decimals 367

5  DECIMALS

Figure 5.1 The price of a gallon of gasoline is written as a decimal number. (credit: Mark Turnauckus, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  5.1 Decimals
  5.2 Decimal Operations
  5.3 Decimals and Fractions
  5.4 Solve Equations with Decimals
  5.5 Averages and Probability
  5.6 Ratios and Rate
  5.7 Simplify and Use Square Roots

      Introduction to Decimals

Gasoline price changes all the time. They might go down for a period of time, but then they usually rise again. One thing
that stays the same is that the price is not usually a whole number. Instead, it is shown using a decimal point to describe
the cost in dollars and cents. We use decimal numbers all the time, especially when dealing with money. In this chapter,
we will explore decimal numbers and how to perform operations using them.

5.1 Decimals

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Name decimals
           Write decimals
           Convert decimals to fractions or mixed numbers
           Locate decimals on the number line
           Order decimals
           Round decimals

   BE PREPARED 5.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    Name the number  in words.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.4.

   BE PREPARED 5.2  Round to the nearest ten.
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 1.9.
368 5 · Decimals

BE PREPARED 5.3                  Locate on a number line.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.16.

Name Decimals

You probably already know quite a bit about decimals based on your experience with money. Suppose you buy a

sandwich and a bottle of water for lunch. If the sandwich costs       , the bottle of water costs     , and the total sales

tax is            , what is the total cost of your lunch?

The total is      Suppose you pay with a bill and pennies. Should you wait for change? No, and pennies is the
same as
                                 each penny is worth of a dollar. We write the value of one penny as  since
Because

Writing a number with a decimal is known as decimal notation. It is a way of showing parts of a whole when the whole is
a power of ten. In other words, decimals are another way of writing fractions whose denominators are powers of ten.
Just as the counting numbers are based on powers of ten, decimals are based on powers of ten. Table 5.1 shows the
counting numbers.

                                 Counting number                           Name

                                                                      One

                                                                      Ten

                                                                      One hundred

                                                                      One thousand

                                                                      Ten thousand

                                 Table 5.1

How are decimals related to fractions? Table 5.2 shows the relation.

                                 Decimal Fraction                     Name

                                                                      One tenth

                                                                 One hundredth

                                                                 One thousandth

                                                           One ten-thousandth

                                 Table 5.2

When we name a whole number, the name corresponds to the place value based on the powers of ten. In Whole

Numbers, we learned to read      as ten thousand. Likewise, the names of the decimal places correspond to their

fraction values. Notice how the place value names in Figure 5.2 relate to the names of the fractions from Table 5.2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           5.1 · Decimals 369

               Figure 5.2 This chart illustrates place values to the left and right of the decimal point.

Notice two important facts shown in Figure 5.2.

· The "th" at the end of the name means the number is a fraction. "One thousand" is a number larger than one, but
    "one thousandth" is a number smaller than one.

· The tenths place is the first place to the right of the decimal, but the tens place is two places to the left of the
    decimal.

Remember that  lunch? We read               as five dollars and three cents. Naming decimals (those that don't represent

money) is done in a similar way. We read the number   as five and three hundredths.

We sometimes need to translate a number written in decimal notation into words. As shown in Figure 5.3, we write the
amount on a check in both words and numbers.

Figure 5.3 When we write a check, we write the amount as a decimal number as well as in words. The bank looks at the
check to make sure both numbers match. This helps prevent errors.

Let's try naming a decimal, such as 15.68.

We start by naming the number to the left of the decimal.                        fifteen______

We use the word "and" to indicate the decimal point.                             fifteen and_____

Then we name the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole  fifteen and sixty-eight_____
number.

Last, name the decimal place of the last digit.                                  fifteen and sixty-eight
                                                                                 hundredths

The number     is read fifteen and sixty-eight hundredths.
370 5 · Decimals

                      ...

                        HOW TO

         Name a decimal number.
           · Name the number to the left of the decimal point.
           · Write "and" for the decimal point.
           · Name the "number" part to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number.
           · Name the decimal place of the last digit.

EXAMPLE 5.1

Name each decimal:                         

Solution



                                                   4.3

Name the number to the left of the decimal point.  four_____

Write "and" for the decimal point.                 four and_____

Name the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. four and three_____

Name the decimal place of the last digit.          four and three tenths



                                                                                                                      2.45

Name the number to the left of the decimal point.  two_____

Write "and" for the decimal point.                 two and_____

Name the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number. two and forty-five_____

Name the decimal place of the last digit.          two and forty-five hundredths

                                                   0.009

Name the number to the left of the decimal point.  Zero is the number to the left of the decimal; it is not
                                                   included in the name.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.1 · Decimals 371

Name the number to the right of the decimal point as if it  nine_____
were a whole number.                                        nine thousandths

Name the decimal place of the last digit.



Name the number to the left of the decimal point.                  negative fifteen

Write "and" for the decimal point.                                 negative fifteen and_____

Name the number to the right of the decimal point as if it were a  negative fifteen and five hundred seventy-
whole number.                                                      one_____

Name the decimal place of the last digit.                          negative fifteen and five hundred seventy-one
                                                                   thousandths

       TRY IT 5.1 Name each decimal:

                     

       TRY IT 5.2 Name each decimal:

                     

Write Decimals

Now we will translate the name of a decimal number into decimal notation. We will reverse the procedure we just used.
Let's start by writing the number six and seventeen hundredths:

                                                                                     six and seventeen hundredths

The word and tells us to place a decimal point.                                      ___.___

The word before and is the whole number; write it to the left of the decimal point. 6._____

The decimal part is seventeen hundredths. 6._ _
Mark two places to the right of the decimal point for hundredths.

Write the numerals for seventeen in the places marked.                               6.17

  EXAMPLE 5.2
Write fourteen and thirty-seven hundredths as a decimal.
372 5 · Decimals

  Solution                                                                fourteen and thirty-seven hundredths
                                                                          ______. _________
Place a decimal point under the word `and'.                               14. _________
Translate the words before `and' into the whole number and place it to    14.__ __
the left of the decimal point.                                            14.37
Mark two places to the right of the decimal point for "hundredths".       Fourteen and thirty-seven hundredths
Translate the words after "and" and write the number to the right of the  is written 14.37.
decimal point.

TRY IT 5.3 Write as a decimal: thirteen and sixty-eight hundredths.

TRY IT 5.4 Write as a decimal: five and eight hundred ninety-four thousandths.

...

     HOW TO

Write a decimal number from its name.

Step 1.  Look for the word "and"--it locates the decimal point.
Step 2.  Mark the number of decimal places needed to the right of the decimal point by noting the place value
         indicated by the last word.

           Place a decimal point under the word "and." Translate the words before "and" into the whole number and
               place it to the left of the decimal point.

           If there is no "and," write a "0" with a decimal point to its right.

Step 3. Translate the words after "and" into the number to the right of the decimal point. Write the number in the
           spaces--putting the final digit in the last place.

Step 4. Fill in zeros for place holders as needed.

The second bullet in Step 2 is needed for decimals that have no whole number part, like `nine thousandths'. We recognize
them by the words that indicate the place value after the decimal - such as `tenths' or `hundredths.' Since there is no
whole number, there is no `and.' We start by placing a zero to the left of the decimal and continue by filling in the
numbers to the right, as we did above.

  EXAMPLE 5.3

Write twenty-four thousandths as a decimal.

Access for free at openstax.org
  Solution                                                                                                              5.1 · Decimals 373

Look for the word "and".                                         twenty-four thousandths
To the right of the decimal point, put three decimal places for  There is no "and" so start with 0
thousandths.                                                     0.
Write the number 24 with the 4 in the thousandths place.
Put zeros as placeholders in the remaining decimal places.       0.024
                                                                 So, twenty-four thousandths is written
                                                                 0.024

       TRY IT 5.5 Write as a decimal: fifty-eight thousandths.

       TRY IT 5.6 Write as a decimal: sixty-seven thousandths.

Before we move on to our next objective, think about money again. We know that is the same as                The way we

write    depends on the context. In the same way, integers can be written as decimals with as many zeros as

needed to the right of the decimal.

Convert Decimals to Fractions or Mixed Numbers

We often need to rewrite decimals as fractions or mixed numbers. Let's go back to our lunch order to see how we can

convert decimal numbers to fractions. We know that  means dollars and cents. Since there are cents in one

dollar, cents means of a dollar, so

We convert decimals to fractions by identifying the place value of the farthest right digit. In the decimal  the is in
the hundredths place, so is the denominator of the fraction equivalent to

For our  lunch, we can write the decimal  as a mixed number.

Notice that when the number to the left of the decimal is zero, we get a proper fraction. When the number to the left of
the decimal is not zero, we get a mixed number.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Convert a decimal number to a fraction or mixed number.
  Step 1. Look at the number to the left of the decimal.
374 5 · Decimals

                   If it is zero, the decimal converts to a proper fraction.
                   If it is not zero, the decimal converts to a mixed number.
                   Write the whole number.

Step 2.  Determine the place value of the final digit.
Step 3.
         Write the fraction.
           numerator--the `numbers' to the right of the decimal point
           denominator--the place value corresponding to the final digit

Step 4. Simplify the fraction, if possible.

  EXAMPLE 5.4
Write each of the following decimal numbers as a fraction or a mixed number:

 

     Solution

 

                                                                                                                          4.09

  There is a 4 to the left of the decimal point.
  Write "4" as the whole number part of the mixed number.

  Determine the place value of the final digit.

  Write the fraction.
  Write 9 in the numerator as it is the number to the right of the decimal point.

  Write 100 in the denominator as the place value of the final digit, 9, is hundredth.

  The fraction is in simplest form.

Did you notice that the number of zeros in the denominator is the same as the number of decimal places?

 

                                                                                                                    3.7

  There is a 3 to the left of the decimal point.
  Write "3" as the whole number part of the mixed number.

  Determine the place value of the final digit.

  Write the fraction.
  Write 7 in the numerator as it is the number to the right of the decimal point.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          5.1 · Decimals 375

Write 10 in the denominator as the place value of the final digit, 7, is tenths.
The fraction is in simplest form.

                                                                                  -0.286

There is a 0 to the left of the decimal point.
Write a negative sign before the fraction.

Determine the place value of the final digit and write it in the denominator.

Write the fraction.
Write 286 in the numerator as it is the number to the right of the decimal
point.
Write 1,000 in the denominator as the place value of the final digit, 6, is
thousandths.

We remove a common factor of 2 to simplify the fraction.

TRY IT 5.7   Write as a fraction or mixed number. Simplify the answer if possible.

              

TRY IT 5.8   Write as a fraction or mixed number. Simplify the answer if possible.

              

Locate Decimals on the Number Line

Since decimals are forms of fractions, locating decimals on the number line is similar to locating fractions on the number
line.

EXAMPLE 5.5

Locate on a number line.

     Solution                                                On a number line, divide the interval between
The decimal is equivalent to so is located between and
and into equal parts and place marks to separate the parts.

Label the marks                                                  We write as  and as  so that the numbers are
consistently in tenths. Finally, mark  on the number line.
376 5 · Decimals

     TRY IT 5.9 Locate on a number line.
     TRY IT 5.10 Locate on a number line.

EXAMPLE 5.6

Locate            on a number line.

     Solution     is equivalent to    so it is located between and On a number line, mark off and label the
The decimal
                  in the interval between and (               ,      , etc.) and mark        between            and     a
multiples of
little closer to       .

     TRY IT 5.11 Locate               on a number line.

     TRY IT 5.12 Locate               on a number line.

Order Decimals

Which is larger,       or

If you think of this as money, you know that                  (forty cents) is greater than  (four cents). So,

In previous chapters, we used the number line to order numbers.

Where are         and      located on the number line?

We see that       is to the right of  So we know

How does          compare to          This doesn't translate into money to make the comparison easy. But if we convert

and               to fractions, we can tell which is larger.

Convert to fractions.
We need a common denominator to compare them.

Because                we know that           Therefore,

Notice what we did in converting      to a fraction--we started with the fraction and ended with the equivalent

fraction          Converting     back to a decimal gives         So  is equivalent to        Writing zeros at the end of a

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.1 · Decimals 377

decimal does not change its value.

If two decimals have the same value, they are said to be equivalent decimals.

We say   and         are equivalent decimals.

Equivalent Decimals

Two decimals are equivalent decimals if they convert to equivalent fractions.

Remember, writing zeros at the end of a decimal does not change its value.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Order decimals.

Step 1.  Check to see if both numbers have the same number of decimal places. If not, write zeros at the end of the
         one with fewer digits to make them match.
Step 2.  Compare the numbers to the right of the decimal point as if they were whole numbers.
Step 3.  Order the numbers using the appropriate inequality sign.

  EXAMPLE 5.7
Order the following decimals using

 Solution 
 

Check to see if both numbers have the same number of decimal places. They do not, so write one
zero at the right of 0.6.
Compare the numbers to the right of the decimal point as if they were whole numbers.

Order the numbers using the appropriate inequality sign.



Check to see if both numbers have the same number of decimal places. They do not, so write one
zero at the right of 0.83.
378 5 · Decimals

         Compare the numbers to the right of the decimal point as if they were whole numbers.
         Order the numbers using the appropriate inequality sign.

     TRY IT 5.13      Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using

                                      

     TRY IT 5.14      Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using

                                      

When we order negative decimals, it is important to remember how to order negative integers. Recall that larger

numbers are to the right on the number line. For example, because lies to the right of on the number line, we

know that         Similarly, smaller numbers lie to the left on the number line. For example, because lies to the left

of on the number line, we know that

If we zoomed in on the interval between and          we would see in the same way that

EXAMPLE 5.8

Use        to order.

Solution

Write the numbers one under the other, lining up the decimal points.

They have the same number of digits.

Since                 tenth is greater than tenths.

     TRY IT 5.15 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using

     TRY IT 5.16 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using

Round Decimals

In the United States, gasoline prices are usually written with the decimal part as thousandths of a dollar. For example, a

gas station might post the price of unleaded gas at  per gallon. But if you were to buy exactly one gallon of gas at

this price, you would pay        , because the final price would be rounded to the nearest cent. In Whole Numbers, we

saw that we round numbers to get an approximate value when the exact value is not needed. Suppose we wanted to

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      5.1 · Decimals 379

round         to the nearest dollar. Is it closer to or to What if we wanted to round   to the nearest ten cents; is

it closer to  or to  The number lines in Figure 5.4 can help us answer those questions.

       Figure 5.4  We see that     is closer to than to So,          rounded to the nearest whole number is

        We see that  is closer to        than  So we say that        rounded to the nearest tenth is

Can we round decimals without number lines? Yes! We use a method based on the one we used to round whole
numbers.

       ...

            HOW TO

Round a decimal.

Step 1.  Locate the given place value and mark it with an arrow.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Underline the digit to the right of the given place value.

         Is this digit greater than or equal to
           Yes - add to the digit in the given place value.
           No - do not change the digit in the given place value

Step 4. Rewrite the number, removing all digits to the right of the given place value.

EXAMPLE 5.9

Round         to the nearest hundredth.

Solution

Locate the hundredths place and mark it with an arrow.

Underline the digit to the right of the 7.

Because 9 is greater than or equal to 5, add 1 to the 7.
Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the right of the
hundredths place.

                                                                     18.38 is 18.379 rounded to the nearest
                                                                     hundredth.
380 5 · Decimals

TRY IT 5.17 Round to the nearest hundredth:
TRY IT 5.18 Round to the nearest hundredth:

EXAMPLE 5.10

Round             to the nearest   tenth   whole number.
     Solution

 Round 18.379 to the nearest tenth.

Locate the tenths place and mark it with an arrow.

Underline the digit to the right of the tenths digit.

Because 7 is greater than or equal to 5, add 1 to the 3.            So, 18.379 rounded to the nearest tenth is
Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the right of the tenths  18.4.
place.

 Round 18.379 to the nearest whole number.

Locate the ones place and mark it with an arrow.
Underline the digit to the right of the ones place.
Since 3 is not greater than or equal to 5, do not add 1 to the 8.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        5.1 · Decimals 381

    Rewrite the number, deleting all digits to the right of the ones
    place.

                                                                      So 18.379 rounded to the nearest whole number
                                                                      is 18.

     TRY IT 5.19 Round              to the nearest  hundredth  tenth  whole number.

     TRY IT 5.20 Round               to the nearest  thousandth  hundredth  tenth.

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Introduction to Decimal Notation (http://www.openstax.org/l/24decmlnotat)
     Write a Number in Decimal Notation from Words (http://www.openstax.org/l/24word2dcmlnot)
     Identify Decimals on the Number Line (http://www.openstax.org/l/24decmlnumline)
     Rounding Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24rounddecml)
     Writing a Decimal as a Simplified Fraction (http://www.openstax.org/l/24decmlsimpfrac)

        SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Name Decimals

In the following exercises, name each decimal.

1.                              2.                                     3.

4.                              5.                                     6.

7.                              8.                                     9.

10.                             11.                                    12.

Write Decimals

In the following exercises, translate the name into a decimal number.

13. Eight and three             14. Nine and seven                     15. Twenty-nine and eighty-
      hundredths                      hundredths                             one hundredths

16. Sixty-one and seventy-four  17. Seven tenths                       18. Six tenths
      hundredths

19. One thousandth              20. Nine thousandths                   21. Twenty-nine thousandths

22. Thirty-five thousandths     23. Negative eleven and nine           24. Negative fifty-nine and two
                                      ten-thousandths                        ten-thousandths

25. Thirteen and three          26. Thirty and two hundred
      hundred ninety-five ten         seventy-nine thousandths
      thousandths
382 5 · Decimals

Convert Decimals to Fractions or Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a fraction or mixed number.

27.                              28.                                 29.

30.                              31.                                 32.

33.                              34.                                 35.

36.                              37.                                 38.

39.                              40.                                 41.

42.                              43.                                 44.

45.                              46.                                 47.

48.                              49.                                 50.

Locate Decimals on the Number Line

In the following exercises, locate each number on a number line.

51.                              52.                                 53.

54.                              55.                                 56.

57.                              58.

Order Decimals

In the following exercises, order each of the following pairs of numbers, using

59.                              60.                                 61.

62.                              63.                                 64.

65.                              66.                                 67.

68.                              69.                                 70.

Round Decimals

In the following exercises, round each number to the nearest tenth.

71.                              72.                                 73.

74.

In the following exercises, round each number to the nearest hundredth.

75.                              76.                                 77.

78.                              79.                                 80.

81.                              82.

In the following exercises, round each number to the nearest  hundredth  tenth  whole number.

83.                              84.                                 85.

86.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.2 · Decimal Operations 383

Everyday Math

87. Salary Increase Danny got a raise and now           88. New Car Purchase Selena's new car cost
                                                                               Round this number to the nearest:
makes              a year. Round this number to
                                                            dollar
the nearest:                                                thousand dollars
                                                            ten thousand dollars.
 dollar
 thousand dollars
 ten thousand dollars.

89. Sales Tax Hyo Jin lives in San Diego. She bought a  90. Sales Tax Jennifer bought a            dining

refrigerator for        and when the clerk              room set for her home in Cincinnati. She

calculated the sales tax it came out to exactly         calculated the sales tax to be exactly

               Round the sales tax to the nearest       Round the sales tax to the nearest  penny 

 penny  dollar.                                         dollar.

Writing Exercises

91. How does your knowledge of money help you           92. Explain how you write "three and nine
      learn about decimals?                                   hundredths" as a decimal.

93. Jim ran a      race in          Tim ran             94. Gerry saw a sign advertising postcards marked for

the same race in            Who had the faster          sale at            What is wrong with the

time, Jim or Tim? How do you know?                      advertised price?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

5.2 Decimal Operations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Add and subtract decimals
           Multiply decimals
           Divide decimals
           Use decimals in money applications
384 5 · Decimals

BE PREPARED 5.4                  Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
                                 Simplify
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.19.

BE PREPARED 5.5                  Multiply
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.25.

BE PREPARED 5.6                  Divide
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.49.

Add and Subtract Decimals

Let's take one more look at the lunch order from the start of Decimals, this time noticing how the numbers were added
together.

All three items (sandwich, water, tax) were priced in dollars and cents, so we lined up the dollars under the dollars and
the cents under the cents, with the decimal points lined up between them. Then we just added each column, as if we
were adding whole numbers. By lining up decimals this way, we can add or subtract the corresponding place values just
as we did with whole numbers.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Add or subtract decimals.

Step 1.  Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up.
Step 2.  Use zeros as place holders, as needed.
Step 3.  Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal in the answer under the
         decimal points in the given numbers.

  EXAMPLE 5.11
Add:

     Solution

Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up.

Place holders are not needed since both numbers have the same number of decimal places.

Add the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal in the answer under the
decimal points in the given numbers.

       TRY IT 5.21 Add:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5.2 · Decimal Operations 385

       TRY IT 5.22 Add:

  EXAMPLE 5.12
Add:

     Solution

Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up.

Place 0 as a place holder after the 5 in 23.5, so that both numbers have two decimal places.

Add the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal in the answer under the
decimal points in the given numbers.

TRY IT 5.23 Add:

TRY IT 5.24 Add:

How much change would you get if you handed the cashier a  bill for a  purchase? We will show the steps to
calculate this in the next example.

  EXAMPLE 5.13

Subtract:
     Solution

Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up. Remember 20 is a whole number, so place
the decimal point after the 0.

Place two zeros after the decimal point in 20, as place holders so that both numbers have two
decimal places.

Subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal in the answer under
the decimal points in the given numbers.

TRY IT 5.25 Subtract:
386 5 · Decimals

              TRY IT 5.26 Subtract:

EXAMPLE 5.14

Subtract:

Solution

If we subtract from  the answer will be negative since     To subtract easily, we can subtract  from

Then we will place the negative sign in the result.

Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up.
Place zero after the 4 in 7.4 as a place holder, so that both numbers have two decimal places.

Subtract and place the decimal in the answer.

Remember that we are really subtracting              so the answer is negative.

TRY IT 5.27 Subtract:

TRY IT 5.28 Subtract:

Multiply Decimals

Multiplying decimals is very much like multiplying whole numbers--we just have to determine where to place the
decimal point. The procedure for multiplying decimals will make sense if we first review multiplying fractions.

Do you remember how to multiply fractions? To multiply fractions, you multiply the numerators and then multiply the
denominators.

So let's see what we would get as the product of decimals by converting them to fractions first. We will do two examples
side-by-side in Table 5.3. Look for a pattern.

                                                        A                        B

                                               Convert to fractions.
                                               Multiply.
                                               Convert back to decimals.
                                            Table 5.3
There is a pattern that we can use. In A, we multiplied two numbers that each had one decimal place, and the product

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    5.2 · Decimal Operations 387

had two decimal places. In B, we multiplied a number with one decimal place by a number with two decimal places, and
the product had three decimal places.

How many decimal places would you expect for the product of                If you said "five", you recognized the

pattern. When we multiply two numbers with decimals, we count all the decimal places in the factors--in this case two

plus three--to get the number of decimal places in the product--in this case five.

Once we know how to determine the number of digits after the decimal point, we can multiply decimal numbers without
converting them to fractions first. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum of the number of decimal
places in the factors.
The rules for multiplying positive and negative numbers apply to decimals, too, of course.

  Multiplying Two Numbers

  When multiplying two numbers,
    · if their signs are the same, the product is positive.
    · if their signs are different, the product is negative.

When you multiply signed decimals, first determine the sign of the product and then multiply as if the numbers were
both positive. Finally, write the product with the appropriate sign.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Multiply decimal numbers.

Step 1.  Determine the sign of the product.
Step 2.  Write the numbers in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right.
Step 3.  Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers, temporarily ignoring the decimal points.
Step 4.  Place the decimal point. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum of the number of decimal
         places in the factors. If needed, use zeros as placeholders.
Step 5.  Write the product with the appropriate sign.

  EXAMPLE 5.15
Multiply:

     Solution

Determine the sign of the product. The signs are the same.                          The product will be
Write the numbers in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right.           positive.
388 5 · Decimals

Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers, temporarily ignoring the decimal
points.

Place the decimal point. Add the number of decimal places in the factors  Place
the decimal point 4 places from the right.

The product is positive.

       TRY IT 5.29 Multiply:
       TRY IT 5.30 Multiply:

  EXAMPLE 5.16
Multiply:

     Solution

The signs are different.                                       The product will be negative.

Write in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right.

Multiply.

  The product is negative.

       TRY IT 5.31 Multiply:
       TRY IT 5.32 Multiply:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                           5.2 · Decimal Operations 389

In the next example, we'll need to add several placeholder zeros to properly place the decimal point.
  EXAMPLE 5.17

Multiply:
     Solution

  The product is positive.
  Write in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right.

  Multiply.

Add zeros as needed to get the 5 places.
The product is positive.

TRY IT 5.33 Multiply:

TRY IT 5.34 Multiply:

Multiply by Powers of

In many fields, especially in the sciences, it is common to multiply decimals by powers of  Let's see what happens

when we multiply  by some powers of

Look at the results without the final zeros. Do you notice a pattern?

The number of places that the decimal point moved is the same as the number of zeros in the power of ten. Table 5.4
summarizes the results.

                               Multiply by Number of zeros Number of places decimal point moves
                                                                                                    place to the right
                                                                                                   places to the right

                             Table 5.4
390 5 · Decimals

                  Multiply by Number of zeros Number of places decimal point moves

                                                                        places to the right

                                                                        places to the right

                  Table 5.4

We can use this pattern as a shortcut to multiply by powers of ten instead of multiplying using the vertical format. We
can count the zeros in the power of and then move the decimal point that same of places to the right.

So, for example, to multiply     by  move the decimal point places to the right.

Sometimes when we need to move the decimal point, there are not enough decimal places. In that case, we use zeros as

placeholders. For example, let's multiply by  We need to move the decimal point places to the right. Since there

is only one digit to the right of the decimal point, we must write a in the hundredths place.

           ...

              HOW TO

Multiply a decimal by a power of 10.
Step 1. Move the decimal point to the right the same number of places as the number of zeros in the power of
Step 2. Write zeros at the end of the number as placeholders if needed.

EXAMPLE 5.18

Multiply by factors of               

Solution

By looking at the number of zeros in the multiple of ten, we see the number of places we need to move the decimal to

the right.



There is 1 zero in 10, so move the decimal point 1 place to the right.



Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            5.2 · Decimal Operations 391

There are 2 zeros in 100, so move the decimal point 2 places to the right.



There are 3 zeros in 1000, so move the decimal point 3 places to the right.
A zero must be added at the end.

  TRY IT 5.35  Multiply  by factors of                    

  TRY IT 5.36  Multiply  by factors of                    

Divide Decimals

Just as with multiplication, division of decimals is very much like dividing whole numbers. We just have to figure out
where the decimal point must be placed.

To understand decimal division, let's consider the multiplication problem

Remember, a multiplication problem can be rephrased as a division problem. So we can write

We can think of this as "If we divide 8 tenths into four groups, how many are in each group?" Figure 5.5 shows that there
are four groups of two-tenths in eight-tenths. So

                                              Figure 5.5

Using long division notation, we would write

Notice that the decimal point in the quotient is directly above the decimal point in the dividend.

To divide a decimal by a whole number, we place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the
dividend and then divide as usual. Sometimes we need to use extra zeros at the end of the dividend to keep dividing
until there is no remainder.
392 5 · Decimals

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Divide a decimal by a whole number.
         Step 1. Write as long division, placing the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
         Step 2. Divide as usual.

         EXAMPLE 5.19
       Divide:

            Solution

         Write as long division, placing the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the
         dividend.

         Divide as usual. Since 3 does not go into 0 or 1 we use zeros as placeholders.

TRY IT 5.37 Divide:

TRY IT 5.38 Divide:

In everyday life, we divide whole numbers into decimals--money--to find the price of one item. For example, suppose a

case of water bottles cost       To find the price per water bottle, we would divide        by and round the

answer to the nearest cent (hundredth).

EXAMPLE 5.20

Divide:
     Solution

Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.

Divide as usual. When do we stop? Since this division involves money, we round it to the
nearest cent (hundredth). To do this, we must carry the division to the thousandths place.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                5.2 · Decimal Operations 393

Round to the nearest cent.

This means the price per bottle is cents.

       TRY IT 5.39 Divide:

       TRY IT 5.40 Divide:

Divide a Decimal by Another Decimal

So far, we have divided a decimal by a whole number. What happens when we divide a decimal by another decimal? Let's
look at the same multiplication problem we looked at earlier, but in a different way.

Remember, again, that a multiplication problem can be rephrased as a division problem. This time we ask, "How many

times does go into          Because             we can say that goes into four times. This means that

divided by is

We would get the same answer,  if we divide by  both whole numbers. Why is this so? Let's think about the division
problem as a fraction.

We multiplied the numerator and denominator by and ended up just dividing by To divide decimals, we multiply
both the numerator and denominator by the same power of to make the denominator a whole number. Because of
the Equivalent Fractions Property, we haven't changed the value of the fraction. The effect is to move the decimal points
in the numerator and denominator the same number of places to the right.
We use the rules for dividing positive and negative numbers with decimals, too. When dividing signed decimals, first
determine the sign of the quotient and then divide as if the numbers were both positive. Finally, write the quotient with
the appropriate sign.
It may help to review the vocabulary for division:

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Divide decimal numbers.
  Step 1. Determine the sign of the quotient.
394 5 · Decimals

Step 2.  Make the divisor a whole number by moving the decimal point all the way to the right. Move the decimal
         point in the dividend the same number of places to the right, writing zeros as needed.
Step 3.  Divide. Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
Step 4.  Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

  EXAMPLE 5.21                                                                           The quotient will be negative.
Divide:

     Solution
  Determine the sign of the quotient.

Make the divisor the whole number by 'moving' the decimal point all the way to the
right. 'Move' the decimal point in the dividend the same number of places to the
right.

Divide. Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the
dividend. Add zeros as needed until the remainder is zero.

Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

       TRY IT 5.41 Divide:
       TRY IT 5.42 Divide:

  EXAMPLE 5.22
Divide:

     Solution

The signs are the same.                                                                  The quotient is positive.

Make the divisor a whole number by 'moving' the decimal point all the way to the right.
'Move' the decimal point in the dividend the same number of places.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          5.2 · Decimal Operations 395

Divide.
Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.

Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

       TRY IT 5.43 Divide:

       TRY IT 5.44 Divide:

Now we will divide a whole number by a decimal number.
  EXAMPLE 5.23

Divide:
     Solution

The signs are the same.                                                                   The quotient is positive.

Make the divisor a whole number by 'moving' the decimal point all the way to the right.
Move the decimal point in the dividend the same number of places, adding zeros as
needed.

Divide.
Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.

  Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.                                           there are

We can relate this example to money. How many nickels are there in four dollars? Because
nickels in

       TRY IT 5.45 Divide:

       TRY IT 5.46 Divide:

Use Decimals in Money Applications

We often apply decimals in real life, and most of the applications involving money. The Strategy for Applications we used
in The Language of Algebra gives us a plan to follow to help find the answer. Take a moment to review that strategy now.
396 5 · Decimals

Strategy for Applications

 1. Identify what you are asked to find.
 2. Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
 3. Translate the phrase to an expression.
 4. Simplify the expression.
 5. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

EXAMPLE 5.24

Paul received for his birthday. He spent          on a video game. How much of Paul's birthday money was left?

Solution

What are you asked to find? How much did Paul have left?

Write a phrase.                  $50 less $31.64

Translate.

Simplify.                        18.36

Write a sentence.                Paul has $18.36 left.

TRY IT 5.47 Nicole earned for babysitting her cousins, then went to the bookstore and spent                     on

                   books and coffee. How much of her babysitting money was left?

TRY IT 5.48        Amber bought a pair of shoes for            and a purse for    The sales tax was             How
                   much did Amber spend?

EXAMPLE 5.25

Jessie put gallons of gas in her car. One gallon of gas costs  How much does Jessie owe for the gas? (Round the
answer to the nearest cent.)

Solution

What are you asked to find? How much did Jessie owe for all the gas?

Write a phrase.                  8 times the cost of one gallon of gas

Translate.

Simplify.                        $28.232

Round to the nearest cent. $28.23

Write a sentence.                Jessie owes $28.23 for her gas purchase.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         5.2 · Decimal Operations 397

TRY IT 5.49        Hector put gallons of gas into his car. One gallon of gas costs       How much did Hector
                   owe for the gas? Round to the nearest cent.

TRY IT 5.50        Christopher bought pizzas for the team. Each pizza cost               How much did all the pizzas
                   cost?

  EXAMPLE 5.26

Four friends went out for dinner. They shared a large pizza and a pitcher of soda. The total cost of their dinner was
           If they divide the cost equally, how much should each friend pay?

     Solution
  What are you asked to find? How much should each friend pay?

Write a phrase.               $31.76 divided equally among the four friends.

Translate to an expression.

Simplify.                     $7.94

Write a sentence.             Each friend should pay $7.94 for his share of the dinner.

TRY IT 5.51        Six friends went out for dinner. The total cost of their dinner was   If they divide the bill
                   equally, how much should each friend pay?

TRY IT 5.52 Chad worked hours last week and his paycheck was                  How much does he earn per hour?

Be careful to follow the order of operations in the next example. Remember to multiply before you add.

EXAMPLE 5.27

Marla buys bananas that cost  each and oranges that cost                  each. How much is the total cost of the fruit?

Solution

What are you asked to find? How much is the total cost of the fruit?

Write a phrase.               6 times the cost of each banana plus 4 times the cost of each orange

Translate to an expression.

Simplify.

Add.                          $3.28

Write a sentence.             Marla's total cost for the fruit is $3.28.

TRY IT 5.53        Suzanne buys cans of beans that cost        each and cans of corn that cost          each. How
                   much is the total cost of these groceries?
398 5 · Decimals

      TRY IT 5.54  Lydia bought movie tickets for the family. She bought two adult tickets for   each and four

                   children's tickets for     each. How much did the tickets cost Lydia in all?

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity "Alexander Who Used to be Rich Last Sunday" will provide you with another view of the
topics covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Adding and Subtracting Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24addsubdecmls)
    Multiplying Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multdecmls)
    Multiplying by Powers of Ten (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpowten)
    Dividing Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24divddecmls)
    Dividing by Powers of Ten (http://www.openstax.org/l/24divddecmlss)

        SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Add and Subtract Decimals

In the following exercises, add or subtract.

95.                                    96.    97.

98.                                    99.    100.

101.                                   102.   103.

104.                                   105.   106.

107.                                   108.   109.

110.                                   111.   112.

113.                                   114.   115.

116.                                   117.   118.

119.                                   120.   121.

122.

Multiply Decimals

In the following exercises, multiply.

123.                                   124.   125.

126.                                   127.   128.

129.                                   130.   131.

132.                                   133.   134.

135.                                   136.   137.

138.                                   139.   140.

141.                                   142.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             5.2 · Decimal Operations 399

Divide Decimals

In the following exercises, divide.

143.                                   144.                                145.

146.                                   147.                                148.

149.                                   150.                                151.

152.                                   153.                                154.

155.                                   156.                                157.

158.                                   159.                                160.

161.                                   162.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify.

163.                                   164.                                165.
                                                                           168.
166.                                   167.                                171.

169.                                   170.                                 174.

172.                                   173.

175.                                   176.

Use Decimals in Money Applications

In the following exercises, use the strategy for applications to solve.

177. Spending money Brenda             178. Spending money Marissa         179. Shopping Adam bought a

      got from the ATM.                      found in her pocket.                 t-shirt for      and a

      She spent  on a                        She spent  on a                      book for      The sales

      pair of earrings. How                  smoothie. How much of                tax was       How much

      much money did she have                the did she have left?               did Adam spend?

      left?

180. Restaurant Roberto's              181. Coupon Emily bought a          182. Coupon Diana bought a
        restaurant bill was
        for the entrée and                   box of cereal that cost              can of coffee that cost
        for the drink. He left a
                tip. How much did                 She had a coupon                     She had a coupon
        Roberto spend?
                                             for      off, and the                for          off, and the

                                             store doubled the                    store doubled the

                                             coupon. How much did                 coupon. How much did

                                             she pay for the box of               she pay for the can of

                                             cereal?                              coffee?

183. Diet Leo took part in a           184. Snowpack On April the          185. Coffee Noriko bought
        diet program. He weighed               snowpack at the ski resort
              pounds at the start of           was meters deep, but               coffees for herself and
        the program. During the                the next few days were
        first week, he lost                    very warm. By April the            her co-workers. Each
        pounds. During the                     snow depth was
        second week, he had lost               meters less. On April it           coffee was         How
             pounds. The third                 snowed and added
        week, he gained                        meters of snow. What was           much did she pay for all
        pounds. The fourth week,               the total depth of the
        he lost pounds. What                   snow?                              the coffees?
        did Leo weigh at the end
        of the fourth week?
400 5 · Decimals

186. Subway Fare Arianna            187. Income Mayra earns                 188. Income Peter earns
                                                    per hour. Last week             per hour. Last week he
spends            per day on                                                        worked hours. How
                                            she worked hours.                       much did he earn?
subway fare. Last week                      How much did she earn?
                                                                            191. Restaurant Jeannette
she rode the subway                 190. Hourly Wage Maria got                      and her friends love to
                                            her first paycheck from                 order mud pie at their
days. How much did she                      her new job. She worked                 favorite restaurant. They
                                                hours and earned                    always share just one
spend for the subway                                     How much does              piece of pie among
                                            she earn per hour?                      themselves. With tax and
fares?                                                                              tip, the total cost is
                                                                                    How much does each girl
189. Hourly Wage Alan got his                                                       pay if the total number
        first paycheck from his                                                     sharing the mud pie is
        new job. He worked
        hours and earned                                                        
                     How much does                                              
        he earn per hour?                                                       
                                                                                
192. Pizza Alex and his friends     193. Fast Food At their                     

go out for pizza and video          favorite fast food                      194. Home Goods Chelsea
                                                                                    needs towels to take with
games once a week. They             restaurant, the Carlson                         her to college. She buys
                                                                                    bath towels that cost
share the cost of a                 family orders burgers                                   each and
                                                                                    washcloths that cost
pizza equally. How much             that cost  each and                                     each. What is the
                                                                                    total cost for the bath
does each person pay if             orders of fries at                              towels and washcloths?

the total number sharing            each. What is the total

the pizza is                        cost of the order?







195. Zoo The Lewis and              196. Ice Skating Jasmine
                                            wants to have her
Chousmith families are                      birthday party at the local
                                            ice skating rink. It will cost
planning to go to the zoo                           per child and
                                                      per adult. What
together. Adult tickets                     will the total cost be for
                                                children and adults?
cost              and children's

tickets cost            What

will the total cost be for

adults and children?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 401

Everyday Math

197. Paycheck Annie has two jobs. She gets paid              198. Paycheck Jake has two jobs. He gets paid
                  per hour for tutoring at City College and
                                                             per hour at the college cafeteria and               at
                per hour at a coffee shop. Last week she
        tutored for hours and worked at the coffee           the art gallery. Last week he worked hours at
        shop for hours.
                                                             the cafeteria and hours at the art gallery.
     How much did she earn?
     If she had worked all hours as a tutor                   How much did he earn?
                                                              If he had worked all hours at the art
        instead of working both jobs, how much more
        would she have earned?                               gallery instead of working both jobs, how much

                                                             more would he have earned?

Writing Exercises

199. At the 2010 winter Olympics, two skiers took the        200. Find the quotient of           and explain in
        silver and bronze medals in the Men's Super-G                words all the steps taken.
        ski event. Miller's time was minute
        seconds and Weibrecht's time was minute
                seconds. Find the difference in their times
        and then write the name of that decimal.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

5.3 Decimals and Fractions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Convert fractions to decimals
           Order decimals and fractions
           Simplify expressions using the order of operations
           Find the circumference and area of circles

       BE PREPARED 5.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Divide:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 5.19.

BE PREPARED 5.8    Order       using or

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.7.

BE PREPARED 5.9    Order       using or

                   If you missed this problem, review Example 5.8.

Convert Fractions to Decimals

In Decimals, we learned to convert decimals to fractions. Now we will do the reverse--convert fractions to decimals.

Remember that the fraction bar indicates division. So can be written  or  This means that we can convert a
402 5 · Decimals

       fraction to a decimal by treating it as a division problem.
         Convert a Fraction to a Decimal
         To convert a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator of the fraction by the denominator of the fraction.

EXAMPLE 5.28

Write the fraction  as a decimal.
     Solution

A fraction bar means division, so we can write the fraction using division.

Divide.

                                                                             So the fraction is equal to

       TRY IT 5.55 Write the fraction as a decimal:
       TRY IT 5.56 Write the fraction as a decimal:

  EXAMPLE 5.29
Write the fraction as a decimal.

     Solution
  The value of this fraction is negative. After dividing, the value of the decimal will be negative. We do
  the division ignoring the sign, and then write the negative sign in the answer.

  Divide by

                                                                                                                                                        So,

       TRY IT 5.57 Write the fraction as a decimal:
       TRY IT 5.58 Write the fraction as a decimal:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                     5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 403

Repeating Decimals

So far, in all the examples converting fractions to decimals the division resulted in a remainder of zero. This is not always
the case. Let's see what happens when we convert the fraction to a decimal. First, notice that is an improper
fraction. Its value is greater than The equivalent decimal will also be greater than
We divide by

No matter how many more zeros we write, there will always be a remainder of and the threes in the quotient will go

on forever. The number  is called a repeating decimal. Remember that the "..." means that the pattern repeats.

Repeating Decimal

A repeating decimal is a decimal in which the last digit or group of digits repeats endlessly.

How do you know how many `repeats' to write? Instead of writing   we use a shorthand notation by placing a line
                                                                 The line above the tells you that the repeats
over the digits that repeat. The repeating decimal  is written

endlessly. So

For other decimals, two or more digits might repeat. Table 5.5 shows some more examples of repeating decimals.

                                                    is the repeating digit

                                                    is the repeating digit

                                                    is the repeating block

                                                                 is the repeating block

                        Table 5.5

  EXAMPLE 5.30

Write as a decimal.
     Solution

Divide by
404 5 · Decimals

Notice that the differences of and repeat, so there is a repeat in the digits of the quotient;  will repeat
endlessly. The first decimal place in the quotient, is not part of the pattern. So,

       TRY IT 5.59 Write as a decimal:

       TRY IT 5.60 Write as a decimal:

It is useful to convert between fractions and decimals when we need to add or subtract numbers in different forms. To
add a fraction and a decimal, for example, we would need to either convert the fraction to a decimal or the decimal to a
fraction.

  EXAMPLE 5.31
Simplify:

     Solution

Change to a decimal.

Add.

TRY IT 5.61 Simplify:

TRY IT 5.62 Simplify:

Order Decimals and Fractions

In Decimals, we compared two decimals and determined which was larger. To compare a decimal to a fraction, we will
first convert the fraction to a decimal and then compare the decimals.

EXAMPLE 5.32

Order             using or
     Solution

Convert to a decimal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 405

Compare        to

Rewrite with the original fraction.

TRY IT 5.63 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

TRY IT 5.64 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

When ordering negative numbers, remember that larger numbers are to the right on the number line and any positive
number is greater than any negative number.

EXAMPLE 5.33

Order              using or
     Solution

Convert to a decimal.

Compare        to  .

Rewrite the inequality with the original fraction.

TRY IT 5.65 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

TRY IT 5.66 Order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

  EXAMPLE 5.34               in order from smallest to largest.
Write the numbers

     Solution

Convert the fractions to decimals.
Write the smallest decimal number first.
406 5 · Decimals

          Write the next larger decimal number in the middle place.
          Write the last decimal number (the larger) in the third place.
          Rewrite the list with the original fractions.

  TRY IT 5.67 Write each set of numbers in order from smallest to largest:

  TRY IT 5.68 Write each set of numbers in order from smallest to largest:

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

The order of operations introduced in Use the Language of Algebra also applies to decimals. Do you remember what the
phrase "Please excuse my dear Aunt Sally" stands for?

EXAMPLE 5.35

Simplify the expressions:

  Solution     



Simplify inside parentheses.
Multiply.



Simplify inside parentheses.
Write as a fraction.
Multiply.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 5.69  Simplify:         
  TRY IT 5.70  Simplify:            

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 407

EXAMPLE 5.36

Simplify each expression:

  Solution                   



Simplify exponents.
Divide.
Multiply.
Add.
Subtract.



Simplify exponents.
Multiply.
Convert to a decimal.
Add.

  TRY IT 5.71 Simplify:

  TRY IT 5.72 Simplify:

Find the Circumference and Area of Circles

The properties of circles have been studied for over  years. All circles have exactly the same shape, but their sizes

are affected by the length of the radius, a line segment from the center to any point on the circle. A line segment that

passes through a circle's center connecting two points on the circle is called a diameter. The diameter is twice as long as

the radius. See Figure 5.6.

The size of a circle can be measured in two ways. The distance around a circle is called its circumference.
408 5 · Decimals

                                                                              Figure 5.6
Archimedes discovered that for circles of all different sizes, dividing the circumference by the diameter always gives the
same number. The value of this number is pi, symbolized by Greek letter (pronounced pie). However, the exact value of

  cannot be calculated since the decimal never ends or repeats (we will learn more about numbers like this in The
Properties of Real Numbers.)

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Pi Lab will help you develop a better understanding of pi.

If we want the exact circumference or area of a circle, we leave the symbol in the answer. We can get an approximate

answer by substituting           as the value of We use the symbol to show that the result is approximate, not exact.

Properties of Circles

Since the diameter is twice the radius, another way to find the circumference is to use the formula

Suppose we want to find the exact area of a circle of radius inches. To calculate the area, we would evaluate the

formula for the area when        inches and leave the answer in terms of

We write after the      So the exact value of the area is  square inches.

To approximate the area, we would substitute

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 409

Remember to use square units, such as square inches, when you calculate the area.

EXAMPLE 5.37

A circle has radius  centimeters. Approximate its  circumference and  area.
     Solution

 Find the circumference when

Write the formula for circumference.

Substitute 3.14 for and 10 for , .

Multiply.

 Find the area when

Write the formula for area.
Substitute 3.14 for and 10 for .
Multiply.

TRY IT 5.73          A circle has radius inches. Approximate its  circumference and  area.
TRY IT 5.74          A circle has radius feet. Approximate its  circumference and  area.

EXAMPLE 5.38

A circle has radius  centimeters. Approximate its  circumference and  area.
     Solution

 Find the circumference when

Write the formula for circumference.

Substitute 3.14 for and 42.5 for

Multiply.

 Find the area when          .

Write the formula for area.
410 5 · Decimals

Substitute 3.14 for and 42.5 for .
Multiply.

TRY IT 5.75          A circle has radius  centimeters. Approximate its  circumference and  area.

TRY IT 5.76 A circle has radius meters. Approximate its  circumference and  area.

Approximate with a Fraction

Convert the fraction to a decimal. If you use your calculator, the decimal number will fill up the display and show

                  But if we round that number to two decimal places, we get  the decimal approximation of When we

have a circle with radius given as a fraction, we can substitute for instead of  And, since is also an

approximation of we will use the symbol to show we have an approximate value.

EXAMPLE 5.39

A circle has radius  meter. Approximate its  circumference and  area.
     Solution

 Find the circumference when

Write the formula for circumference.

Substitute for and for .

Multiply.

 Find the area when

Write the formula for area.
Substitute for and for .
Multiply.

    TRY IT 5.77 A circle has radius meters. Approximate its  circumference and  area.

    TRY IT 5.78 A circle has radius inches. Approximate its  circumference and  area.

       MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Converting a Fraction to a Decimal - Part 2 (http://www.openstax.org/l/24convfrac2dec)
      Convert a Fraction to a Decimal (repeating) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24convfr2decrep)
      Compare Fractions and Decimals using Inequality Symbols (http://www.openstax.org/l/24compfrcdec)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.3 · Decimals and Fractions 411

      Determine the Area of a Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24circlearea)
      Determine the Circumference of a Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24circlecirc)

        SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Convert Fractions to Decimals

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a decimal.

201.                                   202.                       203.

204.                                   205.                       206.

207.                                   208.                       209.

210.                                   211.                       212.

213.                                   214.                       215.

216.

In the following exercises, simplify the expression.

217.                                   218.                       219.

220.                                   221.                       222.

Order Decimals and Fractions

In the following exercises, order each pair of numbers, using or

223.                                   224.                       225.

226.                                   227.                       228.

229.                                   230.                       231.

232.                                   233.                       234.

In the following exercises, write each set of numbers in order from least to greatest.

235.                                   236.                       237.

238.                                   239.                       240.

241.                                   242.

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

In the following exercises, simplify.

243.                                   244.                       245.
                                                                  248.
246.                                   247.                       251.

249.                                   250.                         254.
                                                                  257.
252.                                   253.

255.                                   256.
412 5 · Decimals

258.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, simplify. Give the answer as a decimal.

259.                             260.                                261.

262.                             263.                                264.

265.                             266.

Find the Circumference and Area of Circles

In the following exercises, approximate the  circumference and  area of each circle. If measurements are given in
fractions, leave answers in fraction form.

267.                             268.                                269.

270.                             271.                                272.

273.                             274.                                275.

276.                             277.                                278.

279.                             280.

Everyday Math

281. Kelly wants to buy a pair of boots that are on sale  282. An architect is planning to put a circular mosaic
        for of the original price. The original price of          in the entry of a new building. The mosaic will be
                                                                  in the shape of a circle with radius of feet. How
      the boots is  What is the sale price of the                 many square feet of tile will be needed for the
      shoes?                                                      mosaic? (Round your answer up to the next
                                                                  whole number.)

Writing Exercises

283. Is it easier for you to convert a decimal to a       284. Describe a situation in your life in which you
        fraction or a fraction to a decimal? Explain.             might need to find the area or circumference of
                                                                  a circle.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.4 · Solve Equations with Decimals 413

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

5.4 Solve Equations with Decimals

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Determine whether a decimal is a solution of an equation
           Solve equations with decimals
           Translate to an equation and solve

       BE PREPARED 5.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Evaluate
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 4.77.

  BE PREPARED 5.11  Evaluate  when

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 3.41.

  BE PREPARED 5.12  Solve
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 4.99.

Determine Whether a Decimal is a Solution of an Equation

Solving equations with decimals is important in our everyday lives because money is usually written with decimals. When
applications involve money, such as shopping for yourself, making your family's budget, or planning for the future of
your business, you'll be solving equations with decimals.

Now that we've worked with decimals, we are ready to find solutions to equations involving decimals. The steps we take
to determine whether a number is a solution to an equation are the same whether the solution is a whole number, an
integer, a fraction, or a decimal. We'll list these steps here again for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

Step 1.  Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

         Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
           If so, the number is a solution.
           If not, the number is not a solution.

EXAMPLE 5.40

Determine whether each of the following is a solution of

              

Solution


414 5 · Decimals

Subtract.

Since             does not result in a true equation, is not a solution to the equation.

 

Subtract.

Since             does not result in a true equation,    is not a solution to the equation.

 

Subtract.

Since             results in a true equation, is a solution to the equation.

TRY IT 5.79       Determine whether each value is a solution of the given equation.

                                                         

TRY IT 5.80       Determine whether each value is a solution of the given equation.

                                                         

Solve Equations with Decimals

In previous chapters, we solved equations using the Properties of Equality. We will use these same properties to solve
equations with decimals.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      5.4 · Solve Equations with Decimals 415

Properties of Equality

                  Subtraction Property of Equality   Addition Property of Equality

                        For any numbers              For any numbers

                        If      then                 If      then

                  The Division Property of Equality  The Multiplication Property of Equality

           For any numbers                           For any numbers

                            If  then                     If  then

When you add, subtract, multiply or divide the same quantity from both sides of an equation, you still have equality.

  EXAMPLE 5.41

Solve:
     Solution

We will use the Subtraction Property of Equality to isolate the variable.

Simplify.
Check:

Simplify.

Since      makes                a true statement, we know we have found a solution to this equation.

TRY IT 5.81 Solve:
TRY IT 5.82 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 5.42

Solve:
     Solution

We will use the Addition Property of Equality.
416 5 · Decimals

         Add 4.75 to each side, to undo the subtraction.
         Simplify.
         Check:

Since the result is a true statement,  is a solution to the equation.

TRY IT 5.83 Solve:
TRY IT 5.84 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 5.43

Solve:
     Solution

We will use the Division Property of Equality.
Use the Properties of Equality to find a value for

We must divide both sides by 0.8 to isolate n.
Simplify.
Check:

Since  makes                     a true statement, we know we have a solution.

TRY IT 5.85 Solve:
TRY IT 5.86 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     5.4 · Solve Equations with Decimals 417

  EXAMPLE 5.44
Solve:

     Solution
We will use the Multiplication Property of Equality.

  Here, p is divided by -1.8. We must multiply by -1.8 to isolate p
  Multiply.
  Check:

A solution to  is

       TRY IT 5.87 Solve:

       TRY IT 5.88 Solve:

Translate to an Equation and Solve

Now that we have solved equations with decimals, we are ready to translate word sentences to equations and solve.
Remember to look for words and phrases that indicate the operations to use.

  EXAMPLE 5.45
Translate and solve: The difference of and is

     Solution

  Translate.

Add to both sides of the equation.

Simplify.

Check:         Is the difference of and 4.3 equal to 2.1?

Let            : Is the difference of 6.4 and 4.3 equal to 2.1?
418 5 · Decimals

Translate.
Simplify.

     TRY IT 5.89 Translate and solve: The difference of and is
     TRY IT 5.90 Translate and solve: The difference of and is

  EXAMPLE 5.46                         and is
Translate and solve: The product of

     Solution

  Translate.

Divide both sides by             .

Simplify.

Check:            Is the product of -3.1 and equal to ?

Let               : Is the product of  and      equal to ?

Translate.

Simplify.

     TRY IT 5.91 Translate and solve: The product of        and is
     TRY IT 5.92 Translate and solve: The product of        and is

EXAMPLE 5.47

Translate and solve: The quotient of and    is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.4 · Solve Equations with Decimals 419

  Solution
Translate.

Multiply both sides by  .

Simplify.   Is the quotient of and           equal to ?
Check:
Let         Is the quotient of          and  equal to ?

Translate.

Simplify.

     TRY IT 5.93 Translate and solve: The quotient of and  is

     TRY IT 5.94 Translate and solve: The quotient of and  is

  EXAMPLE 5.48
Translate and solve: The sum of and is

     Solution

  Translate.

Subtract from each side.

Simplify.

Check:      Is the sum and equal to ?

Let         Is the sum     and equal to ?

Translate.

Simplify.

     TRY IT 5.95 Translate and solve: The sum of and is
420 5 · Decimals

      TRY IT 5.96 Translate and solve: The sum of and is

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Solving One Step Equations Involving Decimals (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24eqwithdec)
      Solve a One Step Equation With Decimals by Adding and Subtracting (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
      24eqnwdecplsmin)
      Solve a One Step Equation With Decimals by Multiplying (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24eqnwdecmult)
      Solve a One Step Equation With Decimals by Dividing (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24eqnwdecdiv)

        SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Determine Whether a Decimal is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is a solution of the given equation.

285.                             286.                     287.

                                                                             
                                             
288.
                      
                  

Solve Equations with Decimals

In the following exercises, solve the equation.

289.                             290.                     291.

292.                             293.                     294.

295.                             296.                     297.

298.                             299.                     300.

301.                             302.                     303.

304.                             305.                     306.

307.                             308.                     309.

310.                             311.                     312.

313.                             314.                     315.

316.                             317.                     318.

319.                             320.                     321.

322.                             323.                     324.

Mixed Practice

In the following exercises, solve the equation. Then check your solution.

325.                             326.                     327.

328.                             329.                     330.

331.                             332.                     333.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        5.5 · Averages and Probability 421

334.                                335.                          336.
                                                                  339.
337.                                338.                          342.

340.                                341.

343.                                344.

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

345. The difference of and          346. The difference and       347. The product of       and
             is                             is                              is          and

348. The product of       and       349. The quotient of and      350. The quotient of
          is                                                                     is
                                                  is

351. The sum of and         is 352. The sum of and            is

Everyday Math

353. Shawn bought a pair of shoes on sale for .            354. Mary bought a new refrigerator. The total price

      Solve the equation            to find the               including sales tax was   Find the retail

      original price of the shoes,                            price, of the refrigerator before tax by solving

                                                              the equation

Writing Exercises

355. Think about solving the equation                 but  356. Think about solving the equation
                                                                   but do not actually solve it. Do you think the
      do not actually solve it. Do you think the solution          solution should be greater than or less than
                                                                          Explain your reasoning. Then solve the
      should be greater than or less than                          equation to see if your thinking was correct.

      Explain your reasoning. Then solve the equation

      to see if your thinking was correct.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

5.5 Averages and Probability

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Calculate the mean of a set of numbers
           Find the median of a set of numbers
           Find the mode of a set of numbers
           Apply the basic definition of probability

       BE PREPARED 5.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
422 5 · Decimals

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.48.

BE PREPARED 5.14                 Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.8.

BE PREPARED 5.15                 Convert to a decimal.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.28.

One application of decimals that arises often is finding the average of a set of numbers. What do you think of when you
hear the word average? Is it your grade point average, the average rent for an apartment in your city, the batting
average of a player on your favorite baseball team? The average is a typical value in a set of numerical data. Calculating
an average sometimes involves working with decimal numbers. In this section, we will look at three different ways to
calculate an average.

Calculate the Mean of a Set of Numbers

The mean is often called the arithmetic average. It is computed by dividing the sum of the values by the number of
values. Students want to know the mean of their test scores. Climatologists report that the mean temperature has, or
has not, changed. City planners are interested in the mean household size.

Suppose Ethan's first three test scores were  To find the mean score, he would add them and divide by

His mean test score is points.
  The Mean
  The mean of a set of numbers is the arithmetic average of the numbers.

           ...

              HOW TO

Calculate the mean of a set of numbers.
Step 1. Write the formula for the mean

Step 2.  Find the sum of all the values in the set. Write the sum in the numerator.
Step 3.  Count the number, of values in the set. Write this number in the denominator.
Step 4.  Simplify the fraction.
Step 5.  Check to see that the mean is reasonable. It should be greater than the least number and less than the
         greatest number in the set.

  EXAMPLE 5.49
Find the mean of the numbers

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.5 · Averages and Probability 423

      Solution
    Write the formula for the mean:

    Write the sum of the numbers in the numerator.

    Count how many numbers are in the set. There are 5 numbers in the set, so  .

    Add the numbers in the numerator.

    Then divide.
    Check to see that the mean is 'typical': 10 is neither less than 6 nor greater than 15. The mean is 10.

       TRY IT 5.97 Find the mean of the numbers:

       TRY IT 5.98 Find the mean of the numbers:

  EXAMPLE 5.50
The ages of the members of a family who got together for a birthday celebration were
years. Find the mean age.

     Solution
  Write the formula for the mean:

  Write the sum of the numbers in the numerator.

  Count how many numbers are in the set. Call this and write it in the
  denominator.

  Simplify the fraction.

Is  `typical'? Yes, it is neither less than nor greater than The mean age is          years.

    TRY IT 5.99   The ages of the four students in Ben's carpool are                  Find the mean age of the
                  students.

    TRY IT 5.100  Yen counted the number of emails she received last week. The numbers were
                                                     Find the mean number of emails.

Did you notice that in the last example, while all the numbers were whole numbers, the mean was              a number with

one decimal place? It is customary to report the mean to one more decimal place than the original numbers. In the next

example, all the numbers represent money, and it will make sense to report the mean in dollars and cents.
424 5 · Decimals                                                                Find the mean cost of Daisy's cell

         EXAMPLE 5.51
       For the past four months, Daisy's cell phone bills were
       phone bills.

            Solution
          Write the formula for the mean.

          Count how many numbers are in the set. Call this and write it in the
          denominator.

          Write the sum of all the numbers in the numerator.

          Simplify the fraction.

Does  seem `typical' of this set of numbers? Yes, it is neither less than       nor greater than

The mean cost of her cell phone bill was

      TRY IT 5.101  Last week Ray recorded how much he spent for lunch each workday. He spent
                                                                          Find the mean of how much he spent each day.

      TRY IT 5.102  Lisa has kept the receipts from the past four trips to the gas station. The receipts show the

                    following amounts:                                          Find the mean.

Find the Median of a Set of Numbers

When Ann, Bianca, Dora, Eve, and Francine sing together on stage, they line up in order of their heights. Their heights, in
inches, are shown in Table 5.6.

                                                        Ann Bianca Dora Eve Francine

                                                      Table 5.6

Dora is in the middle of the group. Her height, is the median of the girls' heights. Half of the heights are less than or
equal to Dora's height, and half are greater than or equal. The median is the middle value.

Median

The median of a set of data values is the middle value.
  · Half the data values are less than or equal to the median.
  · Half the data values are greater than or equal to the median.

What if Carmen, the pianist, joins the singing group on stage? Carmen is        inches tall, so she fits in the height order
between Bianca and Dora. Now the data set looks like this:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    5.5 · Averages and Probability 425

There is no single middle value. The heights of the six girls can be divided into two equal parts.

Statisticians have agreed that in cases like this the median is the mean of the two values closest to the middle. So the

median is the mean of                 The median height is  inches.

Notice that when the number of girls was the median was the third height, but when the number of girls was the
median was the mean of the third and fourth heights. In general, when the number of values is odd, the median will be
the one value in the middle, but when the number is even, the median is the mean of the two middle values.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the median of a set of numbers.

Step 1.  List the numbers from smallest to largest.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Count how many numbers are in the set. Call this

         Is odd or even?
           If is an odd number, the median is the middle value.
           If is an even number, the median is the mean of the two middle values.

  EXAMPLE 5.52                                              9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 19
Find the median of                                                       odd

     Solution
  List the numbers in order from smallest to largest.

  Count how many numbers are in the set. Call this .

  Is odd or even?

The median is the middle value.

The middle is the number in the 4th position.          So the median of the data is 13.

TRY IT 5.103 Find the median of the data set:
TRY IT 5.104 Find the median of the data set:
426 5 · Decimals                                                                        64, 76, 79, 83, 85, 86, 88, 90, 92, 100
                                                                                                              even
         EXAMPLE 5.53
       Kristen received the following scores on her weekly math quizzes:

                                                                Find her median score.
            Solution
          Find the median of 83, 79, 85, 86, 92, 100, 76, 90, 88, and 64.
          List the numbers in order from smallest to largest.
          Count the number of data values in the set. Call this
          Is odd or even?

          The median is the mean of the two middle values, the 5th and 6th
          numbers.

          Find the mean of 85 and 86.

                                                                                                                       Kristen's median score is 85.5.

       TRY IT 5.105 Find the median of the data set:

       TRY IT 5.106 Find the median of the data set:

Identify the Mode of a Set of Numbers

The average is one number in a set of numbers that is somehow typical of the whole set of numbers. The mean and
median are both often called the average. Yes, it can be confusing when the word average refers to two different
numbers, the mean and the median! In fact, there is a third number that is also an average. This average is the mode.
The mode of a set of numbers is the number that occurs the most. The frequency, is the number of times a number
occurs. So the mode of a set of numbers is the number with the highest frequency.

  Mode
  The mode of a set of numbers is the number with the highest frequency.

Suppose Jolene kept track of the number of miles she ran since the start of the month, as shown in Figure 5.7.

                                 Figure 5.7

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              5.5 · Averages and Probability 427

If we list the numbers in order it is easier to identify the one with the highest frequency.

Jolene ran        miles three times, and every other distance is listed only once. So the mode of the data is  miles.
                  HOW TO
             ...

Identify the mode of a set of numbers.

Step 1. List the data values in numerical order.
Step 2. Count the number of times each value appears.
Step 3. The mode is the value with the highest frequency.

  EXAMPLE 5.54
The ages of students in a college math class are listed below. Identify the mode.

     Solution
The ages are already listed in order. We will make a table of frequencies to help identify the age with the highest
frequency.

Now look for the highest frequency. The highest frequency is  which corresponds to the age     So the mode of the
ages in this class is years.

TRY IT 5.107 The number of sick days employees used last year:                                 Identify the mode.
                                                                                                          Identify the
TRY IT 5.108      The number of handbags owned by women in a book club:
                  mode.

  EXAMPLE 5.55
The data lists the heights (in inches) of students in a statistics class. Identify the mode.

     Solution
List each number with its frequency.

Now look for the highest frequency. The highest frequency is  which corresponds to the height  inches. So the mode
of this set of heights is inches.
428 5 · Decimals

  TRY IT 5.109    The ages of the students in a statistics class are listed here: , , , , , , , , , ,
                     , , , , , , , , , , . What is the mode?

  TRY IT 5.110    Students listed the number of members in their household as follows: , , , , , , , , , ,
                   , , , , , , , , , . What is the mode?

Some data sets do not have a mode because no value appears more than any other. And some data sets have more than
one mode. In a given set, if two or more data values have the same highest frequency, we say they are all modes.

Use the Basic Definition of Probability

The probability of an event tells us how likely that event is to occur. We usually write probabilities as fractions or
decimals.

For example, picture a fruit bowl that contains five pieces of fruit - three bananas and two apples.

If you want to choose one piece of fruit to eat for a snack and don't care what it is, there is a probability you will
choose a banana, because there are three bananas out of the total of five pieces of fruit. The probability of an event is
the number of favorable outcomes divided by the total number of outcomes.

  Probability
  The probability of an event is the number of favorable outcomes divided by the total number of outcomes possible.

Converting the fraction to a decimal, we would say there is a probability of choosing a banana.

This basic definition of probability assumes that all the outcomes are equally likely to occur. If you study probabilities in a
later math class, you'll learn about several other ways to calculate probabilities.

EXAMPLE 5.56

The ski club is holding a raffle to raise money. They sold tickets. All of the tickets are placed in a jar. One ticket will be
pulled out of the jar at random, and the winner will receive a prize. Cherie bought one raffle ticket.

 Find the probability she will win the prize.
 Convert the fraction to a decimal.

     Solution



What are you asked to find?                The probability Cherie wins the prize.

What is the number of favorable outcomes?  1, because Cherie has 1 ticket.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                5.5 · Averages and Probability 429

Use the definition of probability.
Substitute into the numerator and denominator.



Convert the fraction to a decimal.
Write the probability as a fraction.
Convert the fraction to a decimal.

  TRY IT 5.111  Ignaly is attending a fashion show where the guests are seated at tables of ten. One guest from
  TRY IT 5.112
                each table will be selected at random to receive a door prize.  Find the probability Ignaly will
                win the door prize for her table.  Convert the fraction to a decimal.

                Hoang is among people available to sit on a jury. One person will be chosen at random from

                the  Find the probability Hoang will be chosen.  Convert the fraction to a decimal.

EXAMPLE 5.57

Three women and five men interviewed for a job. One of the candidates will be offered the job.

 Find the probability the job is offered to a woman.
 Convert the fraction to a decimal.

     Solution



What are you asked to find?                     The probability the job is offered to a woman.

What is the number of favorable outcomes?       3, because there are three women.

What are the total number of outcomes?          8, because 8 people interviewed.

Use the definition of probability.

Substitute into the numerator and denominator.



Convert the fraction to a decimal.
430 5 · Decimals

Write the probability as a fraction.
Convert the fraction to a decimal.

      TRY IT 5.113                A bowl of Halloween candy contains chocolate candies and lemon candies. Tanya will
      TRY IT 5.114
                                  choose one piece of candy at random.  Find the probability Tanya will choose a chocolate
                                  candy.  Convert the fraction to a decimal.

                                  Dan has pairs of black socks and pairs of blue socks. He will choose one pair at random to

                                  wear tomorrow.  Find the probability Dan will choose a pair of black socks  Convert the

                                  fraction to a decimal.

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Mean, Median, and Mode (http://www.openstax.org/l/24meanmedmode)
      Find the Mean of a Data Set (http://www.openstax.org/l/24meandataset)
      Find the Median of a Data Set (http://www.openstax.org/l/24meddataset)
      Find the Mode of a Data Set (http://www.openstax.org/l/24modedataset)

        SECTION 5.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Calculate the Mean of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, find the mean.

357. , , , ,                              358. , , , , ,                        359. , , , , ,

360. , , , , and                          361. , , ,                            362. , , ,

363.              ,         ,     ,       , 364.  ,,,,                          365. Four girls leaving a mall

      ,                                           ,,,                           were asked how much

                                                                                money they had just

                                                                                spent. The amounts were

                                                                                ,     ,               , and

                                                                                   . Find the mean

                                                                                amount of money spent.

366. Juan bought shirts to                367. The number of minutes it         368. Norris bought six books
                                                  took Jim to ride his bike to
      wear to his new job. The                    school for each of the        for his classes this
                                                  past six days was , ,
      costs of the shirts were                       , , , and . Find           semester. The costs of the
                                                  the mean number of
                     ,         ,     ,            minutes.                      books were            ,

                     , and        . Find                                           ,            ,               ,

      the mean cost.                                                               , and              . Find

                                                                                the mean cost.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             5.5 · Averages and Probability 431

369. The top eight hitters in a     370. The monthly snowfall at a
        softball league have                ski resort over a six-
        batting averages of ,               month period was
              ,,,,                                                         and
              , , and . Find                       inches. Find the
        the mean of the batting             mean snowfall.
        averages. Round your
        answer to the nearest
        thousandth.

Find the Median of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, find the median.

371. , , , ,                        372. , , , ,                                373. , , , , , , ,
                                                                                           ,
374. , , , , ,                      375. , , , , , , ,
             ,,,                                                                376. , , , , , , ,

377.  ,     ,,,                     378.        ,,,,                            379. Last week Ray recorded

         ,                                      ,,,                             how much he spent for

                                                                                lunch each workday. He

                                                                                spent  ,     ,               ,

                                                                                , and        . Find

                                                                                the median.

380. Michaela is in charge of 6     381. Brian is teaching a swim               382. Sal recorded the amount
        two-year olds at a daycare          class for three-year olds.                  he spent for gas each
        center. Their ages, in              Their ages, in months, are                  week for the past
        months, are , , ,                                                               weeks. The amounts were
           , , and . Find the               Find the median age.
        median age.

                                                                                       and      Find

                                                                                the median amount.

Identify the Mode of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, identify the mode.

383. , , , , , , , , , ,            384. , , , , , , , , , ,                    385. , , , , , , ,
                                                                                           ,,,,,,,
386. , , , , , , ,                  387. The number of children                            ,,,,,
           ,,,,,,,                          per house on one block:
           ,,,,,,                            ,,,,,,,,,,,                        388. The number of movies
                                             ,                                          watched each month last
389. The number of units                                                                year: , , , , , , , , ,
        being taken by students     390. The number of hours of                          ,,
        in one class: , , , ,               sleep per night for the
           , ,, , , , ,                     past two weeks: , , , ,
           .                                 , ,,,,,,,,.
432 5 · Decimals

Use the Basic Definition of Probability

In the following exercises, express the probability as both a fraction and a decimal. (Round to three decimal places, if
necessary.)

391. Josue is in a book club        392. Jessica is one of eight          393. There are people who
        with members. One                   kindergarten teachers at              work in Dane's
        member is chosen at                 Mandela Elementary                    department. Next week,
        random each month to                School. One of the                    one person will be
        select the next month's             kindergarten teachers will            selected at random to
        book. Find the probability          be selected at random to              bring in doughnuts. Find
        that Josue will be chosen           attend a summer                       the probability that Dane
        next month.                         workshop. Find the                    will be selected. Round
                                            probability that Jessica              your answer to the
                                            will be selected.                     nearest thousandth.

394. Monica has two                 395. Michel has four rock CDs         396. Noah is planning his
        strawberry yogurts and              and six country CDs in his            summer camping trip. He
        six banana yogurts in her           car. He will pick one CD to           can't decide among six
        refrigerator. She will              play on his way to work.              campgrounds at the
        choose one yogurt at                Find the probability                  beach and twelve
        random to take to work.             Michel will pick a rock CD.           campgrounds in the
        Find the probability                                                      mountains, so he will
        Monica will choose a                                                      choose one campground
        strawberry yogurt.                                                        at random. Find the
                                                                                  probability that Noah will
                                                                                  choose a campground at
                                                                                  the beach.

397. Donovan is considering         398. There are
        transferring to a                   number combinations
                             He is          possible in the Mega
        considering out-of                  Millions lottery. One
        state colleges and                  winning jackpot ticket will
        colleges in his state. He           be chosen at random.
        will choose one college at          Brent chooses his favorite
        random to visit during              number combination and
        spring break. Find the              buys one ticket. Find the
        probability that Donovan            probability Brent will win
        will choose an out-of-              the jackpot. Round the
        state college.                      decimal to the first digit
                                            that is not zero, then
                                            write the name of the
                                            decimal.

Everyday Math

399. Joaquin gets paid every Friday. His paychecks for                    400. The cash register receipts each day last week at a
        the past Fridays were                                                     coffee shop were
                                                                Find the
                                                                                                  Find the  mean, 
     mean,  median, and  mode.                                                median, and  mode.

Writing Exercises

401. Explain in your own words the difference                             402. Make an example of probability that relates to
        between the mean, median, and mode of a set of                            your life. Write your answer as a fraction and
        numbers.                                                                  explain what the numerator and denominator
                                                                                  represent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                                 5.6 · Ratios and Rate 433

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

5.6 Ratios and Rate

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Write a ratio as a fraction
           Write a rate as a fraction
           Find unit rates
           Find unit price
           Translate phrases to expressions with fractions

       BE PREPARED 5.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 4.19.

BE PREPARED 5.17  Divide:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 5.19.

BE PREPARED 5.18  Simplify:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 4.43.

Write a Ratio as a Fraction

When you apply for a mortgage, the loan officer will compare your total debt to your total income to decide if you qualify
for the loan. This comparison is called the debt-to-income ratio. A ratio compares two quantities that are measured with
the same unit. If we compare and , the ratio is written as

  Ratios

  A ratio compares two numbers or two quantities that are measured with the same unit. The ratio of to is written

In this section, we will use the fraction notation. When a ratio is written in fraction form, the fraction should be
simplified. If it is an improper fraction, we do not change it to a mixed number. Because a ratio compares two quantities,
we would leave a ratio as instead of simplifying it to so that we can see the two parts of the ratio.

EXAMPLE 5.58

Write each ratio as a fraction:   
434 5 · Decimals

            Solution

     

Write as a fraction with the first number in the numerator and the second in the denominator.
Simplify the fraction.



Write as a fraction with the first number in the numerator and the second in the denominator.
Simplify.

We leave the ratio in  as an improper fraction.

TRY IT 5.115 Write each ratio as a fraction:                        

TRY IT 5.116 Write each ratio as a fraction:                        

Ratios Involving Decimals

We will often work with ratios of decimals, especially when we have ratios involving money. In these cases, we can
eliminate the decimals by using the Equivalent Fractions Property to convert the ratio to a fraction with whole numbers
in the numerator and denominator.

For example, consider the ratio  We can write it as a fraction with decimals and then multiply the numerator

and denominator by to eliminate the decimals.

Do you see a shortcut to find the equivalent fraction? Notice that    and         The least common

denominator of and is            By multiplying the numerator and denominator of  by           we `moved' the

decimal two places to the right to get the equivalent fraction with no decimals. Now that we understand the math
behind the process, we can find the fraction with no decimals like this:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               5.6 · Ratios and Rate 435

"Move" the decimal 2 places.
Simplify.

You do not have to write out every step when you multiply the numerator and denominator by powers of ten. As long as
you move both decimal places the same number of places, the ratio will remain the same.

  EXAMPLE 5.59
Write each ratio as a fraction of whole numbers:

 Solution 
 

  Write as a fraction.

  Rewrite as an equivalent fraction without decimals, by moving both decimal points 1 place to the right.

  Simplify.

So  is equivalent to

                                                             To clear both decimals we need to move

The numerator has one decimal place and the denominator has
the decimal places to the right.

Write as a fraction.
Move both decimals right two places.
Simplify.

So  is equivalent to

    TRY IT 5.117 Write each ratio as a fraction:             

    TRY IT 5.118 Write each ratio as a fraction:             

Some ratios compare two mixed numbers. Remember that to divide mixed numbers, you first rewrite them as improper
fractions.
436 5 · Decimals                 as a fraction.

         EXAMPLE 5.60
       Write the ratio of

            Solution

Write as a fraction.

Convert the numerator and denominator to improper fractions.
Rewrite as a division of fractions.
Invert the divisor and multiply.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.119 Write each ratio as a fraction:

       TRY IT 5.120 Write each ratio as a fraction:

Applications of Ratios

One real-world application of ratios that affects many people involves measuring cholesterol in blood. The ratio of total
cholesterol to HDL cholesterol is one way doctors assess a person's overall health. A ratio of less than to is considered
good.

  EXAMPLE 5.61

Hector's total cholesterol is mg/dl and his HDL cholesterol is mg/dl.  Find the ratio of his total cholesterol to
his HDL cholesterol.  Assuming that a ratio less than to is considered good, what would you suggest to Hector?

     Solution

 First, write the words that express the ratio. We want to know the ratio of Hector's total cholesterol to his HDL

cholesterol.

  Write as a fraction.

  Substitute the values.

  Simplify.

 Is Hector's cholesterol ratio ok? If we divide by we obtain approximately so                  Hector's cholesterol

ratio is high! Hector should either lower his total cholesterol or raise his HDL cholesterol.

TRY IT 5.121 Find the patient's ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol using the given information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        5.6 · Ratios and Rate 437

              Total cholesterol is mg/dL and HDL cholesterol is mg/dL.

TRY IT 5.122  Find the patient's ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol using the given information.
              Total cholesterol is mg/dL and HDL cholesterol is mg/dL.

Ratios of Two Measurements in Different Units
To find the ratio of two measurements, we must make sure the quantities have been measured with the same unit. If the
measurements are not in the same units, we must first convert them to the same units.
We know that to simplify a fraction, we divide out common factors. Similarly in a ratio of measurements, we divide out
the common unit.

  EXAMPLE 5.62

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Guidelines for wheel chair ramps require a maximum vertical rise of inch for
every foot of horizontal run. What is the ratio of the rise to the run?

     Solution
In a ratio, the measurements must be in the same units. We can change feet to inches, or inches to feet. It is usually
easier to convert to the smaller unit, since this avoids introducing more fractions into the problem.
Write the words that express the ratio.

                                                                            Ratio of the rise to the run

  Write the ratio as a fraction.

Substitute in the given values.

Convert 1 foot to inches.

Simplify, dividing out common factors and units.

So the ratio of rise to run is to  This means that the ramp should rise inch for every inches of horizontal run to
comply with the guidelines.

       TRY IT 5.123 Find the ratio of the first length to the second length: inches to foot.

       TRY IT 5.124 Find the ratio of the first length to the second length: foot to inches.

Write a Rate as a Fraction

Frequently we want to compare two different types of measurements, such as miles to gallons. To make this comparison,
we use a rate. Examples of rates are miles in hours, words in minutes, and dollars per ounces.

  Rate
  A rate compares two quantities of different units. A rate is usually written as a fraction.

When writing a fraction as a rate, we put the first given amount with its units in the numerator and the second amount
with its units in the denominator. When rates are simplified, the units remain in the numerator and denominator.
438 5 · Decimals

  EXAMPLE 5.63     miles in hours. Write this rate as a fraction.
Bob drove his car

     Solution

Write as a fraction, with 525 miles in the numerator and 9 hours in the denominator.

So miles in hours is equivalent to

TRY IT 5.125 Write the rate as a fraction: miles in hours.

TRY IT 5.126 Write the rate as a fraction: miles in hours.

Find Unit Rates

In the last example, we calculated that Bob was driving at a rate of  This tells us that every three hours, Bob will

travel miles. This is correct, but not very useful. We usually want the rate to reflect the number of miles in one hour.
A rate that has a denominator of unit is referred to as a unit rate.

Unit Rate

A unit rate is a rate with denominator of unit.

Unit rates are very common in our lives. For example, when we say that we are driving at a speed of miles per hour
we mean that we travel miles in hour. We would write this rate as miles/hour (read miles per hour). The
common abbreviation for this is mph. Note that when no number is written before a unit, it is assumed to be

So miles/hour really means

Two rates we often use when driving can be written in different forms, as shown:

                   Example          Rate         Write                Abbreviate      Read

                   miles in hour                 miles/hour           mph

                   miles to gallon               miles/gallon         mpg

Another example of unit rate that you may already know about is hourly pay rate. It is usually expressed as the amount

of money earned for one hour of work. For example, if you are paid    for each hour you work, you could write that

your hourly (unit) pay rate is      (read        per hour.)

To convert a rate to a unit rate, we divide the numerator by the denominator. This gives us a denominator of

EXAMPLE 5.64

Anita was paid     last week for working         What is Anita's hourly pay rate?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   5.6 · Ratios and Rate 439

     Solution
  Start with a rate of dollars to hours. Then divide.
  Write as a rate.
  Divide the numerator by the denominator.
  Rewrite as a rate.
Anita's hourly pay rate is per hour.

TRY IT 5.127 Find the unit rate:              for hours.
TRY IT 5.128 Find the unit rate:              for hours.

  EXAMPLE 5.65

Sven drives his car miles, using gallons of gasoline. How many miles per gallon does his car get?
     Solution

Start with a rate of miles to gallons. Then divide.

Write as a rate.
Divide 455 by 14 to get the unit rate.

Sven's car gets  miles/gallon, or       mpg.

TRY IT 5.129 Find the unit rate: miles to gallons of gas.

TRY IT 5.130     Find the unit rate: miles to          gallons of gas.

Find Unit Price

Sometimes we buy common household items `in bulk', where several items are packaged together and sold for one
price. To compare the prices of different sized packages, we need to find the unit price. To find the unit price, divide the
total price by the number of items. A unit price is a unit rate for one item.

  Unit price

  A unit price is a unit rate that gives the price of one item.
440 5 · Decimals

EXAMPLE 5.66

The grocery store charges        for a case of bottles of water. What is the unit price?

     Solution
What are we asked to find? We are asked to find the unit price, which is the price per bottle.

Write as a rate.

Divide to find the unit price.

Round the result to the nearest penny.

The unit price is approximately  per bottle. Each bottle costs about

TRY IT 5.131      Find the unit price. Round your answer to the nearest cent if necessary.
                              of juice boxes for

TRY IT 5.132      Find the unit price. Round your answer to the nearest cent if necessary.
                              of bottles of ice tea for

Unit prices are very useful if you comparison shop. The better buy is the item with the lower unit price. Most grocery
stores list the unit price of each item on the shelves.

EXAMPLE 5.67

Paul is shopping for laundry detergent. At the grocery store, the liquid detergent is priced at  for loads of

laundry and the same brand of powder detergent is priced at  for loads.

Which detergent has the lowest cost per load?

     Solution
To compare the prices, we first find the unit price for each type of detergent.

                                               Liquid                            Powder

                  Write as a rate.

                  Find the unit price.

                  Round to the nearest cent.

Now we compare the unit prices. The unit price of the liquid detergent is about          per load and the unit price of the

powder detergent is about        per load. The powder is the better buy.

TRY IT 5.133      Find each unit price and then determine the better buy. Round to the nearest cent if necessary.

                  Brand A Storage Bags,        for count, or Brand B Storage Bags,               for count

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5.6 · Ratios and Rate 441

  TRY IT 5.134    Find each unit price and then determine the better buy. Round to the nearest cent if necessary.

                  Brand C Chicken Noodle Soup,           for ounces, or Brand D Chicken Noodle Soup,  for

                    ounces

Notice in Example 5.67 that we rounded the unit price to the nearest cent. Sometimes we may need to carry the division
to one more place to see the difference between the unit prices.

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Fractions

Have you noticed that the examples in this section used the comparison words ratio of, to, per, in, for, on, and from?
When you translate phrases that include these words, you should think either ratio or rate. If the units measure the
same quantity (length, time, etc.), you have a ratio. If the units are different, you have a rate. In both cases, you write a
fraction.

EXAMPLE 5.68

Translate the word phrase into an algebraic expression:

  miles per hours   students to teachers                 dollars for hours

  Solution



Write as a rate.



Write as a rate.



Write as a rate.

  TRY IT 5.135    Translate the word phrase into an algebraic expression.

                    miles per hours  parents to students                   dollars for minutes

  TRY IT 5.136    Translate the word phrase into an algebraic expression.

                   miles per hours  students to buses                      dollars for  hours

  MEDIA

  ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
  Ratios (http://www.openstax.org/l/24ratios)
442 5 · Decimals

      Write Ratios as a Simplified Fractions Involving Decimals and Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24ratiosimpfrac)
      Write a Ratio as a Simplified Fraction (http://www.openstax.org/l/24ratiosimp)
      Rates and Unit Rates (http://www.openstax.org/l/24rates)
      Unit Rate for Cell Phone Plan (http://www.openstax.org/l/24unitrate)

        SECTION 5.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Write a Ratio as a Fraction

In the following exercises, write each ratio as a fraction.

403. to                          404. to                       405. to

406. to                          407. to                       408. to

409. to                          410. to                       411.       to

412.              to             413. to                       414. to

415. to                          416. to                       417.       to

418.       to                    419.     to                   420.       to

421. ounces to ounces            422. ounces to ounces         423. feet to feet

424. feet to feet                425.  milligrams to           426.       milligrams to

                                       milligrams                    milligrams

427. total cholesterol of to     428. total cholesterol of to  429. inches to foot
        HDL cholesterol of               HDL cholesterol of

430. inches to foot

Write a Rate as a Fraction

In the following exercises, write each rate as a fraction.

431.       calories per          432.  calories per            433. pounds per square
                                                                       inches
      ounces                           ounces

434. pounds per square           435.  miles in hours          436.       miles in hours

      inches

437.              for hours      438.     for hours

Find Unit Rates

In the following exercises, find the unit rate. Round to two decimal places, if necessary.

439.       calories per          440.  calories per            441. pounds per square
                                                                       inches
      ounces                           ounces

442. pounds per square           443.  miles in hours          444.       miles in hours

      inches

445.              for hours      446.     for hours            447.       miles on          gallons of

                                                                     gas

448.       miles on gallons of 449.    pounds in weeks         450. pounds in weeks

      gas

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          5.6 · Ratios and Rate 443

451. beats in minute              452. beats in minute               453. The bindery at a printing
                                                                             plant assembles
                                                                             magazines in hours.
                                                                             How many magazines are
                                                                             assembled in one hour?

454. The pressroom at a
        printing plant prints
                    sections in
        hours. How many
        sections are printed per
        hour?

Find Unit Price

In the following exercises, find the unit price. Round to the nearest cent.

455. Soap bars at for             456. Soap bars at for              457. Women's sports socks at
                                                                             pairs for

458. Men's dress socks at         459. Snack packs of cookies at     460. Granola bars at for
        pairs for                             for

461. CD-RW discs at for           462. CDs at for                    463. The grocery store has a
                                                                             special on macaroni and
                                                                             cheese. The price is
                                                                             for boxes. How much
                                                                             does each box cost?

464. The pet store has a

      special on cat food. The

      price is    for cans.

      How much does each can

      cost?

In the following exercises, find each unit price and then identify the better buy. Round to three decimal places.

465. Mouthwash,                   466. Toothpaste,    ounce size     467. Breakfast cereal,

      size for    or                    for       or                         ounces for          or

                  size for              size for                             ounces for

468. Breakfast Cereal,            469. Ketchup,                      470. Mayonnaise

      ounces for        or              regular bottle for       or          regular bottle for      or

      ounces for                                  squeeze bottle                        squeeze bottle

                                        for                                  for

471. Cheese       for lb.         472. Candy          for a lb.
        block or   for lb.
        block                           bag or        for lb. of

                                        loose candy

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Fractions

In the following exercises, translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression.

473.  miles per hours             474. feet per seconds              475. for lbs.

476. beats in minutes             477.       calories in ounces      478.         minutes for    dollars

479. the ratio of and             480. the ratio of and
444 5 · Decimals

Everyday Math

481. One elementary school in Ohio has students     482. The average American produces about
        and teachers. Write the student-to-teacher
        ratio as a unit rate.                       pounds of paper trash per year               How

483. A popular fast food burger weighs ounces       many pounds of paper trash does the average
        and contains calories, grams of fat,
        grams of carbohydrates, and grams of        American produce each day? (Round to the

    protein. Find the unit rate of  calories per    nearest tenth of a pound.)
    ounce  grams of fat per ounce  grams of
    carbohydrates per ounce  grams of protein       484. A  chocolate mocha coffee with

        per ounce. Round to two decimal places.     whipped cream contains calories, grams

                                                    of fat, grams of carbohydrates, and grams

                                                    of protein. Find the unit rate of  calories per
                                                    ounce  grams of fat per ounce  grams of
                                                    carbohydrates per ounce  grams of protein

                                                    per ounce.

Writing Exercises

485. Would you prefer the ratio of your income to   486. The parking lot at the airport charges                  for

your friend's income to be or  Explain              every minutes.  How much does it cost to
                                                    park for hour?  Explain how you got your
your reasoning.                                     answer to part  . Was your reasoning based

                                                    on the unit cost or did you use another method?

487. Kathryn ate a  cup of frozen yogurt and        488. Mollie had a  cappuccino at her

then went for a swim. The frozen yogurt had         neighborhood coffee shop. The cappuccino had

calories. Swimming burns calories per hour.                 calories. If Mollie walks for one hour, she

For how many minutes should Kathryn swim to         burns calories. For how many minutes must

burn off the calories in the frozen yogurt?         Mollie walk to burn off the calories in the

Explain your reasoning.                             cappuccino? Explain your reasoning.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

5.7 Simplify and Use Square Roots

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions with square roots
           Estimate square roots
           Approximate square roots
           Simplify variable expressions with square roots
           Use square roots in applications

       BE PREPARED 5.19 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 3.52.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 445

    BE PREPARED 5.20  Round    to the nearest hundredth.

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 5.9.

    BE PREPARED 5.21  Evaluate for
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 2.14.

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots

To start this section, we need to review some important vocabulary and notation.

Remember that when a number is multiplied by itself, we can write this as which we read aloud as  For

example, is read as

We call the square of because  Similarly, is the square of because

Square of a Number

If  then is the square of

Modeling Squares

Do you know why we use the word square? If we construct a square with three tiles on each side, the total number of
tiles would be nine.

This is why we say that the square of three is nine.

The number is called a perfect square because it is the square of a whole number.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Square Numbers will help you develop a better understanding of perfect
  square numbers

The chart shows the squares of the counting numbers through  You can refer to it to help you identify the perfect
squares.

  Perfect Squares
  A perfect square is the square of a whole number.

What happens when you square a negative number?

When we multiply two negative numbers, the product is always positive. So, the square of a negative number is always
positive.
The chart shows the squares of the negative integers from to
446 5 · Decimals

Did you notice that these squares are the same as the squares of the positive numbers?

Square Roots

Sometimes we will need to look at the relationship between numbers and their squares in reverse. Because
we say is the square of We can also say that is a square root of

Square Root of a Number

A number whose square is is called a square root of

If                then is a square root of

Notice            also, so       is also a square root of  Therefore, both and          are square roots of
                                                                                       stands for the positive square
So, every positive number has two square roots: one positive and one negative.

What if we only want the positive square root of a positive number? The radical sign,
root. The positive square root is also called the principal square root.

Square Root Notation

    is read as "the square root of

We can also use the radical sign for the square root of zero. Because                  Notice that zero has only one
square root.

The chart shows the square roots of the first perfect square numbers.

EXAMPLE 5.69

Simplify:         

    Solution



Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 447



Since

  TRY IT 5.137 Simplify:                       

  TRY IT 5.138 Simplify:                       

Every positive number has two square roots and the radical sign indicates the positive one. We write               If we

want to find the negative square root of a number, we place a negative in front of the radical sign. For example,

EXAMPLE 5.70

Simplify.        

Solution



The negative is in front of the radical sign.



The negative is in front of the radical sign.

  TRY IT 5.139 Simplify:                       

  TRY IT 5.140 Simplify:                       

Square Root of a Negative Number

Can we simplify    Is there a number whose square is

None of the numbers that we have dealt with so far have a square that is      Why? Any positive number squared is

positive, and any negative number squared is also positive. In the next chapter we will see that all the numbers we work

with are called the real numbers. So we say there is no real number equal to  If we are asked to find the square

root of any negative number, we say that the solution is not a real number.
448 5 · Decimals

EXAMPLE 5.71

Simplify:         

Solution

 There is no real number whose square is    Therefore,  is not a real number.

 The negative is in front of the radical sign, so we find the opposite of the square root of

The negative is in front of the radical.

TRY IT 5.141 Simplify:                    

TRY IT 5.142 Simplify:                    

Square Roots and the Order of Operations
When using the order of operations to simplify an expression that has square roots, we treat the radical sign as a
grouping symbol. We simplify any expressions under the radical sign before performing other operations.

  EXAMPLE 5.72

Simplify:                        

Solution

 Use the order of operations.

Simplify each radical.
Add.

 Use the order of operations.

Add under the radical sign.
Simplify.

TRY IT 5.143 Simplify:                      

TRY IT 5.144 Simplify:                      

Notice the different answers in parts  and  of Example 5.72. It is important to follow the order of operations correctly.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                           5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 449

In  , we took each square root first and then added them. In  , we added under the radical sign first and then found
the square root.

Estimate Square Roots

So far we have only worked with square roots of perfect squares. The square roots of other numbers are not whole
numbers.

We might conclude that the square roots of numbers between and will be between and and they will not be
whole numbers. Based on the pattern in the table above, we could say that is between and Using inequality
symbols, we write

EXAMPLE 5.73

Estimate     between two consecutive whole numbers.

     Solution                            Make a small table of these perfect squares and their squares roots.
Think of the perfect squares closest to

TRY IT 5.145 Estimate                    between two consecutive whole numbers.

TRY IT 5.146 Estimate                    between two consecutive whole numbers.

Approximate Square Roots with a Calculator

There are mathematical methods to approximate square roots, but it is much more convenient to use a calculator to find
square roots. Find the or key on your calculator. You will to use this key to approximate square roots. When you
use your calculator to find the square root of a number that is not a perfect square, the answer that you see is not the
exact number. It is an approximation, to the number of digits shown on your calculator's display. The symbol for an
approximation is and it is read approximately.

Suppose your calculator has a            display. Using it to find the square root of will give  This is the

approximate square root of When we report the answer, we should use the "approximately equal to" sign instead of an

equal sign.
450 5 · Decimals

You will seldom use this many digits for applications in algebra. So, if you wanted to round  to two decimal places,
you would write

How do we know these values are approximations and not the exact values? Look at what happens when we square
them.

The squares are close, but not exactly equal, to

EXAMPLE 5.74

Round             to two decimal places using a calculator.

Solution

Use the calculator square root key.
Round to two decimal places.

TRY IT 5.147 Round                   to two decimal places.

TRY IT 5.148 Round                   to two decimal places.

Simplify Variable Expressions with Square Roots

Expressions with square root that we have looked at so far have not had any variables. What happens when we have to
find a square root of a variable expression?

Consider          where          Can you think of an expression whose square is

When we use a variable in a square root expression, for our work, we will assume that the variable represents a non-
negative number. In every example and exercise that follows, each variable in a square root expression is greater than or
equal to zero.

EXAMPLE 5.75

Simplify:                                                    . Algebraically,

     Solution
Think about what we would have to square to get

Since

Access for free at openstax.org
                               5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 451

       TRY IT 5.149 Simplify:
       TRY IT 5.150 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 5.76
Simplify:
     Solution

       TRY IT 5.151 Simplify:
       TRY IT 5.152 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 5.77
Simplify:
     Solution

       TRY IT 5.153 Simplify:
       TRY IT 5.154 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 5.78
Simplify:
     Solution

       TRY IT 5.155 Simplify:
       TRY IT 5.156 Simplify:
452 5 · Decimals

Use Square Roots in Applications

As you progress through your college courses, you'll encounter several applications of square roots. Once again, if we
use our strategy for applications, it will give us a plan for finding the answer!

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a strategy for applications with square roots.

Step 1.  Identify what you are asked to find.
Step 2.  Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
Step 3.  Translate the phrase to an expression.
Step 4.  Simplify the expression.
Step 5.  Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

Square Roots and Area

We have solved applications with area before. If we were given the length of the sides of a square, we could find its area
by squaring the length of its sides. Now we can find the length of the sides of a square if we are given the area, by
finding the square root of the area.

If the area of the square is square units, the length of a side is units. See Table 5.7.

                                                     Area (square units) Length of side (units)

                                       Table 5.7

EXAMPLE 5.79

Mike and Lychelle want to make a square patio. They have enough concrete for an area of  square feet. To the
nearest tenth of a foot, how long can a side of their square patio be?

     Solution                          square feet and want to find the length of the side. If the area of the square is
We know the area of the square is        units.
square units, the length of a side is

What are you asked to find? The length of each side of a square patio

Write a phrase.                     The length of a side

Translate to an expression.

Evaluate when                    .

Use your calculator.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 453

Round to one decimal place.

Write a sentence.               Each side of the patio should be          feet.

TRY IT 5.157       Katie wants to plant a square lawn in her front yard. She has enough sod to cover an area of
                         square feet. To the nearest tenth of a foot, how long can a side of her square lawn be?

TRY IT 5.158       Sergio wants to make a square mosaic as an inlay for a table he is building. He has enough tile

                   to cover an area of        square centimeters. How long can a side of his mosaic be?

Square Roots and Gravity

Another application of square roots involves gravity. On Earth, if an object is dropped from a height of feet, the time in

seconds it will take to reach the ground is found by evaluating the expression   For example, if an object is dropped

from a height of feet, we can find the time it takes to reach the ground by evaluating

Take the square root of 64.
Simplify the fraction.

It would take seconds for an object dropped from a height of feet to reach the ground.

EXAMPLE 5.80

Christy dropped her sunglasses from a bridge  feet above a river. How many seconds does it take for the sunglasses
to reach the river?

Solution

What are you asked to find? The number of seconds it takes for the sunglasses to reach the river

Write a phrase.                 The time it will take to reach the river

Translate to an expression.

Evaluate when                .

Find the square root of 400.

Simplify.

Write a sentence.               It will take 5 seconds for the sunglasses to reach the river.

TRY IT 5.159 A helicopter drops a rescue package from a height of                feet. How many seconds does it
454 5 · Decimals

                        take for the package to reach the ground?

TRY IT 5.160            A window washer drops a squeegee from a platform feet above the sidewalk. How many
                        seconds does it take for the squeegee to reach the sidewalk?

Square Roots and Accident Investigations

Police officers investigating car accidents measure the length of the skid marks on the pavement. Then they use square
roots to determine the speed, in miles per hour, a car was going before applying the brakes. According to some

formulas, if the length of the skid marks is feet, then the speed of the car can be found by evaluating

EXAMPLE 5.81

After a car accident, the skid marks for one car measured  feet. To the nearest tenth, what was the speed of the car
(in mph) before the brakes were applied?

Solution

What are you asked to find?      The speed of the car before the brakes were applied

Write a phrase.                  The speed of the car

Translate to an expression.

Evaluate          when

Multiply.

Use your calculator.             The speed of the car was approximately 67.5 miles per hour.
Round to tenths.
Write a sentence.

TRY IT 5.161            An accident investigator measured the skid marks of a car and found their length was  feet.
                        To the nearest tenth, what was the speed of the car before the brakes were applied?

TRY IT 5.162            The skid marks of a vehicle involved in an accident were feet long. To the nearest tenth,
                        how fast had the vehicle been going before the brakes were applied?

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity "Sea Squares" will provide you with another view of the topics covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Introduction to Square Roots (http://www.openstax.org/l/24introsqroots)
    Estimating Square Roots with a Calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/24estsqrtcalc)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 5.7 · Simplify and Use Square Roots 455

        SECTION 5.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots
In the following exercises, simplify.

489.                               490.                               491.

492.                               493.                               494.

495.                               496.                               497.

498.                               499.                               500.

501.                               502.                               503.

504.

Estimate Square Roots

In the following exercises, estimate each square root between two consecutive whole numbers.

505.                               506.                               507.

508.

Approximate Square Roots with a Calculator

In the following exercises, use a calculator to approximate each square root and round to two decimal places.

509.                               510.                               511.

512.

Simplify Variable Expressions with Square Roots
In the following exercises, simplify. (Assume all variables are greater than or equal to zero.)

513.                               514.                               515.

516.                               517.                               518.

519.                               520.

Use Square Roots in Applications

In the following exercises, solve. Round to one decimal place.

521. Landscaping Reed wants        522. Landscaping Vince wants       523. Gravity An airplane
        to have a square garden            to make a square patio in
        plot in his backyard. He           his yard. He has enough          dropped a flare from a
        has enough compost to              concrete to pave an area
        cover an area of                   of square feet. How              height of            feet above
        square feet. How long can          long can a side of his
        a side of his garden be?           patio be?                        a lake. How many

                                                                            seconds did it take for the

                                                                            flare to reach the water?
456 5 · Decimals

524. Gravity A hang glider          525. Gravity A construction        526. Accident investigation
        dropped his cell phone                                                 The skid marks from a car
        from a height of feet.      worker dropped a                           involved in an accident
        How many seconds did it                                                measured feet. What
        take for the cell phone to  hammer while building                      was the speed of the car
        reach the ground?                                                      before the brakes were
                                    the Grand Canyon                           applied?
527. Accident investigation
        The skid marks from a car   skywalk,               feet above  529. Accident investigation
        involved in an accident                                                An accident investigator
        measured feet. What         the Colorado River. How                    measured the skid marks
        was the speed of the car                                               of one of the vehicles
        before the brakes were      many seconds did it take                   involved in an accident.
        applied?                                                               The length of the skid
                                    for the hammer to reach                    marks was feet. What
                                                                               was the speed of the
                                    the river?                                 vehicle before the brakes
                                                                               were applied?
                                    528. Accident investigation
                                            An accident investigator
                                            measured the skid marks
                                            of one of the vehicles
                                            involved in an accident.
                                            The length of the skid
                                            marks was feet. What
                                            was the speed of the
                                            vehicle before the brakes
                                            were applied?

Everyday Math

530. Decorating Denise wants to install a square           531. Decorating Morris wants to have a square
        accent of designer tiles in her new shower. She
        can afford to buy square centimeters of the              mosaic inlaid in his new patio. His budget allows
        designer tiles. How long can a side of the accent
        be?                                                      for   tiles. Each tile is square with an area of

                                                                 one square inch. How long can a side of the

                                                                 mosaic be?

Writing Exercises

532. Why is there no real number equal to                  533. What is the difference between and

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          5 · Chapter Review 457

Chapter Review

Key Terms

circumference of a circle The distance around a circle is called its circumference.
diameter of a circle A diameter of a circle is a line segment that passes through a circle's center connecting two points

    on the circle.
equivalent decimals Two decimals are equivalent decimals if they convert to equivalent fractions.
mean The mean of a set of numbers is the arithmetic average of the numbers. The formula is

median The median of a set of data values is the middle value.
    · Half the data values are less than or equal to the median.
    · Half the data values are greater than or equal to the median.

mode The mode of a set of numbers is the number with the highest frequency.
radius of a circle A radius of a circle is a line segment from the center to any point on the circle.
rate A rate compares two quantities of different units. A rate is usually written as a fraction.
ratio A ratio compares two numbers or two quantities that are measured with the same unit. The ratio of to is

    written to , , or .
repeating decimal A repeating decimal is a decimal in which the last digit or group of digits repeats endlessly.
unit price A unit price is a unit rate that gives the price of one item.
unit rate A unit rate is a rate with denominator of 1 unit.

Key Concepts

5.1 Decimals

  · Name a decimal number.
      Step 1. Name the number to the left of the decimal point.
      Step 2. Write "and" for the decimal point.
      Step 3. Name the "number" part to the right of the decimal point as if it were a whole number.
      Step 4. Name the decimal place of the last digit.

  · Write a decimal number from its name.
      Step 1. Look for the word "and"--it locates the decimal point.
                  Place a decimal point under the word "and." Translate the words before "and" into the whole number and
                  place it to the left of the decimal point.
                  If there is no "and," write a "0" with a decimal point to its right.
      Step 2. Mark the number of decimal places needed to the right of the decimal point by noting the place value
                  indicated by the last word.
      Step 3. Translate the words after "and" into the number to the right of the decimal point. Write the number in the
                  spaces--putting the final digit in the last place.
      Step 4. Fill in zeros for place holders as needed.

  · Convert a decimal number to a fraction or mixed number.
      Step 1. Look at the number to the left of the decimal.
                  If it is zero, the decimal converts to a proper fraction.
                  If it is not zero, the decimal converts to a mixed number.
                  Write the whole number.
      Step 2. Determine the place value of the final digit.
      Step 3. Write the fraction. numerator--the `numbers' to the right of the decimal point denominator--the place
                  value corresponding to the final digit
      Step 4. Simplify the fraction, if possible.

  · Order decimals.
      Step 1. Check to see if both numbers have the same number of decimal places. If not, write zeros at the end of the
                  one with fewer digits to make them match.
      Step 2. Compare the numbers to the right of the decimal point as if they were whole numbers.
      Step 3. Order the numbers using the appropriate inequality sign.

  · Round a decimal.
      Step 1. Locate the given place value and mark it with an arrow.
      Step 2. Underline the digit to the right of the given place value.
458 5 · Chapter Review

Step 3.  Is this digit greater than or equal to 5?
Step 4.  Yes - add 1 to the digit in the given place value.
         No - do not change the digit in the given place value
         Rewrite the number, removing all digits to the right of the given place value.

5.2 Decimal Operations

  · Add or subtract decimals.
      Step 1. Write the numbers vertically so the decimal points line up.
      Step 2. Use zeros as place holders, as needed.
      Step 3. Add or subtract the numbers as if they were whole numbers. Then place the decimal in the answer under
                  the decimal points in the given numbers.

· Multiply decimal numbers.
    Step 1. Determine the sign of the product.
    Step 2. Write the numbers in vertical format, lining up the numbers on the right.
    Step 3. Multiply the numbers as if they were whole numbers, temporarily ignoring the decimal points.
    Step 4. Place the decimal point. The number of decimal places in the product is the sum of the number of decimal
               places in the factors. If needed, use zeros as placeholders.
    Step 5. Write the product with the appropriate sign.

· Multiply a decimal by a power of 10.
    Step 1. Move the decimal point to the right the same number of places as the number of zeros in the power of 10.
    Step 2. Write zeros at the end of the number as placeholders if needed.

· Divide a decimal by a whole number.
    Step 1. Write as long division, placing the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
    Step 2. Divide as usual.

· Divide decimal numbers.
    Step 1. Determine the sign of the quotient.
    Step 2. Make the divisor a whole number by moving the decimal point all the way to the right. Move the decimal
               point in the dividend the same number of places to the right, writing zeros as needed.
    Step 3. Divide. Place the decimal point in the quotient above the decimal point in the dividend.
    Step 4. Write the quotient with the appropriate sign.

· Strategy for Applications
    Step 1. Identify what you are asked to find.
    Step 2. Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
    Step 3. Translate the phrase to an expression.
    Step 4. Simplify the expression.
    Step 5. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

5.3 Decimals and Fractions

  · Convert a Fraction to a Decimal To convert a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator of the fraction by the

      denominator of the fraction.

· Properties of Circles              is the length of the radius
      is the length of the diameter

    The circumference is .
    The area is .

5.4 Solve Equations with Decimals

  · Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.
       Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
       Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               5 · Chapter Review 459

    Determine whether the resulting equation is true.           Addition Property of Equality
        If so, the number is a solution.                         For any numbers , , and ,
        If not, the number is not a solution.

· Properties of Equality

                              Subtraction Property of Equality

                                  For any numbers , , and ,

            Division of Property of Equality Multiplication Property of Equality

            For any numbers , , and  ,                          For any numbers , , and ,

            Table 5.8

5.5 Averages and Probability

  · Calculate the mean of a set of numbers.
      Step 1. Write the formula for the mean

      Step 2. Find the sum of all the values in the set. Write the sum in the numerator.
      Step 3. Count the number, n, of values in the set. Write this number in the denominator.
      Step 4. Simplify the fraction.
      Step 5. Check to see that the mean is reasonable. It should be greater than the least number and less than the

                  greatest number in the set.

· Find the median of a set of numbers.
    Step 1. List the numbers from least to greatest.
    Step 2. Count how many numbers are in the set. Call this .
    Step 3. Is odd or even?
               If is an odd number, the median is the middle value.
               If is an even number, the median is the mean of the two middle values

· Identify the mode of a set of numbers.
    Step 1. List the data values in numerical order.
    Step 2. Count the number of times each value appears.
    Step 3. The mode is the value with the highest frequency.

5.7 Simplify and Use Square Roots

  · Square Root Notation is read `the square root of '

If  , then  , for      .

· Use a strategy for applications with square roots.
    Identify what you are asked to find.
    Write a phrase that gives the information to find it.
    Translate the phrase to an expression.
    Simplify the expression.
    Write a complete sentence that answers the question.
460 5 · Exercises

Exercises

Review Exercises

Decimals

Name Decimals

In the following exercises, name each decimal.

534.                                   535.                            536.

537.                                   538.                            539.

Write Decimals

In the following exercises, write as a decimal.

540. three tenths                      541. nine hundredths            542. twenty-seven hundredths
                                                                       545. negative five hundredths
543. ten and thirty-five               544. negative twenty and three
        thousandths                            tenths

Convert Decimals to Fractions or Mixed Numbers

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a fraction. Simplify the answer if possible.

546.                                   547.                            548.

549.

Locate Decimals on the Number Line

550. 
    
    
    

Order Decimals

In the following exercises, order each of the following pairs of numbers, using or

551.                                   552.                            553.

554.

Round Decimals

In the following exercises, round each number to the nearest:  hundredth  tenth  whole number.

555.                                   556.                            557.

Decimal Operations

Add and Subtract Decimals

In the following exercises, add or subtract.

558.                                   559.                            560.

561.                                   562.                            563.

Multiply Decimals

In the following exercises, multiply.

564.                                   565.                            566.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       5 · Exercises 461

567.

Divide Decimals

In the following exercises, divide.

568.                                  569.                               570.

571.                                  572.                               573.

Use Decimals in Money Applications

In the following exercises, use the strategy for applications to solve.

574. Miranda got from her             575. Jessie put gallons of gas     576. A pack of water bottles

      ATM. She spent          on            in her car. One gallon of          cost     How much did

      lunch and          on a               gas costs     How                  each bottle cost?

      book. How much money                  much did Jessie owe for

      did she have left? Round              all the gas?

      to the nearest cent if

      necessary.

577. Alice bought a roll of

      paper towels that cost

           She had a coupon

      for      off, and the

      store doubled the

      coupon. How much did

      Alice pay for the paper

      towels?

Decimals and Fractions

Convert Fractions to Decimals

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a decimal.

578.                                  579.                               580.

581.                                  582.                               583.

Order Decimals and Fractions

In the following exercises, order each pair of numbers, using or

584.                                  585.                               586.

587.                                  588.                               589.

In the following exercises, write each set of numbers in order from least to greatest.

590.                                  591.

Simplify Expressions Using the Order of Operations

In the following exercises, simplify

592.                                  593.                               594.

595.                                  596.                               597.
462 5 · Exercises

Find the Circumference and Area of Circles

In the following exercises, approximate the  circumference and  area of each circle.

598.                                599.                        600.

601.

Solve Equations with Decimals

Determine Whether a Decimal is a Solution of an Equation

In the following exercises, determine whether the each number is a solution of the given equation.

602.                                603.                        604.

                                                                                      

605.

                     

Solve Equations with Decimals

In the following exercises, solve.

606.                                607.                        608.
                                                                611.
609.                                610.                        614.
                                                                617.
612.                                613.
                                                                620. The quotient of and
615.                                616.                                       is

Translate to an Equation and Solve                              624. Each workday last week,
                                                                        Yoshie kept track of the
In the following exercises, translate and solve.                        number of minutes she
                                                                        had to wait for the bus.
618. The difference of and          619. The product of    and          She waited
               is                                                                             minutes.
                                          is                            Find the mean.

621. The sum of and
        is

Averages and Probability

Find the Mean of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, find the mean of the numbers.

622.                                623.          ,  ,     ,

                                          and

625. In the last three months,
        Raul's water bills were

        Find the mean.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     5 · Exercises 463

Find the Median of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, find the median.

626. , , , ,                         627. , , , , , , ,                  628. The ages of the eight men in
                                                                                 Jerry's model train club are

                                                                               Find the median age.

629. The number of clients at
        Miranda's beauty salon
        each weekday last week
        were
        Find the median number
        of clients.

Find the Mode of a Set of Numbers

In the following exercises, identify the mode of the numbers.

630. , , , , , , , ,                 631. The number of siblings of
                                             a group of students: , ,
                                              ,,,,,,,,,

Use the Basic Definition of Probability

In the following exercises, solve. (Round decimals to three places.)

632. The Sustainability Club         633. Luc has to read novels
        sells tickets to a                   and short stories for
        raffle, and Albert buys              his literature class. The
        one ticket. One ticket will          professor will choose one
        be selected at random to             reading at random for the
        win the grand prize. Find            final exam. Find the
        the probability Albert will          probability that the
        win the grand prize.                 professor will choose a
        Express your answer as a             novel for the final exam.
        fraction and as a decimal.           Express your answer as a
                                             fraction and as a decimal.

Ratios and Rate

Write a Ratio as a Fraction

In the following exercises, write each ratio as a fraction. Simplify the answer if possible.

634. to                              635. to                             636. to

637. to                              638.                                639.

640. ounces to ounces                641. inches to feet

Write a Rate as a Fraction

In the following exercises, write each rate as a fraction. Simplify the answer if possible.

642.  calories per ounces 643. pounds per square 644.                          miles in hours

                                           inches

645.     for hours
464 5 · Exercises

Find Unit Rates

In the following exercises, find the unit rate.

646.  calories per ounces 647. pounds per square 648.                      miles in hours

                                          inches

649.  for hours

Find Unit Price

In the following exercises, find the unit price.

650. t-shirts: for                  651. Highlighters: for           652. An office supply store
                                                                             sells a box of pens for
                                                                                    The box contains
                                                                             pens. How much does
                                                                             each pen cost?

653. Anna bought a pack of
        kitchen towels for
        How much did each towel
        cost? Round to the
        nearest cent if necessary.

In the following exercises, find each unit price and then determine the better buy.

654. Shampoo: ounces for            655. Vitamins:      tablets for
                or ounces for                       or  for

Translate Phrases to Expressions with Fractions

In the following exercises, translate the English phrase into an algebraic expression.

656.  miles per                     657. adults to children          658. the ratio of and the
                                                                             difference of and

659. the ratio of and the
        sum of and

Simplify and Use Square Roots

Simplify Expressions with Square Roots
In the following exercises, simplify.

660.                                661.                             662.

663.                                664.                             665.

666.                                667.

Estimate Square Roots

In the following exercises, estimate each square root between two consecutive whole numbers.

668.                                669.

Approximate Square Roots

In the following exercises, approximate each square root and round to two decimal places.

670.                                671.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                             5 · Exercises 465

Simplify Variable Expressions with Square Roots
In the following exercises, simplify. (Assume all variables are greater than or equal to zero.)

672.                                 673.                               674.

675.                                 676.                               677.

678.                                 679.

Use Square Roots in Applications

In the following exercises, solve. Round to one decimal place.

680. Art Diego has square            681. Landscaping Janet wants       682. Gravity A hiker dropped a
        inch tiles. He wants to use          to plant a square flower           granola bar from a
        them to make a square                garden in her yard. She            lookout spot feet
        mosaic. How long can                 has enough topsoil to              above a valley. How long
        each side of the mosaic              cover an area of                   did it take the granola bar
        be?                                  square feet. How long can          to reach the valley floor?
                                             a side of the flower
                                             garden be?

683. Accident investigation
        The skid marks of a car
        involved in an accident
        were feet. How fast
        had the car been going
        before applying the
        brakes?

Practice Test

684. Write six and thirty-four       685. Write        as a fraction.   686. Write as a decimal.
        thousandths as a decimal.

687. Round     to the                688. Write the numbers

      nearest  tenth                         in order from smallest to
      hundredth  whole                       largest.

      number

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

689.                                 690.                               691.

692.                                 693.                               694.

695.                                 696.                               697.

698.                                 699.                               700.

In the following exercises, solve.   702.                               703.
701.
704.                                 705. Three friends went out to     706. A circle has radius

                                           dinner and agreed to split       Find the 
                                                                            circumference and 
                                           the bill evenly. The bill
                                                                                area.
                                           was         How much

                                           should each person pay?
466 5 · Exercises

707. The ages, in months, of           708. Of the nurses in               709. Find each unit price and
            children in a preschool            Doreen's department,
                                               are women and are           then the better buy.
        class are:                             men. One of the nurses
           ,,,,,,,                             will be assigned at         Laundry detergent:
           ,,                                  random to work an extra
                                                                           ounces for     or
    Find the  mean                         shift next week.  Find
    median  mode                                                           ounces for
                                               the probability a woman
                                               nurse will be assigned the

                                           extra shift.  Convert

                                               the fraction to a decimal.

In the following exercises, simplify.

710.                                   711.                                712. Estimate  to between

                                                                           two whole numbers.

713. Yanet wants a square
        patio in her backyard. She
        has square feet of
        tile. How long can a side
        of the patio be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      6 · Introduction to Percents 467

6  PERCENTS

Figure 6.1 Banks provide money for savings and charge money for loans. The interest on savings and loans is usually
given as a percent. (credit: Mike Mozart, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  6.1 Understand Percent
  6.2 Solve General Applications of Percent
  6.3 Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications
  6.4 Solve Simple Interest Applications
  6.5 Solve Proportions and their Applications

      Introduction to Percents

When you deposit money in a savings account at a bank, it earns additional money. Figuring out how your money will
grow involves understanding and applying concepts of percents. In this chapter, we will find out what percents are and
how we can use them to solve problems.

6.1 Understand Percent

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the definition of percent
           Convert percents to fractions and decimals
           Convert decimals and fractions to percents

       BE PREPARED 6.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Translate "the ratio of to into an algebraic expression.
                                           If you missed this problem, review Table 2.7.

   BE PREPARED 6.2  Write as a decimal.
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.28.

   BE PREPARED 6.3  Write  as a fraction.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.4.
468 6 · Percents

Use the Definition of Percent

How many cents are in one dollar? There are cents in a dollar. How many years are in a century? There are years

in a century. Does this give you a clue about what the word "percent" means? It is really two words, "per cent," and

means per one hundred. A percent is a ratio whose denominator is          We use the percent symbol to show percent.

Percent

A percent is a ratio whose denominator is

According to data from the American Association of Community Colleges     about             of community college

students are female. This means out of every community college students are female, as Figure 6.2 shows. Out of

the squares on the grid, are shaded, which we write as the ratio

                  Figure 6.2 Among every community college students, are female.

Similarly,        means a ratio of      means a ratio of and              means a ratio of  In words, "one hundred

percent" means the total            is  and since       we see that       means whole.

EXAMPLE 6.1

According to the Public Policy Institute of California  of parents of public school children would like their

youngest child to earn a graduate degree. Write this percent as a ratio.

    Solution

The amount we want to convert is 44%.

Write the percent as a ratio. Remember that percent means per 100.

    TRY IT 6.1    Write the percent as a ratio.

                  According to a survey,           of college students have a smartphone.

    TRY IT 6.2    Write the percent as a ratio.

                  A study found that       of U.S. teens send text messages regularly.

EXAMPLE 6.2

In  according to a U.S. Department of Education report, out of every first-time freshmen college students at

    public institutions took at least one remedial course. Write this as a ratio and then as a percent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   6.1 · Understand Percent 469

  Solution                                 out of
The amount we want to convert is out of .
Write as a ratio.
Convert the 21 per 100 to percent.

TRY IT 6.3  Write as a ratio and then as a percent: The American Association of Community Colleges reported
            that out of full-time community college students balance their studies with full-time or
            part time employment.

TRY IT 6.4  Write as a ratio and then as a percent: In response to a student survey, out of Santa Ana
            College students expressed a goal of earning an Associate's degree or transferring to a four-year
            college.

Convert Percents to Fractions and Decimals                                                             so the

Since percents are ratios, they can easily be expressed as fractions. Remember that percent means per
denominator of the fraction is

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Convert a percent to a fraction.

  Step 1. Write the percent as a ratio with the denominator
  Step 2. Simplify the fraction if possible.

  EXAMPLE 6.3
Convert each percent to a fraction:

 Solution 
 

Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Simplify.


470 6 · Percents

Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Simplify.

  TRY IT 6.5 Convert each percent to a fraction:

                                     

  TRY IT 6.6 Convert each percent to a fraction:

                                     

The previous example shows that a percent can be greater than  We saw that  means  or These are
improper fractions, and their values are greater than one.

EXAMPLE 6.4

Convert each percent to a fraction:

  Solution        



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Clear the decimal by multiplying numerator and denominator by 10.
Multiply.
Rewrite showing common factors.
Simplify.



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Write the numerator as an improper fraction.
Rewrite as fraction division, replacing 100 with .

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         6.1 · Understand Percent 471

Multiply by the reciprocal.
Simplify.

TRY IT 6.7 Convert each percent to a fraction:

                             

TRY IT 6.8 Convert each percent to a fraction:

                             

In Decimals, we learned how to convert fractions to decimals. To convert a percent to a decimal, we first convert it to a
fraction and then change the fraction to a decimal.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Convert a percent to a decimal.

Step 1. Write the percent as a ratio with the denominator
Step 2. Convert the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

  EXAMPLE 6.5                                                                            instead of removing common

Convert each percent to a decimal:

 Solution 

Because we want to change to a decimal, we will leave the fractions with denominator
factors.

 

Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.
472 6 · Percents

TRY IT 6.9        Convert each percent to a decimal:
TRY IT 6.10
                                    

                  Convert each percent to a decimal:

                                    

EXAMPLE 6.6

Convert each percent to a decimal:

 Solution 
 

Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

TRY IT 6.11 Convert each percent to a decimal:

                                      

TRY IT 6.12 Convert each percent to a decimal:

                                      

Let's summarize the results from the previous examples in Table 6.1, and look for a pattern we could use to quickly
convert a percent number to a decimal number.

                                        Percent Decimal

                                        Table 6.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.1 · Understand Percent 473

Do you see the pattern?

To convert a percent number to a decimal number, we move the decimal point two places to the left and remove the

sign. (Sometimes the decimal point does not appear in the percent number, but just like we can think of the integer as

we can think of as        ) Notice that we may need to add zeros in front of the number when moving the decimal

to the left.

Figure 6.3 uses the percents in Table 6.1 and shows visually how to convert them to decimals by moving the decimal
point two places to the left.

                                                   Figure 6.3

EXAMPLE 6.7

Among a group of business leaders,      believe that poor math and science education in the U.S. will lead to higher
unemployment rates.

Convert the percent to:   a fraction    a decimal

     Solution



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.



Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

  TRY IT 6.13            Convert the percent to:  a fraction and  a decimal

                         Twitter's share of web traffic jumped  when one celebrity tweeted live on air.

  TRY IT 6.14            Convert the percent to:  a fraction and  a decimal

                         The U.S. Census estimated that in      of the population of Boston age          or older have a
                         bachelor's or higher degrees.

EXAMPLE 6.8

There are four suits of cards in a deck of cards--hearts, diamonds, clubs, and spades. The probability of randomly

choosing a heart from a shuffled deck of cards is  Convert the percent to:

 a fraction  a decimal
474 6 · Percents

                                 Figure 6.4 (credit: Riles32807, Wikimedia Commons)

  Solution



Write as a ratio with denominator 100.
Simplify.



Change the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

TRY IT 6.15           Convert the percent to:  a fraction, and     a decimal

                      The probability that it will rain Monday is

TRY IT 6.16           Convert the percent to:  a fraction, and  a decimal

                      The probability of getting heads three times when tossing a coin three times is

Convert Decimals and Fractions to Percents

To convert a decimal to a percent, remember that percent means per hundred. If we change the decimal to a fraction

whose denominator is             it is easy to change that fraction to a percent.

...

     HOW TO

Convert a decimal to a percent.                    rewrite it as an equivalent fraction with denominator

Step 1. Write the decimal as a fraction.
Step 2. If the denominator of the fraction is not
Step 3. Write this ratio as a percent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    6.1 · Understand Percent 475

EXAMPLE 6.9

Convert each decimal to a percent:            

Solution



Write as a fraction. The denominator is 100.
Write this ratio as a percent.



The denominator is 100.
Write this ratio as a percent.

  TRY IT 6.17 Convert each decimal to a percent:        

  TRY IT 6.18 Convert each decimal to a percent:        

To convert a mixed number to a percent, we first write it as an improper fraction.

EXAMPLE 6.10

Convert each decimal to a percent:            

Solution



Write as a fraction.
Write as an improper fraction. The denominator is 100.
Write this ratio as a percent.

Notice that since  the result is more than
476 6 · Percents



Write as a fraction. The denominator is 1,000.
Divide the numerator and denominator by 10, so that the denominator is 100.
Write this ratio as a percent.

TRY IT 6.19 Convert each decimal to a percent:   

TRY IT 6.20 Convert each decimal to a percent:   

Let's summarize the results from the previous examples in Table 6.2 so we can look for a pattern.

                  Decimal Percent

                                                                     Table 6.2
Do you see the pattern? To convert a decimal to a percent, we move the decimal point two places to the right and then
add the percent sign.
Figure 6.5 uses the decimal numbers in Table 6.2 and shows visually to convert them to percents by moving the decimal
point two places to the right and then writing the sign.

                                                                              Figure 6.5
In Decimals, we learned how to convert fractions to decimals. Now we also know how to change decimals to percents. So
to convert a fraction to a percent, we first change it to a decimal and then convert that decimal to a percent.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Convert a fraction to a percent.
  Step 1. Convert the fraction to a decimal.
  Step 2. Convert the decimal to a percent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                6.1 · Understand Percent 477

EXAMPLE 6.11

Convert each fraction or mixed number to a percent:     

Solution

To convert a fraction to a decimal, divide the numerator by the denominator.



Change to a decimal.

Write as a percent by moving the decimal two places.



Change to a decimal.
Write as a percent by moving the decimal two places.



Write as an improper fraction.
Change to a decimal.
Write as a percent.

Notice that we needed to add zeros at the end of the number when moving the decimal two places to the right.

TRY IT 6.21 Convert each fraction or mixed number to a percent:               

TRY IT 6.22 Convert each fraction or mixed number to a percent:   

Sometimes when changing a fraction to a decimal, the division continues for many decimal places and we will round off
the quotient. The number of decimal places we round to will depend on the situation. If the decimal involves money, we
round to the hundredths place. For most other cases in this book we will round the number to the nearest thousandth,
so the percent will be rounded to the nearest tenth.

  EXAMPLE 6.12

Convert to a percent.
478 6 · Percents

            Solution
       To change a fraction to a decimal, we divide the numerator by the denominator.

         Change to a decimal--rounding to the nearest thousandth.
         Write as a percent.

              TRY IT 6.23 Convert the fraction to a percent:

              TRY IT 6.24 Convert the fraction to a percent:
       When we first looked at fractions and decimals, we saw that some fractions converted to a repeating decimal. For
       example, when we converted the fraction to a decimal, we wrote the answer as We will use this same notation, as
       well as fraction notation, when we convert fractions to percents in the next example.

         EXAMPLE 6.13
       An article in a medical journal claimed that approximately of American adults are obese. Convert the fraction to a
       percent.

            Solution

Change to a decimal.

Write as a repeating decimal.
Write as a percent.

We could also write the percent as  .

TRY IT 6.25           Convert the fraction to a percent:
                      According to the U.S. Census Bureau, about
                      bedroom.                                    of United States housing units have just

TRY IT 6.26           Convert the fraction to a percent:
                      According to the U.S. Census Bureau, about
                      than English at home.                       of Colorado residents speak a language other

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   6.1 · Understand Percent 479

        SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Definition of Percents

In the following exercises, write each percent as a ratio.

1. In  the unemployment               2. In  among the                 3. The unemployment rate for

     rate for those with only a            unemployed,      were            those with Bachelor's

     high school degree was                long-term unemployed.            degrees was     in

4. The unemployment rate in

     Michigan in  was

In the following exercises, write as

1.  a ratio and                       6. out of firefighters           7. out of first-time
2.  a percent                             and law enforcement              freshmen students attend a
                                          officers were educated at a      community college.
     5. out of nursing                    community college.
          candidates received their
          degree at a community
          college.

8. out of full-time
    community college faculty
    have a master's degree.

Convert Percents to Fractions and Decimals

In the following exercises, convert each percent to a fraction and simplify all fractions.

9.                                    10.                              11.

12.                                   13.                              14.

15.                                   16.                              17.

18.                                   19.                              20.

21.                                   22.                              23.

24.

In the following exercises, convert each percent to a decimal.

25.                                   26.                              27.

28.                                   29.                              30.

31.                                   32.                              33.

34.                                   35.                              36.

37.                                   38.                              39.

40.

     In the following exercises, convert each percent to

1.  a simplified fraction and
2.  a decimal
480 6 · Percents

41. In            of home             42. In  of the United              43. According to government

     sales had owner financing.            States population was of           data, in  the number

     (Source: Bloomberg                    Asian descent. (Source:            of cell phones in India was

     Businessweek, 5/23-29/                www.census.gov)                              of the population.

     2011)

44. According to the U.S.             45. A couple plans to have two     46. Javier will choose one digit
                                            children. The probability          at random from through
     Census Bureau, among                   they will have two girls is           The probability he will
                                                                               choose is
     Americans age or older

     who had doctorate

     degrees in                  are

     women.

47. According to the local            48. A club sells tickets to a
      weather report, the                   raffle. Osbaldo bought one
      probability of                        ticket. The probability he
      thunderstorms in New York             will win the raffle is
      City on July is

Convert Decimals and Fractions to Percents

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a percent.

49.                                   50.                                51.

52.                                   53.                                54.

55.                                   56.                                57.

58.                                   59.                                60.

61.                                   62.                                63.

64.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a percent.

65.                                   66.                                67.

68.                                   69.                                70.

71.                                   72.                                73.

74.                                   75.                                76.

77.                                   78.                                79.

80.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a percent.

81. of washing machines               82. of dishwashers needed
      needed repair.                        repair.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a percent.

83. According to the National         84. The U.S. Census Bureau
                                            estimated that in
     Center for Health Statistics,                         of Americans
                                            lived in the same house as
     in           of American               they did year before.

     adults were obese.

Access for free at openstax.org
In the following exercises, complete the table.                                                                                6.1 · Understand Percent 481

        Fraction Decimal Percent                               Fraction Decimal Percent
85.                                                    86.

Table 6.3                                              Table 6.4

Everyday Math

87. Sales tax Felipa says she has an easy way to       88. Savings Ryan has  of each paycheck

estimate the sales tax when she makes a                automatically deposited in his savings account.

purchase. The sales tax in her city is           She    Write as a fraction.

knows this is a little less than                        Use your answer from  to find the amount

 Convert to a fraction.                                that goes to savings from Ryan's        paycheck.
 Use your answer from  to estimate the

sales tax Felipa would pay on a dress.

Amelio is shopping for textbooks online. He found three sellers that are offering a book he needs for the same price,
including shipping. To decide which seller to buy from he is comparing their customer satisfaction ratings. The ratings
are given in the chart.

Use the chart to answer the following questions

                                                      Seller Rating

89. Write seller  rating as a fraction and a decimal.  90. Write seller rating as a percent and a decimal.
91. Write seller  rating as a percent and a decimal.   92. Which seller should Amelio buy from and why?

Writing Exercises

93. Convert                       to fractions. Do     94. Convert                       and to

you notice a pattern? Explain what the pattern is.     percents. Do you notice a pattern? Explain what
                                                       the pattern is.
482 6 · Percents

95. When the Szetos sold their home, the selling price  96. According to cnn.com, cell phone use in              was

was               of what they had paid for the house   of what it had been in     Explain what

                  ago. Explain what  means in this      means in this context.

context.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

6.2 Solve General Applications of Percent

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Translate and solve basic percent equations
           Solve applications of percent
           Find percent increase and percent decrease

       BE PREPARED 6.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Translate and solve: of is
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 4.105.

BE PREPARED 6.5                  Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.15.

BE PREPARED 6.6                  Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.43.

Translate and Solve Basic Percent Equations

We will solve percent equations by using the methods we used to solve equations with fractions or decimals. In the past,
you may have solved percent problems by setting them up as proportions. That was the best method available when you
did not have the tools of algebra. Now as a prealgebra student, you can translate word sentences into algebraic
equations, and then solve the equations.

We'll look at a common application of percent--tips to a server at a restaurant--to see how to set up a basic percent
application.

When Aolani and her friends ate dinner at a restaurant, the bill came to  They wanted to leave a     tip. What
amount would the tip be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 483

To solve this, we want to find what amount is      of  The is called the base. The amount of the tip would be

           or See Figure 6.6. To find the amount of the tip, we multiplied the percent by the base.

                          Figure 6.6 A         tip for an restaurant bill comes out to

In the next examples, we will find the amount. We must be sure to change the given percent to a decimal when we
translate the words into an equation.

EXAMPLE 6.14

What number is  of

Solution

Translate into algebra. Let the number.

Multiply.

                                                       is  of

TRY IT 6.27         What number is             of

TRY IT 6.28         What number is             of

EXAMPLE 6.15
      of is what number?
484 6 · Percents

  Solution
Translate into algebra. Let the number.

Multiply.

                                                         of is .

Remember that a percent over is a number greater than We found that  of is which is greater than

TRY IT 6.29                          of is what number?

TRY IT 6.30                          of is what number?

In the next examples, we are asked to find the base.

EXAMPLE 6.16

Translate and solve: is              of what number?
     Solution

Translate. Let the number.

Divide both sides by 0.75.
Simplify.

TRY IT 6.31                      is  of what number?
TRY IT 6.32
                                 is  of what number?

EXAMPLE 6.17
     of what number is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 485

  Solution
Translate. Let the number.
Divide both sides by 0.065.
Simplify.

TRY IT 6.33               of what number is

TRY IT 6.34               of what number is

In the next examples, we will solve for the percent.
  EXAMPLE 6.18

What percent of is
     Solution

Translate into algebra. Let the percent.

Divide by 36.
Simplify.
Convert to decimal form.
Convert to percent.

     TRY IT 6.35 What percent of is
     TRY IT 6.36 What percent of is

EXAMPLE 6.19
   is what percent of
486 6 · Percents

            Solution
         Translate into algebra. Let the percent.
         Divide by 96.
         Simplify.
         Convert to percent.

TRY IT 6.37                      is what percent of

TRY IT 6.38                      is what percent of

Solve Applications of Percent

Many applications of percent occur in our daily lives, such as tips, sales tax, discount, and interest. To solve these
applications we'll translate to a basic percent equation, just like those we solved in the previous examples in this section.
Once you translate the sentence into a percent equation, you know how to solve it.

We will update the strategy we used in our earlier applications to include equations now. Notice that we will translate a
sentence into an equation.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve an application

Step 1.      Identify what you are asked to find and choose a variable to represent it.
Step 2.      Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.
Step 3.      Translate the sentence into an equation.
Step 4.      Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 5.      Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 6.      Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

Now that we have the strategy to refer to, and have practiced solving basic percent equations, we are ready to solve
percent applications. Be sure to ask yourself if your final answer makes sense--since many of the applications we'll solve
involve everyday situations, you can rely on your own experience.

EXAMPLE 6.20

Dezohn and his girlfriend enjoyed a dinner at a restaurant, and the bill was             They want to leave an  tip. If the

tip will be  of the total bill, how much should the tip be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 487

  Solution                                                                     the amount of the tip
What are you asked to find?                                                    Let amount of tip.
Choose a variable to represent it.                                             The tip is 18% of the total bill.
Write a sentence that give the information to find it.

Translate the sentence into an equation.

Multiply.

Check. Is this answer reasonable?

If we approximate the bill to $70 and the percent to 20%, we would have a tip
of $14.
So a tip of $12.33 seems reasonable.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.                           The couple should leave a tip of
                                                                               $12.33.

TRY IT 6.39  Cierra and her sister enjoyed a special dinner in a restaurant, and the bill was  If she

             wants to leave        of the total bill as her tip, how much should she leave?

TRY IT 6.40  Kimngoc had lunch at her favorite restaurant. She wants to leave  of the total bill as her tip.

             If her bill was       how much will she leave for the tip?

  EXAMPLE 6.21

The label on Masao's breakfast cereal said that one serving of cereal provides milligrams (mg) of potassium, which is
     of the recommended daily amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of potassium?
488 6 · Percents

  Solution                                               the total amount of potassium recommended
What are you asked to find?                              Let total amount of potassium.
Choose a variable to represent it.                       85 mg is 2% of the total amount.
Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.

Translate the sentence into an equation.

Divide both sides by 0.02.

Simplify.                                                The amount of potassium that is recommended is 4250
Check: Is this answer reasonable?                        mg.
Yes. 2% is a small percent and 85 is a small part of
4,250.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.41       One serving of wheat square cereal has grams of fiber, which is     of the recommended

                  daily amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of fiber?

TRY IT 6.42       One serving of rice cereal has mg of sodium, which is of the recommended daily
                  amount. What is the total recommended daily amount of sodium?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 489

EXAMPLE 6.22

Mitzi received some gourmet brownies as a gift. The wrapper said each brownie was    calories, and had   calories
of fat. What percent of the total calories in each brownie comes from fat?

Solution

What are you asked to find?               the percent of the total calories from fat

Choose a variable to represent it.        Let percent from fat.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it. What percent of 480 is 240?

Translate the sentence into an equation.

Divide both sides by 480.
Simplify.
Convert to percent form.
Check. Is this answer reasonable?
Yes. 240 is half of 480, so 50% makes sense.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question. Of the total calories in each brownie, 50% is fat.

TRY IT 6.43   Veronica is planning to make muffins from a mix. The package says each muffin will be
              calories and calories will be from fat. What percent of the total calories is from fat? (Round to
              the nearest whole percent.)

TRY IT 6.44   The brownie mix Ricardo plans to use says that each brownie will be      calories, and
              calories are from fat. What percent of the total calories are from fat?

Find Percent Increase and Percent Decrease

People in the media often talk about how much an amount has increased or decreased over a certain period of time.
They usually express this increase or decrease as a percent.
To find the percent increase, first we find the amount of increase, which is the difference between the new amount and
the original amount. Then we find what percent the amount of increase is of the original amount.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Find Percent Increase.

  Step 1. Find the amount of increase.

    ·
490 6 · Percents

Step 2. Find the percent increase as a percent of the original amount.

EXAMPLE 6.23

In  the California governor proposed raising community college fees from           per unit to  per unit. Find the

percent increase. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

    Solution

What are you asked to find?       the percent increase

Choose a variable to represent it. Let percent.

Find the amount of increase.

Find the percent increase.        The increase is what percent of the original amount?
Translate to an equation.

Divide both sides by 26.

Round to the nearest thousandth.

Convert to percent form.

Write a complete sentence.        The new fees represent a 38.5% increase over the old fees.

    TRY IT 6.45   In             the IRS increased the deductible mileage cost to  cents from   cents. Find the

                  percent increase. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

    TRY IT 6.46   In             the standard bus fare in Chicago was   In         the standard bus fare was

                  Find the percent increase. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

Finding the percent decrease is very similar to finding the percent increase, but now the amount of decrease is the
difference between the original amount and the final amount. Then we find what percent the amount of decrease is of
the original amount.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Find percent decrease.

  Step 1. Find the amount of decrease.
               

  Step 2. Find the percent decrease as a percent of the original amount.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 491

EXAMPLE 6.24

The average price of a gallon of gas in one city in June  was  The average price in that city in July was

Find the percent decrease.

Solution

What are you asked to find?       the percent decrease

Choose a variable to represent it. Let percent.

Find the amount of decrease.

Find the percent of decrease.     The decrease is what percent of the original amount?
Translate to an equation.

Divide both sides by 3.71.

Round to the nearest thousandth.

Convert to percent form.          The price of gas decreased 1.9%.
Write a complete sentence.

TRY IT 6.47         The population of one city was about       in   The population of the city is projected to

                    be about      in              Find the percent decrease. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

TRY IT 6.48         Last year Sheila's salary was         Because of furlough days, this year her salary was

                               Find the percent decrease. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent.)

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Percent Increase and Percent Decrease Visualization (http://www.openstax.org/l/24percentincdec)

        SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Translate and Solve Basic Percent Equations

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

97. What number is  of         98. What number is         of   99. What number is       of
492 6 · Percents

100. What number is              of  101.         of  is what            102.       of   is what

                                           number?                             number?

103.              of  is what        104.         of  is what            105. is         of what

      number?                              number?                             number?

106. is               of what        107. is          of what            108. is         of what

      number?                              number?                             number?

109.              of what number is  110.         of what number is      111.       of what number is

112.              of what number is 113. What percent of is              114. What percent of is

115. What percent of             is  116. What percent of           is   117. is what percent of

118. is what percent of              119.  is what percent of            120.       is what percent of

Solve Applications of Percents

In the following exercises, solve the applications of percents.

121. Geneva treated her              122. When Hiro and his co-          123. Trong has  of each

      parents to dinner at their           workers had lunch at a              paycheck automatically

      favorite restaurant. The             restaurant the bill was             deposited to his savings

      bill was        She wants                   They want to                 account. His last paycheck

      to leave        of the total         leave      of the total bill        was       How much

      bill as a tip. How much              as a tip. How much                  money was deposited to

      should the tip be?                   should the tip be?                  Trong's savings account?

124. Cherise deposits of             125. One serving of oatmeal         126. One serving of trail mix
        each paycheck into her                                                   has grams of
        retirement account. Her            has grams of fiber,                   carbohydrates, which is
        last paycheck was                                                               of the recommended
        How much did Cherise               which is   of the                     daily amount. What is the
        deposit into her                                                         total recommended daily
        retirement account?                recommended daily                     amount of
                                                                                 carbohydrates?
                                           amount. What is the total

                                           recommended daily

                                           amount of fiber?

127. A bacon cheeseburger at         128. A grilled chicken salad at     129. The nutrition fact sheet at
                                                                                 a fast food restaurant
      a popular fast food                  a popular fast food                   says the fish sandwich
                                                                                 has calories, and
      restaurant contains                  restaurant contains                   calories are from fat.
                                                                                 What percent of the total
      milligrams (mg) of                   milligrams (mg) of                    calories is from fat?

      sodium, which is           of        sodium, which is      of

      the recommended daily                the recommended daily

      amount. What is the total            amount. What is the total

      recommended daily                    recommended daily

      amount of sodium?                    amount of sodium?

130. The nutrition fact sheet at     131. Emma gets paid                 132. Dimple gets paid
        a fast food restaurant               per month. She pays                 per month. She pays
        says a small portion of              a month for rent. What              a month for rent. What
        chicken nuggets has                  percent of her monthly              percent of her monthly
        calories, and calories               pay goes to rent?                   pay goes to rent?
        are from fat. What
        percent of the total
        calories is from fat?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   6.2 · Solve General Applications of Percent 493

Find Percent Increase and Percent Decrease

In the following exercises, find the percent increase or percent decrease.

133. Tamanika got a raise in  134. Ayodele got a raise in her            135. Annual student fees at

her hourly pay, from                 hourly pay, from                       the University of

           to      Find the          to           Find the                  California rose from

percent increase.                    percent increase.                      about        in        to

                                                                            about        in

                                                                            Find the percent increase.

136. The price of a share of  137. According to Time                     138. In one month, the median
                                      magazine                                   home price in the
one stock rose from                   annual global seafood                      Northeast rose from
                                      consumption rose from                                    to
           to      Find the               pounds per person in                   Find the percent increase.
                                              to pounds per                      (Round to the nearest
percent increase.                     person today. Find the                     tenth of a percent.)
                                      percent increase. (Round
                                      to the nearest tenth of a
                                      percent.)

139. A grocery store reduced  140. The price of a share of               141. Hernando's salary was
                                                                                             last year. This
the price of a loaf of               one stock fell from
                                                                                 year his salary was cut to
bread from         to                to           Find the percent                            Find the percent

           Find the percent          decrease.                                   decrease.

decrease.

142. From      to      the    143. In one month, the median              144. Sales of video games and

population of Detroit fell           home price in the West                 consoles fell from

from about              to           fell from              to              million to         million

about              Find the                       Find the                  in one year. Find the

percent decrease. (Round             percent decrease. (Round               percent decrease. (Round

to the nearest tenth of a            to the nearest tenth of a              to the nearest tenth of a

percent.)                            percent.)                              percent.)

Everyday Math

145. Tipping At the campus coffee cart, a medium        146. Late Fees Alison was late paying her credit card

coffee costs       MaryAnne brings                with          bill of     She was charged a late fee. What

her when she buys a cup of coffee and leaves the                was the amount of the late fee?

change as a tip. What percent tip does she leave?

Writing Exercises

147. Without solving the problem is      of what        148. Without solving the problem "What is               of

number", think about what the solution might                             think about what the solution might be.

be. Should it be a number that is greater than                  Should it be a number that is greater than or

or less than Explain your reasoning.                            less than   Explain your reasoning.

149. After returning from vacation, Alex said he        150. Because of road construction in one city,

should have packed            fewer shorts and                  commuters were advised to plan their Monday

more shirts. Explain what Alex meant.                           morning commute to take            of their usual

                                                                commuting time. Explain what this means.
494 6 · Percents

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

6.3 Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve sales tax applications
           Solve commission applications
           Solve discount applications
           Solve mark-up applications

BE PREPARED 6.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Solve  through multiplication.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.17.

BE PREPARED 6.8                  Solve  through division.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.22.

Solve Sales Tax Applications

Sales tax and commissions are applications of percent in our everyday lives. To solve these applications, we will follow
the same strategy we used in the section on decimal operations. We show it again here for easy reference.

             ...

                 HOW TO

  Solve an application
  Step 1. Identify what you are asked to find and choose a variable to represent it.
  Step 2. Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.
  Step 3. Translate the sentence into an equation.
  Step 4. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
  Step 5. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
  Step 6. Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

Remember that whatever the application, once we write the sentence with the given information (Step 2), we can
translate it to a percent equation and then solve it.

Do you pay a tax when you shop in your city or state? In many parts of the United States, sales tax is added to the
purchase price of an item. See Figure 6.7. The sales tax is determined by computing a percent of the purchase price.

To find the sales tax multiply the purchase price by the sales tax rate. Remember to convert the sales tax rate from a
percent to a decimal number. Once the sales tax is calculated, it is added to the purchase price. The result is the total
cost--this is what the customer pays.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 495

                                Figure 6.7 The sales tax is calculated as a percent of the purchase price.
Sales Tax
The sales tax is a percent of the purchase price.

EXAMPLE 6.25

Cathy bought a bicycle in Washington, where the sales tax rate was  of the purchase price. What was

 the sales tax and   the total cost of a bicycle if the purchase price of the bicycle was

     Solution



Identify what you are asked to find.                                What is the sales tax?

Choose a variable to represent it.                                  Let sales tax.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.             The sales tax is 6.5% of the purchase price.

Translate into an equation. (Remember to change the percent
to a decimal).

Simplify.
Check: Is this answer reasonable?
496 6 · Percents

Yes, because the sales tax amount is less than 10% of the         The sales tax is $25.48.
purchase price.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question.              What is the total cost of the bicycle?
                                                                  Let total cost of bicycle.
                                                                  The total cost is the purchase price plus the sales
                                                                  tax.
Identify what you are asked to find.
Choose a variable to represent it.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Simplify.                                                         The total cost of the bicycle is $417.48.

Check: Is this answer reasonable?
Yes, because the total cost is a little more than the purchase
price.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

     TRY IT 6.49 Find  the sales tax and  the total cost: Alexandra bought a television set for              in

                  Boston, where the sales tax rate was            of the purchase price.

     TRY IT 6.50  Find  the sales tax and  the total cost: Kim bought a winter coat for              in St. Louis,

                  where the sales tax rate was                    of the purchase price.

EXAMPLE 6.26

Evelyn bought a new smartphone for    plus tax. She was surprised when she got the receipt and saw that the tax

was               What was the sales tax rate for this purchase?

Solution

Identify what you are asked to find.                              What is the sales tax rate?

Choose a variable to represent it.                                Let sales tax.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it. What percent of the price is the sales tax?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 497

Translate into an equation.

Divide.
Simplify.
Check. Is this answer reasonable?
Yes, because 8.5% is close to 10%.
10% of $500 is $50, which is close to $42.42.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question. The sales tax rate is 8.5%.

TRY IT 6.51   Diego bought a new car for                 He was surprised that the dealer then added

              What was the sales tax rate for this purchase?

TRY IT 6.52 What is the sales tax rate if a              purchase will have       of sales tax added to it?

Solve Commission Applications

Sales people often receive a commission, or percent of total sales, for their sales. Their income may be just the
commission they earn, or it may be their commission added to their hourly wages or salary. The commission they earn is
calculated as a certain percent of the price of each item they sell. That percent is called the rate of commission.

  Commission

  A commission is a percentage of total sales as determined by the rate of commission.

To find the commission on a sale, multiply the rate of commission by the total sales. Just as we did for computing sales
tax, remember to first convert the rate of commission from a percent to a decimal.

EXAMPLE 6.27

Helene is a realtor. She receives   commission when she sells a house. How much commission will she receive for
selling a house that costs

Solution

Identify what you are asked to find.                     What is the commission?

Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let the commission.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.  The commission is 3% of the price.
498 6 · Percents

Translate into an equation.

Simplify.

Check. Is this answer reasonable?

Yes. 1% of $260,000 is $2,600, and $7,800 is three times $2,600.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.              Helene will receive a commission of $7,800.

TRY IT 6.53       Bob is a travel agent. He receives commission when he books a cruise for a customer. How

                  much commission will he receive for booking a   cruise?

TRY IT 6.54       Fernando receives      commission when he makes a computer sale. How much commission

                  will he receive for selling a computer for

  EXAMPLE 6.28                           stove. What rate of commission did she get?
Rikki earned commission when she sold a              What is the rate of commission?

     Solution
  Identify what you are asked to find.

Choose a variable to represent it.                           Let the rate of commission.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.      The commission is what percent of the sale?

Translate into an equation.

Divide.

Simplify.

Change to percent form.

Check if this answer is reasonable.

Yes. A 10% commission would have been $145.
The 6% commission, $87, is a little more than half of that.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.         The commission was 6% of the price of the stove.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                         6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 499

TRY IT 6.55   Homer received        commission when he sold a car for         What rate of commission
              did he get?

TRY IT 6.56   Bernice earned        commission when she sold an        living room set. What rate of

              commission did she get?

Solve Discount Applications

Applications of discount are very common in retail settings Figure 6.8. When you buy an item on sale, the original price
of the item has been reduced by some dollar amount. The discount rate, usually given as a percent, is used to
determine the amount of the discount. To determine the amount of discount, we multiply the discount rate by the
original price. We summarize the discount model in the box below.

          Figure 6.8 Applications of discounts are common in everyday life. (credit: Charleston's TheDigitel, Flickr)
Discount
An amount of discount is a percent off the original price.

The sale price should always be less than the original price. In some cases, the amount of discount is a fixed dollar
amount. Then we just find the sale price by subtracting the amount of discount from the original price.

EXAMPLE 6.29

Jason bought a pair of sunglasses that were on sale for  off. The original price of the sunglasses was  What was
the sale price of the sunglasses?                             What is the sale price?

     Solution

  Identify what you are asked to find.

Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let the sale price.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.  The sale price is the original price minus the discount.

Translate into an equation.
500 6 · Percents

Simplify.

Check if this answer is reasonable.

Yes. The sale price, $29, is less than the original price, $39.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.             The sale price of the sunglasses was $29.

TRY IT 6.57       Marta bought a dishwasher that was on sale for off. The original price of the dishwasher

                  was               What was the sale price of the dishwasher?

TRY IT 6.58       Orlando bought a pair of shoes that was on sale for           off. The original price of the shoes was
                          What was the sale price of the shoes?

In Example 6.29, the amount of discount was a set amount,        In Example 6.30 the discount is given as a percent of
the original price.

EXAMPLE 6.30

Elise bought a dress that was discounted  off of the original price of          What was  the amount of discount and 
the sale price of the dress?

     Solution

 Before beginning, you may find it helpful to organize the information in a list.

Original price = $140
Discount rate = 35%
Amount of discount = ?

Identify what you are asked to find.                  What is the amount of discount?

Choose a variable to represent it.                    Let the amount of discount.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it. The discount is 35% of the original price.

Translate into an equation.

  Simplify.
  Check if this answer is reasonable.
  Yes. A $49 discount is reasonable for a $140 dress.
  Write a complete sentence that answers the question. The amount of discount was $49.



Original price = $140
Amount of discount = $49

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 501

Sale price = ?                                                    What is the sale price of the dress?
  Identify what you are asked to find.                            Let the sale price.
  Choose a variable to represent it.                              The sale price is the original price minus the discount.
  Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.

  Translate into an equation.

Simplify.

Check if this answer is reasonable.

Yes. The sale price, $91, is less than the original price, $140.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.              The sale price of the dress was $91.

TRY IT 6.59             Find  the amount of discount and  the sale price: Sergio bought a belt that was discounted
                              from an original price of

TRY IT 6.60             Find  the amount of discount and  the sale price: Oscar bought a barbecue grill that was

                        discounted    from an original price of

There may be times when you buy something on sale and want to know the discount rate. The next example will show
this case.

EXAMPLE 6.31

Jeannette bought a swimsuit at a sale price of  The original price of the swimsuit was      Find the  amount

of discount and  discount rate.

Solution

 Before beginning, you may find it helpful to organize the information in a list.

Original price = $31

Amount of discount = ?

Sale price = $13.95

Identify what you are asked to find.                       What is the amount of discount?

Choose a variable to represent it.                         Let the amount of discount.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it. The discount is the original price minus the sale price.

Translate into an equation.
502 6 · Percents

Simplify.
Check if this answer is reasonable.
Yes. The $17.05 discount is less than the original price.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question. The amount of discount was $17.05.

 Before beginning, you may find it helpful to organize the information in a list.

Original price = $31
Amount of discount = $17.05
Discount rate = ?

Identify what you are asked to find.                     What is the discount rate?

Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let the discount rate.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.  The discount is what percent of the original price?

Translate into an equation.

Divide.

Simplify.

Check if this answer is reasonable.

The rate of discount was a little more than 50% and the
amount of discount is a little more than half of $31.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.     The rate of discount was 55%.

TRY IT 6.61       Find  the amount of discount and  the discount rate: Lena bought a kitchen table at the

                  sale price of       The original price of the table was

TRY IT 6.62       Find  the amount of discount and  the discount rate: Nick bought a multi-room air

                  conditioner at a sale price of         The original price of the air conditioner was

Solve Mark-up Applications

Applications of mark-up are very common in retail settings. The price a retailer pays for an item is called the wholesale
price. The retailer then adds a mark-up to the wholesale price to get the list price, the price he sells the item for. The
mark-up is usually calculated as a percent of the wholesale price. The percent is called the mark-up rate. To determine
the amount of mark-up, multiply the mark-up rate by the wholesale price. We summarize the mark-up model in the box
below.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 503

Mark-up
The mark-up is the amount added to the wholesale price.

The list price should always be more than the wholesale price.    Adam marked the price up  Find the 
  EXAMPLE 6.32
                                                                  What is the amount of mark-up?
Adam's art gallery bought a photograph at the wholesale price of  Let the amount of each mark-up.
                                                                  The mark-up is 40% of the wholesale price.
amount of mark-up and  the list price of the photograph.

     Solution

 

  Identify what you are asked to find.

  Choose a variable to represent it.

  Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Simplify.                                                         The mark-up on the photograph was $100.

Check if this answer is reasonable.

Yes. The markup rate is less than 50% and $100 is less than half
of $250.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

                                                         What is the list price?
                                                         Let the list price.
Identify what you are asked to find.                     The list price is the wholesale price plus the mark-up.
Choose a variable to represent it.
Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.

Translate into an equation.

Simplify.
504 6 · Percents

Check if this answer is reasonable.                               The list price of the photograph was $350.

Yes. The list price, $350, is more than the wholesale price,
$250.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.63         Jim's music store bought a guitar at wholesale price           Jim marked the price up       Find
TRY IT 6.64
                    the  amount of mark-up and  the list price.           They marked the price up               Find

                    The Auto Resale Store bought Pablo's Toyota for

                    the  amount of mark-up and  the list price.

        SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Sales Tax Applications

In the following exercises, find  the sales tax and  the total cost.

151. The cost of a pair of boots     152. The cost of a refrigerator      153. The cost of a microwave

was               The sales tax      was              The sales tax       oven was         The sales

rate is of the purchase              rate is of the purchase              tax rate is      of the

price.                               price.                               purchase price.

154. The cost of a tablet            155. The cost of a file cabinet      156. The cost of a luggage set
                                                                                          The sales tax rate is
computer is         The              is               The sales tax rate                   of the purchase

sales tax rate is                of  is               of the purchase             price.

the purchase price.                  price.

157. The cost of a                   158. The cost of a sofa is

dresser             The sales                         The sales tax rate

tax rate is         of the           is               of the purchase

purchase price.                      price.

In the following exercises, find the sales tax rate.

159. Shawna bought a mixer           160. Orphia bought a coffee          161. Bopha bought a bedroom

for               The sales tax on   table for        The sales           set for      The sales

the purchase was                     tax on the purchase was              tax on the purchase was

162. Ruth bought a washer
        and dryer set for
        The sales tax on the
        purchase was

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            6.3 · Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications 505

Solve Commission Applications

In the following exercises, find the commission.

163. Christopher sold his             164. Michele rented a booth at        165. Farrah works in a jewelry
        dinette set for                       a craft fair, which charged           store and receives
        through an online site,               her commission on                     commission when she
        which charged him of                  her sales. One day her                makes a sale. How much
        the selling price as                  total sales were                      commission will she
        commission. How much                  How much was the                      receive for selling a
        was the commission?                   commission?                                     ring?

166. Jamal works at a car             167. Hector receives                  168. Denise receives
        dealership and receives               commission when he sells              commission when she
             commission when he               an insurance policy. How              books a tour at the travel
        sells a car. How much                 much commission will he               agency. How much
        commission will he                    receive for selling a policy          commission will she
        receive for selling a                 for                                   receive for booking a tour
                    car?                                                            with total cost

In the following exercises, find the rate of commission.

169. Dontay is a realtor and          170. Nevaeh is a cruise               171. As a waitress, Emily
                                              specialist and earned
earned                                                commission after      earned     in tips on
                                              booking a cruise that cost
commission on the sale of                                What is her rate   sales of           last
                                              of commission?
a       house. What is                                                      Saturday night. What was

his rate of commission?                                                     her rate of commission?

172. Alejandra earned                 173. Maureen earned                   174. Lucas earned
                       commission on                         commission
                                                                            commission when he
        weekly sales of                       when she sold a
        as a salesperson at the               car. What was the rate of     brought a                job to
        computer store. What is               commission?
        her rate of commission?                                             his office. What was the

                                                                            rate of commission?

Solve Discount Applications

In the following exercises, find the sale price.

175. Perla bought a cellphone         176. Sophie saw a dress she           177. Rick wants to buy a tool
        that was on sale for                  liked on sale for off.                set with original price
        off. The original price of            The original price of the                     Next week the tool
        the cellphone was                     dress was                             set will be on sale for
                                                                                    off.

178. Angelo's store is having a
        sale on TV sets. One set,
        with an original price of
                is selling for
        off.

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount and  the sale price.

179. Janelle bought a beach           180. Errol bought a skateboard        181. Kathy wants to buy a

chair on sale at  off.                helmet on sale at       off.          camera that lists for

The original price was                The original price was                The camera is on sale

                                                                            with a     discount.
506 6 · Percents

182. Colleen bought a suit that        183. Erys bought a treadmill      184. Jay bought a guitar on

was discounted                   from  on sale at      off. The                sale at      off. The

an original price of                   original price was                      original price was

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount and  the discount rate. (Round to the nearest tenth of a
percent if needed.)

185. Larry and Donna bought            186. Hiroshi bought a             187. Patty bought a baby
        a sofa at the sale price of                                              stroller on sale for
                   The original price  lawnmower at the sale                                  The original
        of the sofa was                                                          price of the stroller was
                                       price of       The original

                                       price of the lawnmower is

188. Bill found a book he              189. Nikki bought a patio set     190. Stella bought a dinette set
        wanted on sale for
                   The original price  on sale for            The              on sale for        The
        of the book was
                                       original price was                      original price was

Solve Mark-up Applications

In the following exercises, find  the amount of the mark-up and  the list price.

191. Daria bought a bracelet at        192. Regina bought a              193. Tom paid            a pound
        wholesale cost to sell
        in her handicraft store.       handmade quilt at                       for tomatoes to sell at his
        She marked the price up
                                       wholesale cost           to             produce store. He added

                                       sell in her quilt store. She            a        mark-up.

                                       marked the price up

194. Flora paid her supplier           195. Alan bought a used           196. Michael bought a classic

                  a stem for roses to  bicycle for            After re-        car for      He

sell at her flower shop.               conditioning it, he added               restored it, then added

She added an          mark-            mark-up and then                           mark-up before

up.                                    advertised it for sale.                 advertising it for sale.

Everyday Math

197. Coupons Yvonne can use two coupons for the               198. Cash Back Jason can buy a bag of dog food for

same purchase at her favorite department store.                          at two different stores. One store offers

One coupon gives her off and the other                              cash back on the purchase plus off his next

gives her         off. She wants to buy a bedspread                 purchase. The other store offers        cash back.

that sells for                                                       Calculate the total savings from the first

 Calculate the discount price if Yvonne uses                        store, including the savings on the next

the coupon first and then takes        off.                         purchase.

 Calculate the discount price if Yvonne uses                         Calculate the total savings from the second
the               off coupon first and then uses the
                                                                    store.

coupon.                                                              Which store should Jason buy the dog food

 In which order should Yvonne use the                               from? Why?

coupons?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          6.4 · Solve Simple Interest Applications 507

Writing Exercises

199. Priam bought a jacket that was on sale for  200. Roxy bought a scarf on sale for  off. The

off. The original price of the jacket was        original price of the scarf was       Roxy

While the sales clerk figured the price by       claimed that the price she paid for the scarf was

calculating the amount of discount and then      the same as the amount she saved. Was Roxy

subtracting that amount from     Priam found     correct? Explain.

the price faster by calculating  of

 Explain why Priam was correct.
 Will Priam's method work for any original

price?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

6.4 Solve Simple Interest Applications

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the simple interest formula
           Solve simple interest applications

       BE PREPARED 6.9 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Solve
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 5.43.

BE PREPARED 6.10        Solve
                        If you missed this problem, review Example 5.44.

Use the Simple Interest Formula

Do you know that banks pay you to let them keep your money? The money you put in the bank is called the principal,
and the bank pays you interest, The interest is computed as a certain percent of the principal; called the rate of
interest, The rate of interest is usually expressed as a percent per year, and is calculated by using the decimal
equivalent of the percent. The variable for time, represents the number of years the money is left in the account.

Simple Interest

If an amount of money,  the principal, is invested for a period of years at an annual interest rate the amount of
interest, earned is

where
508 6 · Percents

Interest earned according to this formula is called simple interest.

The formula we use to calculate simple interest is  To use the simple interest formula we substitute in the values

for variables that are given, and then solve for the unknown variable. It may be helpful to organize the information by

listing all four variables and filling in the given information.

EXAMPLE 6.33

Find the simple interest earned after years on      at an interest rate of

     Solution
Organize the given information in a list.

We will use the simple interest formula to find the interest.                                       The simple interest
  Write the formula.                                                                                is $90.
  Substitute the given information. Remember to write the percent in decimal form.
  Simplify.
  Check your answer. Is $90 a reasonable interest earned on $500 in 3 years?
  In 3 years the money earned 18%. If we rounded to 20%, the interest would have been
  500(0.20) or $100. Yes, $90 is reasonable.

  Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.65 Find the simple interest earned after years on                  at an interest rate of

TRY IT 6.66 Find the simple interest earned after years on                  at an interest rate of

In the next example, we will use the simple interest formula to find the principal.

EXAMPLE 6.34

Find the principal invested if   interest was earned in years at an interest rate of

     Solution
Organize the given information in a list.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                      6.4 · Solve Simple Interest Applications 509

We will use the simple interest formula to find the principal.
  Write the formula.
  Substitute the given information.
  Divide.
  Simplify.
  Check your answer. Is it reasonable that $2,225 would earn $178 in 2 years?

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.             The principal is $2,225.

TRY IT 6.67 Find the principal invested if                 interest was earned in years at an interest rate of

TRY IT 6.68 Find the principal invested if                 interest was earned in years at an interest rate of

Now we will solve for the rate of interest.

EXAMPLE 6.35

Find the rate if a principal of  earned      interest in years.

     Solution
Organize the given information.

We will use the simple interest formula to find the rate.
  Write the formula.
  Substitute the given information.
  Multiply.
510 6 · Percents

         Divide.
         Simplify.
         Write as a percent.
         Check your answer. Is 11.5% a reasonable rate if $3,772 was earned in 4 years?

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.                                     The rate was 11.5%.

TRY IT 6.69 Find the rate if a principal of           earned  interest in years.

TRY IT 6.70 Find the rate if a principal of           earned  interest in years.

Solve Simple Interest Applications

Applications with simple interest usually involve either investing money or borrowing money. To solve these applications,
we continue to use the same strategy for applications that we have used earlier in this chapter. The only difference is
that in place of translating to get an equation, we can use the simple interest formula.

We will start by solving a simple interest application to find the interest.

EXAMPLE 6.36

Nathaly deposited  in her bank account where it will earn     interest. How much interest will Nathaly earn in
years?

     Solution
We are asked to find the Interest,

Organize the given information in a list.

  Write the formula.
  Substitute the given information.
  Simplify.
  Check your answer. Is $2,500 a reasonable interest on $12,500 over 5 years?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           6.4 · Solve Simple Interest Applications 511

At 4% interest per year, in 5 years the interest would be 20% of the principal. Is 20% of  The interest is $2,500.
$12,500 equal to $2,500? Yes.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.71             Areli invested a principal of    in her bank account with interest rate How much interest
                        did she earn in years?

TRY IT 6.72             Susana invested a principal of   in her bank account with interest rate  How much
                        interest did she earn in years?

There may be times when you know the amount of interest earned on a given principal over a certain length of time, but
you don't know the rate. For instance, this might happen when family members lend or borrow money among
themselves instead of dealing with a bank. In the next example, we'll show how to solve for the rate.

EXAMPLE 6.37

Loren lent his brother  to help him buy a car. In        his brother paid him back the     plus  in interest.

What was the rate of interest?

     Solution
We are asked to find the rate of interest,

Organize the given information.

Write the formula.
Substitute the given information.
Multiply.
Divide.
Simplify.
Change to percent form.
Check your answer. Is 5.5% a reasonable interest rate to pay your brother?
512 6 · Percents

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.                       The rate of interest was 5.5%.

TRY IT 6.73 Jim lent his sister      to help her buy a house. In years, she paid him the                   plus

                  interest. What was the rate of interest?

TRY IT 6.74       Hang borrowed      from her parents to pay her tuition. In years, she paid them

                  interest in addition to the           she borrowed. What was the rate of interest?

There may be times when you take a loan for a large purchase and the amount of the principal is not clear. This might
happen, for instance, in making a car purchase when the dealer adds the cost of a warranty to the price of the car. In the
next example, we will solve a simple interest application for the principal.

EXAMPLE 6.38

Eduardo noticed that his new car loan papers stated that with an interest rate of  he would pay            in

interest over years. How much did he borrow to pay for his car?

     Solution
We are asked to find the principal,

Organize the given information.

Write the formula.
Substitute the given information.
Multiply.
Divide.
Simplify.
Check your answer. Is $17,590 a reasonable amount to borrow to buy a car?

  Write a complete sentence that answers the question.                             The amount borrowed was $17,590.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             6.4 · Solve Simple Interest Applications 513

TRY IT 6.75         Sean's new car loan statement said he would pay   in interest from an interest rate of

                    over years. How much did he borrow to buy his new car?

TRY IT 6.76         In years, Gloria's bank account earned     interest at How much had she deposited in
                    the account?

In the simple interest formula, the rate of interest is given as an annual rate, the rate for one year. So the units of time
must be in years. If the time is given in months, we convert it to years.

EXAMPLE 6.39

Caroline got  as graduation gifts and invested it in a         certificate of deposit that earned  interest. How

much interest did this investment earn?

     Solution
We are asked to find the interest,

Organize the given information.

Write the formula.

Substitute the given information, converting 10 months to of a year.

Multiply.

Check your answer. Is $15.75 a reasonable amount of interest?

If Caroline had invested the $900 for a full year at 2% interest, the amount of interest would
have been $18. Yes, $15.75 is reasonable.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.                                            The interest earned
                                                                                                was $15.75.

TRY IT 6.77         Adriana invested     for months in an account that paid  interest. How much interest
                    did she earn?

TRY IT 6.78         Milton invested      for months in an account that paid  interest How much interest
                    did he earn?
514 6 · Percents

        SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Simple Interest Formula
In the following exercises, use the simple interest formula to fill in the missing information.

          Interest Principal Rate Time (years)                 Interest Principal Rate Time (years)
201.                                                 202.

Table 6.5                                                        Table 6.6

          Interest Principal Rate Time (years)                 Interest Principal Rate Time (years)
203.                                                 204.

Table 6.7                                                        Table 6.8

          Interest Principal Rate Time (years)                 Interest Principal Rate Time (years)
205.                                                 206.

Table 6.9                                                        Table 6.10

In the following exercises, solve the problem using the simple interest formula.

207. Find the simple interest           208. Find the simple interest           209. Find the simple interest
        earned after years on                   earned after years on                   earned after years on
                at an interest rate of                  at an interest rate of                    at an interest rate
                                                                                        of

210. Find the simple interest           211. Find the simple interest           212. Find the simple interest
        earned after years on                   earned after years on                   earned after years on
                  at an interest rate                       at an interest                          at an interest
        of                                      rate of                                 rate of

213. Find the principal                 214. Find the principal                 215. Find the principal

invested if       interest              invested if  interest                   invested if              interest

was earned in years at                  was earned in years at                  was earned in years at

an interest rate of                     an interest rate of                     an interest rate of

216. Find the principal                 217. Find the principal                 218. Find the principal
        invested if                             invested if                             invested if
        interest was earned in                  interest was earned in                  interest was earned in
        years at an interest rate               years at an interest rate               years at an interest rate
        of                                      of                                      of

219. Find the rate if a principal       220. Find the rate if a principal       221. Find the rate if a principal

of                earned                of  earned                              of           earned

interest in years.                      interest in years.                      interest in years.

222. Find the rate if a principal

of                earned

interest in years.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       6.4 · Solve Simple Interest Applications 515

Solve Simple Interest Applications

In the following exercises, solve the problem using the simple interest formula.

223. Casey deposited         in        224. Terrence deposited              225. Robin deposited
                                                         in a bank account
a bank account with                                                         in a bank account with
                                               with interest rate
interest rate How                              How much interest was        interest rate          How
                                               earned in years?
much interest was earned                                                    much interest was earned

in years?                                                                   in years?

226. Carleen deposited                 227. Hilaria borrowed                228. Kenneth lent his niece
                    in a bank account
                                       from her grandfather to                      to buy a computer.
        with interest rate
        How much interest was          pay for college. Five years          Two years later, she paid
        earned in years?
                                       later, she paid him back             him back the              plus

                                       the            plus                        interest. What was

                                       interest. What was the               the rate of interest?

                                       rate of interest?

229. Lebron lent his daughter          230. Pablo borrowed                  231. In years, a bank
                                               to start a business. Three
          to help her buy a                    years later, he repaid the   account that paid
                                                            plus
condominium. When she                          interest. What was the       earned          interest.
                                               rate of interest?
sold the condominium                                                        What was the principal of

four years later, she paid                                                  the account?

him the                plus

      interest. What was

the rate of interest?

232. In years, a bond that             233. Joshua's computer loan          234. Margaret's car loan

paid       earned                      statement said he would              statement said she would

interest. What was the                 pay            in interest           pay            in interest

principal of the bond?                 for a year loan at                   for a year loan at

                                       How much did Joshua                  How much did Margaret

                                       borrow to buy the                    borrow to buy the car?

                                       computer?

235. Caitlin invested        in        236. Diego invested     in           237. Airin borrowed
                                                                                    from her parents for the
an         certificate of              a           certificate of                   down payment on a car
                                                                                    and promised to pay
deposit paying                         deposit paying                               them back in months
                                                                                    at a rate of interest.
interest. How much                     interest. How much                           How much interest did
                                                                                    she owe her parents?
interest did she earn form             interest did he earn form

this investment?                       this investment?

238. Yuta borrowed     from

his brother to pay for his

textbooks and promised

to pay him back in

months at a rate of

interest. How much

interest did Yuta owe his

brother?

Everyday Math

239. Interest on savings Find the interest rate your          240. Interest on a loan Find the interest rate your

local bank pays on savings accounts.                           local bank charges for a car loan.

 What is the interest rate?                                     What is the interest rate?
 Calculate the amount of interest you would                     Calculate the amount of interest you would
earn on a principal of                 for years.              pay on a loan of        for years.
516 6 · Percents

Writing Exercises

241. Why do banks pay interest on money deposited  242. Why do banks charge interest for lending
        in savings accounts?                               money?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

6.5 Solve Proportions and their Applications

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the definition of proportion
           Solve proportions
           Solve applications using proportions
           Write percent equations as proportions
           Translate and solve percent proportions

       BE PREPARED 6.11 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 4.44.

BE PREPARED 6.12                 Solve:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.99.

BE PREPARED 6.13                 Write as a rate: Sale rode his bike miles in hours.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.63.

Use the Definition of Proportion

In the section on Ratios and Rates we saw some ways they are used in our daily lives. When two ratios or rates are equal,
the equation relating them is called a proportion.

Proportion

A proportion is an equation of the form  where

The proportion states two ratios or rates are equal. The proportion is read  is to as is to

The equation      is a proportion because the two fractions are equal. The proportion        is read is to as is
to

If we compare quantities with units, we have to be sure we are comparing them in the right order. For example, in the

proportion                       we compare the number of students to the number of teachers. We put students in

the numerators and teachers in the denominators.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 517

EXAMPLE 6.40

Write each sentence as a proportion:

 is to as is to             hits in   at bats is the same as  hits in  at-bats.
                                      for ounces.
  for ounces is equivalent to

  Solution



                         3 is to 7 as 15 is to 35.

Write as a proportion.



                                                                     5 hits in 8 at-bats is the same as 30 hits in 48 at-bats.
Write each fraction to compare hits to at-bats.
Write as a proportion.



                                                                          $1.50 for 6 ounces is equivalent to $2.25 for 9 ounces.
Write each fraction to compare dollars to ounces.
Write as a proportion.

  TRY IT 6.79 Write each sentence as a proportion:

                          is to as is to             hits in at-bats is the same as hits in at-bats.
                                for ounces is equivalent to   for ounces.

  TRY IT 6.80 Write each sentence as a proportion:

                          is to as is to
                          adults for children is the same as adults for children.
                                for ounces is equivalent to   for ounces.

Look at the proportions    and        From our work with equivalent fractions we know these equations are true.

But how do we know if an equation is a proportion with equivalent fractions if it contains fractions with larger numbers?

To determine if a proportion is true, we find the cross products of each proportion. To find the cross products, we
multiply each denominator with the opposite numerator (diagonally across the equal sign). The results are called a cross
product because of the cross formed. If, and only if, the given proportion is true, that is, the two sides are equal, then the
cross products of a proportion will be equal.
518 6 · Percents

Cross Products of a Proportion           where    its cross products are equal.
For any proportion of the form

Cross products can be used to test whether a proportion is true. To test whether an equation makes a proportion, we
find the cross products. If they are both equal, we have a proportion.

EXAMPLE 6.41

Determine whether each equation is a proportion:

  Solution        

To determine if the equation is a proportion, we find the cross products. If they are equal, the equation is a proportion.



  Find the cross products.                        the equation is not a proportion.

Since the cross products are not equal,

 

Find the cross products.

Since the cross products are equal,               the equation is a proportion.

  TRY IT 6.81 Determine whether each equation is a proportion:

                                         

  TRY IT 6.82 Determine whether each equation is a proportion:

                                         

Solve Proportions

To solve a proportion containing a variable, we remember that the proportion is an equation. All of the techniques we

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 519

have used so far to solve equations still apply. In the next example, we will solve a proportion by multiplying by the Least
Common Denominator (LCD) using the Multiplication Property of Equality.

  EXAMPLE 6.42
Solve:

     Solution

  To isolate , multiply both sides by the LCD, 63.
  Simplify.
  Divide the common factors.
  Check: To check our answer, we substitute into the original proportion.

  Show common factors.

  Simplify.

       TRY IT 6.83 Solve the proportion:
       TRY IT 6.84 Solve the proportion:
When the variable is in a denominator, we'll use the fact that the cross products of a proportion are equal to solve the
proportions.
We can find the cross products of the proportion and then set them equal. Then we solve the resulting equation using
our familiar techniques.
  EXAMPLE 6.43
Solve:
     Solution
Notice that the variable is in the denominator, so we will solve by finding the cross products and setting them equal.
520 6 · Percents

         Find the cross products and set them equal.
         Simplify.
         Divide both sides by 9.
         Simplify.
         Check your answer.

Show common factors..

Simplify.

Another method to solve this would be to multiply both sides by the LCD,  Try it and verify that you get the same
solution.

TRY IT 6.85 Solve the proportion:
TRY IT 6.86 Solve the proportion:

  EXAMPLE 6.44
Solve:

     Solution
  Find the cross products and set them equal.

Simplify.
Divide both sides by 52.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 521

Simplify.
Check:

Show common factors.
Simplify.

TRY IT 6.87 Solve the proportion:

TRY IT 6.88 Solve the proportion:

Solve Applications Using Proportions

The strategy for solving applications that we have used earlier in this chapter, also works for proportions, since
proportions are equations. When we set up the proportion, we must make sure the units are correct--the units in the
numerators match and the units in the denominators match.

EXAMPLE 6.45

When pediatricians prescribe acetaminophen to children, they prescribe milliliters (ml) of acetaminophen for every
pounds of the child's weight. If Zoe weighs pounds, how many milliliters of acetaminophen will her doctor prescribe?

Solution

Identify what you are asked to find.                 How many ml of acetaminophen the doctor will prescribe

Choose a variable to represent it.                   Let ml of acetaminophen.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find  If 5 ml is prescribed for every 25 pounds, how much will be
it.                                                  prescribed for 80 pounds?

Translate into a proportion.

Substitute given values--be careful of the units.
Multiply both sides by 80.

Multiply and show common factors.
522 6 · Percents

Simplify.                                                The pediatrician would prescribe 16 ml of acetaminophen to
Check if the answer is reasonable.                       Zoe.
Yes. Since 80 is about 3 times 25, the medicine
should be about 3 times 5.

Write a complete sentence.

You could also solve this proportion by setting the cross products equal.

TRY IT 6.89       Pediatricians prescribe milliliters (ml) of acetaminophen for every pounds of a child's
                  weight. How many milliliters of acetaminophen will the doctor prescribe for Emilia, who weighs

                      pounds?

TRY IT 6.90       For every kilogram (kg) of a child's weight, pediatricians prescribe milligrams (mg) of a
                  fever reducer. If Isabella weighs kg, how many milligrams of the fever reducer will the
                  pediatrician prescribe?

EXAMPLE 6.46

One brand of microwave popcorn has calories per serving. A whole bag of this popcorn has  servings. How many
calories are in a whole bag of this microwave popcorn?

Solution

Identify what you are asked to find.                     How many calories are in a whole bag of microwave
                                                         popcorn?

Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let number of calories.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.  If there are 120 calories per serving, how many
                                                         calories are in a whole bag with 3.5 servings?

Translate into a proportion.

Substitute given values.

Multiply both sides by 3.5.
Multiply.
Check if the answer is reasonable.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 523

Yes. Since 3.5 is between 3 and 4, the total calories should
be between 360 (3120) and 480 (4120).

Write a complete sentence.                                    The whole bag of microwave popcorn has 420 calories.

TRY IT 6.91           Marissa loves the Caramel Macchiato at the coffee shop. The oz. medium size has
                      calories. How many calories will she get if she drinks the large oz. size?

TRY IT 6.92           Yaneli loves Starburst candies, but wants to keep her snacks to calories. If the candies have
                            calories for pieces, how many pieces can she have in her snack?

EXAMPLE 6.47

Josiah went to Mexico for spring break and changed       dollars into Mexican pesos. At that time, the exchange rate

had U.S. is equal to      Mexican pesos. How many Mexican pesos did he get for his trip?

Solution

Identify what you are asked to find.                          How many Mexican pesos did Josiah get?

Choose a variable to represent it.                            Let number of pesos.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.       If $1 U.S. is equal to 12.54 Mexican pesos, then $325
                                                              is how many pesos?

Translate into a proportion.

Substitute given values.

The variable is in the denominator, so find the cross         Josiah has 4075.5 pesos for his spring break trip.
products and set them equal.

Simplify.

Check if the answer is reasonable.

Yes, $100 would be $1,254 pesos. $325 is a little more than
3 times this amount.

Write a complete sentence.

TRY IT 6.93           Yurianna is going to Europe and wants to change   dollars into Euros. At the current

                      exchange rate, US is equal to           Euro. How many Euros will she have for her trip?

TRY IT 6.94           Corey and Nicole are traveling to Japan and need to exchange  into Japanese yen. If each

                      dollar is       yen, how many yen will they get?
524 6 · Percents

Write Percent Equations As Proportions

Previously, we solved percent equations by applying the properties of equality we have used to solve equations
throughout this text. Some people prefer to solve percent equations by using the proportion method. The proportion
method for solving percent problems involves a percent proportion. A percent proportion is an equation where a
percent is equal to an equivalent ratio.

For example,        and we can simplify             Since the equation  shows a percent equal to an

equivalent ratio, we call it a percent proportion. Using the vocabulary we used earlier:

Percent Proportion
The amount is to the base as the percent is to

If we restate the problem in the words of a proportion, it may be easier to set up the proportion:

We could also say:

First we will practice translating into a percent proportion. Later, we'll solve the proportion.

EXAMPLE 6.48

Translate to a proportion. What number is       of

     Solution
If you look for the word "of", it may help you identify the base.

Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.

Set up the proportion. Let       .

TRY IT 6.95         Translate to a proportion: What number is      of

TRY IT 6.96         Translate to a proportion: What number is      of

  EXAMPLE 6.49                   of what number?
Translate to a proportion. is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 525

  Solution
Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.

Set up the proportion. Let  .

TRY IT 6.97   Translate to a proportion: is            of what number?

TRY IT 6.98   Translate to a proportion: is            of what number?

  EXAMPLE 6.50
Translate to a proportion. What percent of is

     Solution

  Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.

Set up the proportion. Let  .

TRY IT 6.99 Translate to a proportion: What percent of is

TRY IT 6.100 Translate to a proportion: What percent of is

Translate and Solve Percent Proportions

Now that we have written percent equations as proportions, we are ready to solve the equations.

EXAMPLE 6.51

Translate and solve using proportions: What number is  of

Solution

Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.
526 6 · Percents

Set up the proportion. Let number.                                 36 is 45% of 80.

Find the cross products and set them equal.
Simplify.

Divide both sides by 100.

Simplify.
Check if the answer is reasonable.
Yes. 45 is a little less than half of 100 and 36 is a little less
than half 80.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.101      Translate and solve using proportions: What number is              of

TRY IT 6.102      Translate and solve using proportions: What number is              of

In the next example, the percent is more than  which is more than one whole. So the unknown number will be more
than the base.

EXAMPLE 6.52

Translate and solve using proportions:  of is what number?
     Solution

Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.
Set up the proportion. Let number.
Find the cross products and set them equal.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 100.
Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 527

Check if the answer is reasonable.
Yes. 125 is more than 100 and 31.25 is more than 25.
Write a complete sentence that answers the question. 125% of 25 is 31.25.

TRY IT 6.103 Translate and solve using proportions:             of is what number?
                                                                of is what number?
TRY IT 6.104 Translate and solve using proportions:

Percents with decimals and money are also used in proportions.

EXAMPLE 6.53

Translate and solve:      of what number is
     Solution

Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

Restate as a proportion.

Set up the proportion. Let number.

Find the cross products and set them equal.
Simplify.

Divide both sides by 6.5 to isolate the variable.

Simplify.                                                6.5% of $24 is $1.56.

Check if the answer is reasonable.

Yes. 6.5% is a small amount and $1.56 is much less than
$24.

Write a complete sentence that answers the question.

TRY IT 6.105 Translate and solve using proportions:             of what number is
TRY IT 6.106 Translate and solve using proportions:              of what number is
528 6 · Percents

         EXAMPLE 6.54
       Translate and solve using proportions: What percent of is

            Solution
         Identify the parts of the percent proportion.

         Restate as a proportion.
         Set up the proportion. Let number.
         Find the cross products and set them equal.
         Simplify.
         Divide both sides by 72.
         Simplify.
         Check if the answer is reasonable.
         Yes. 9 is of 72 and is 12.5%.
         Write a complete sentence that answers the question. 12.5% of 72 is 9.

      TRY IT 6.107 Translate and solve using proportions: What percent of is
      TRY IT 6.108 Translate and solve using proportions: What percent of is

        SECTION 6.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Definition of Proportion

In the following exercises, write each sentence as a proportion.

243. is to as is to               244. is to as is to             245. is to as is to

246. is to as is to               247. wins in     games is the   248. wins in            games is the
                                          same as    wins in              same as         wins in
                                          games.                          games.

249. campers to counselor         250. campers to counselor       251.           for          ounces is the
        is the same as                    is the same as                                         for
        campers to counselors.            campers to counselors.                 same as

                                                                                 ounces.

252.  for      ounces is the      253.  for pounds is             254.           for pounds is
                   for
      same as                           the same as    for                       the same as  for

      ounces.                           pounds.                                  pounds.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 529

In the following exercises, determine whether each equation is a proportion.

255.                                256.                                257.

258.                                259.                                260.

261.                                262.

Solve Proportions

In the following exercises, solve each proportion.

263.                                264.                                265.

266.                                267.                                268.

269.                                270.                                271.

272.                                273.                                274.

275.                                276.                                277.

278.

Solve Applications Using Proportions

In the following exercises, solve the proportion problem.

279. Pediatricians prescribe        280. Brianna, who weighs kg,        281. At the gym, Carol takes
        milliliters (ml) of                 just received her shots             her pulse for sec and
        acetaminophen for every             and needs a pain killer.            counts beats. How
            pounds of a child's             The pain killer is                  many beats per minute is
        weight. How many                    prescribed for children at          this? Has Carol met her
        milliliters of                          milligrams (mg) for             target heart rate of
        acetaminophen will the              every kilogram (kg) of              beats per minute?
        doctor prescribe for                the child's weight. How
        Jocelyn, who weighs                 many milligrams will the    284. One ounce can of soda
        pounds?                             doctor prescribe?                   has calories. If Josiah
                                                                                drinks the big ounce
282. Kevin wants to keep his        283. A new energy drink                     size from the local mini-
        heart rate at beats                 advertises calories for             mart, how many calories
        per minute while training.            ounces. How many                  does he get?
        During his workout he               calories are in ounces
        counts beats in                     of the drink?               287. Janice is traveling to
        seconds. How many beats                                                 Canada and will change
        per minute is this? Has                                                         US dollars into
        Kevin met his target heart                                              Canadian dollars. At the
        rate?                                                                   current exchange rate,
                                                                                US is equal to
285. Karen eats cup of              286. An oatmeal cookie recipe               Canadian. How many
                                            calls for cup of butter             Canadian dollars will she
        oatmeal that counts for                                                 get for her trip?
        points on her weight loss           to make dozen cookies.
        program. Her husband,               Hilda needs to make
        Joe, can have points of             dozen cookies for the
        oatmeal for breakfast.              bake sale. How many
        How much oatmeal can                cups of butter will she
        he have?                            need?
530 6 · Percents

288. Todd is traveling to                289. Steve changed      into        290. Martha changed      US

Mexico and needs to                      Euros. How many                     into Australian

exchange          into                   Euros did he receive per            dollars. How many

Mexican pesos. If each                   US dollar?                          Australian dollars did she

dollar is worth                                                              receive per US dollar?

pesos, how many pesos

will he get for his trip?

291. At the laundromat, Lucy             292. When she arrived at a          293. Jesse's car gets miles
                                                 casino, Gerty changed               per gallon of gas. If Las
changed              into                              into nickels. How             Vegas is miles away,
                                                 many nickels did she get?           how many gallons of gas
quarters. How many                                                                   are needed to get there
                                                                                     and then home? If gas is
quarters did she get?                                                                        per gallon, what is
                                                                                     the total cost of the gas
294. Danny wants to drive to             295. Hugh leaves early one                  for the trip?
                                                 morning to drive from his
Phoenix to see his                               home in Chicago to go to    296. Kelly leaves her home in
                                                 Mount Rushmore,                     Seattle to drive to
grandfather. Phoenix is                          miles away. After hours,            Spokane, a distance of
                                                 he has gone miles. At                     miles. After hours,
                  miles from Danny's             that rate, how long will            she has gone miles.
                                                 the whole drive take?               At that rate, how long will
home and his car gets                                                                the whole drive take?

                  miles per gallon.

How many gallons of gas

will Danny need to get to

and from Phoenix? If gas

is                per gallon, what

is the total cost for the

gas to drive to see his

grandfather?

297. Phil wants to fertilize his         298. April wants to paint the
        lawn. Each bag of                        exterior of her house.
        fertilizer covers about                  One gallon of paint covers
                square feet of lawn.             about square feet,
        Phil's lawn is                           and the exterior of the
        approximately                            house measures
        square feet. How many                    approximately
        bags of fertilizer will he               square feet. How many
        have to buy?                             gallons of paint will she
                                                 have to buy?

Write Percent Equations as Proportions

In the following exercises, translate to a proportion.

299. What number is              of      300. What number is     of          301. What number is      of

302. What number is                  of  303. is     of what                 304. is  of what

                                         number?                             number?

305. is           of what                306. is        of what              307. What percent of is

number?                                  number?

308. What percent of is                  309. What percent of is             310. What percent of is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          6.5 · Solve Proportions and their Applications 531

Translate and Solve Percent Proportions

In the following exercises, translate and solve using proportions.

311. What number is  of        312. What number is            of    313.  of is what

                                                                          number?

314.  of is what               315.      of          is what        316.  of       is what
                                                        of
      number?                        number?                              number?

317. What is   of              318. What is                         319.  of what number is

320.  of what number is        321.      is               of what   322.  is       of what

                                     number?                              number?

323. What percent of is        324. What percent of is              325. What percent of is
326. What percent of is

Everyday Math

327. Mixing a concentrate Sam bought a large bottle       328. Mixing a concentrate Travis is going to wash his
        of concentrated cleaning solution at the                  car. The directions on the bottle of car wash
        warehouse store. He must mix the concentrate              concentrate say to mix ounces of concentrate
        with water to make a solution for washing his             with ounces of water. If Travis puts ounces
        windows. The directions tell him to mix ounces            of concentrate in a bucket, how much water
        of concentrate with ounces of water. If he puts           must he mix with the concentrate?
            ounces of concentrate in a bucket, how many
        ounces of water should he add? How many
        ounces of the solution will he have altogether?

Writing Exercises

329. To solve "what number is  of        do you           330. To solve "what percent of is do you
                                                                  prefer to use an equation like you did in the
      prefer to use an equation like you did in the               section on Decimal Operations or a proportion
                                                                  like you did in this section? Explain your reason.
      section on Decimal Operations or a proportion

      like you did in this section? Explain your reason.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?
532 6 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

commission A commission is a percentage of total sales as determined by the rate of commission.

discount An amount of discount is a percent off the original price, determined by the discount rate.

mark-up The mark-up is the amount added to the wholesale price, determined by the mark-up rate.

percent A perfecnt is a ratio whose denominator is .

percent decrease The percent decrease is the percent the amount of decrease is of the original amount.

percent increase The percent increase is the percent the amount of increase is of the original amount.

proportion A proportion is an equation of the form           , where  ,     .The proportion states two ratios or

rates are equal. The proportion is read " is to , as is to ".

sales tax The sales tax is a percent of the purchase price.

simple interest If an amount of money, , the principal, is invested for a period of years at an annual interest rate ,

the amount of interest, , earned is             . Interest earned according to this formula is called simple interest.

Key Concepts

6.1 Understand Percent

  · Convert a percent to a fraction.
      Step 1. Write the percent as a ratio with the denominator 100.
      Step 2. Simplify the fraction if possible.

· Convert a percent to a decimal.
    Step 1. Write the percent as a ratio with the denominator 100.
    Step 2. Convert the fraction to a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator.

· Convert a decimal to a percent.
    Step 1. Write the decimal as a fraction.
    Step 2. If the denominator of the fraction is not 100, rewrite it as an equivalent fraction with denominator 100.
    Step 3. Write this ratio as a percent.

· Convert a fraction to a percent.
    Step 1. Convert the fraction to a decimal.
    Step 2. Convert the decimal to a percent.

6.2 Solve General Applications of Percent

  · Solve an application.
      Step 1. Identify what you are asked to find and choose a variable to represent it.
      Step 2. Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.
      Step 3. Translate the sentence into an equation.
      Step 4. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 5. Write a complete sentence that answers the question.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

· Find percent increase.
    Step 1. Find the amount of increase:

    Step 2. Find the percent increase as a percent of the original amount.

· Find percent decrease.
    Step 1. Find the amount of decrease.

      Step 2. Find the percent decrease as a percent of the original amount.

6.3 Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications

  · Sales Tax The sales tax is a percent of the purchase price.
      
      

  · Commission A commission is a percentage of total sales as determined by the rate of commission.
      

  · Discount An amount of discount is a percent off the original price, determined by the discount rate.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           6 · Exercises 533

      
      

· Mark-up The mark-up is the amount added to the wholesale price, determined by the mark-up rate.
   
   

6.4 Solve Simple Interest Applications

  · Simple interest
       If an amount of money, , the principal, is invested for a period of years at an annual interest rate , the

           amount of interest, , earned is
       Interest earned according to this formula is called simple interest.

6.5 Solve Proportions and their Applications

· Proportion

       A proportion is an equation of the form          , where       ,  .The proportion states two ratios or rates are

        equal. The proportion is read " is to , as is to ".

· Cross Products of a Proportion

       For any proportion of the form          , where       , its cross products are equal:  .

· Percent Proportion
    The amount is to the base as the percent is to 100.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Understand Percent

In the following exercises, write each percent as a ratio.

331.       admission rate for         332.         rate of college

        the university                      students with student

                                            loans

In the following exercises, write as a ratio and then as a percent.

333. out of architects                334. out of every      nurses
        are women.                            are men.

In the following exercises, convert each percent to a fraction.

335.                                  336.                               337.

338.

In the following exercises, convert each percent to a decimal.

339.                                  340.                               341.

342. 4.9%

In the following exercises, convert each percent to  a simplified fraction and  a decimal.

343. In                 of the        344. In               of the       345. When a die is tossed, the
                                                                                 probability it will land
        United States population            United States population             with an even number of
                                                                                 dots on the top side is
        was age or over.                    was under years old.

        (Source: www.census.gov)            (Source: www.census.gov)

346. A couple plans to have
        three children. The
        probability they will all be
        girls is
534 6 · Exercises

In the following exercises, convert each decimal to a percent.

347.                                  348.                                   349.
                                                                             352.
350.                                  351.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a percent.

353.                                  354.                                   355.

356.                                  357. According to the Centers          358. According to the Centers
                                                                                     for Disease Control,
                                            for Disease Control, of                  among adults who do
                                                                                     take a vitamin or
                                            adults do not take a                     supplement, take a
                                            vitamin or supplement.                   multivitamin.

In the following exercises, translate and solve.

359. What number is              of   360.          of  is what              361. is        of what

                                            number?                                number?

362. is of what number? 363.                        of what number is        364.     of what number is

365. What percent of is               366. What percent of is

Solve General Applications of Percents

In the following exercises, solve.

367. When Aurelio and his             368. One granola bar has               369. The nutrition label on a
                                              grams of fiber, which is               package of granola bars
      family ate dinner at a                       of the recommended                says that each granola
                                              daily amount. What is the              bar has calories, and
      restaurant, the bill was                total recommended daily                    calories are from fat.
                                              amount of fiber?                       What percent of the total
              Aurelio wants to                                                       calories is from fat?

      leave        of the total bill

      as a tip. How much

      should the tip be?

370. Elsa gets paid              per

      month. Her car payment

      is      What percent of

      her monthly pay goes to

      her car payment?

In the following exercises, solve.

371. Jorge got a raise in his         372. Last year Bernard bought
                                              a new car for
      hourly pay, from                        This year the car is worth
                                                           Find the percent
      to           Find the                   decrease.

      percent increase.

Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications

In the following exercises, find  the sales tax  the total cost.

373. The cost of a lawn mower         374. The cost of a water heater

      was          The sales tax            is          The sales tax rate

      rate is of the purchase               is          of the purchase

      price.                                price.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            6 · Exercises 535

In the following exercises, find the sales tax rate.

375. Andy bought a piano for           376. Nahomi bought a purse
                   The sales tax on
                                       for            The sales tax on
        the purchase was
                                       the purchase was

In the following exercises, find the commission.

377. Ginny is a realtor. She           378. Jackson receives
        receives commission                    commission when he sells
        when she sells a house.                a dinette set. How much
        How much commission                    commission will he
        will she receive for selling           receive for selling a
        a house for                            dinette set for

In the following exercises, find the rate of commission.

379. Ruben received                    380. Tori received       for

commission when he sold                selling a

a  painting at the                     membership at her gym.

art gallery where he                   What was her rate of

works. What was the rate               commission?

of commission?

In the following exercises, find the sale price.

381. Aya bought a pair of              382. Takwanna saw a
        shoes that was on sale for
              off. The original price  cookware set she liked on
        of the shoes was
                                       sale for            off. The

                                       original price of the

                                       cookware was

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount and  the sale price.

383. Nga bought a microwave            384. Jarrett bought a tie that

for her office. The                    was discounted           from

microwave was                          an original price of

discounted           from an

original price of

In the following exercises, find  the amount of discount  the discount rate. (Round to the nearest tenth of a percent if
needed.)

385. Hilda bought a bedspread          386. Tyler bought a phone on

on sale for          The               sale for            The

original price of the                  original price of the

bedspread was                          phone was

In the following exercises, find        the list price     387. Manny paid     a

 the amount of the mark-up                                      pound for apples. He

                                                                added        mark-up

                                                                before selling them at his

                                                                produce stand. What

                                                                price did he charge for

                                                                the apples?
536 6 · Exercises

388. It cost Noelle              for

      the materials she used to

      make a purse. She added

      a        mark-up before

      selling it at her friend's

      store. What price did she

      ask for the purse?

Solve Simple Interest Applications

In the following exercises, solve the simple interest problem.

389. Find the simple interest         390. Find the simple interest       391. Find the principal
        earned after years on                 earned after years on
                  invested at an                          invested at an        invested if        interest
        interest rate of                      interest rate of
                                                                                was earned in years at

                                                                                an interest rate of

392. Find the interest rate if        393. Kazuo deposited                394. Brent invested            in
                  interest was
                                            in a bank account with              a friend's business. In
        earned from a principal of
                    invested for            interest rate   How                 years the friend paid him

        years.                              much interest was earned            the          plus

                                            in years?                           interest. What was the

                                                                                rate of interest?

395. Fresia lent her son              396. In years, a bond that

      for college expenses.                 paid    earned

      Three years later he                  interest. What was the

      repaid her the                        principal of the bond?

      plus         interest. What

      was the rate of interest?

Solve Proportions and their Applications

In the following exercises, write each sentence as a proportion.

397. is to as is to                   398. miles to gallons is            399. teacher to students
                                              the same as miles to                is the same as
                                                  gallons.                        teachers to students.

400.        for    ounces is the
                      for
      same as

      ounces.

In the following exercises, determine whether each equation is a proportion.

401.                                  402.                                403.

404.

In the following exercises, solve each proportion.

405.                                  406.                                407.

408.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          6 · Exercises 537

In the following exercises, solve the proportion problem.

409. The children's dosage of       410. After a workout, Dennis      411. An ounce serving of ice
        acetaminophen is                    takes his pulse for sec           cream has calories. If
        milliliters (ml) for every          and counts beats. How             Lavonne eats ounces
        pounds of a child's                 many beats per minute is          of ice cream, how many
        weight. How many                    this?                             calories does she get?
        milliliters of
        acetaminophen will be
        prescribed for a pound
        child?

412. Alma is going to Europe        413. Zack wants to drive from     414. Teresa is planning a party
                                            Omaha to Denver, a                for people. Each
      and wants to exchange                 distance of miles. If             gallon of punch will serve
                                            his car gets miles to                 people. How many
             into Euros. If each            the gallon, how many              gallons of punch will she
                                            gallons of gas will Zack          need?
      dollar is  Euros, how                 need to get to Denver?

      many Euros will Alma get?

In the following exercises, translate to a proportion.

415. What number is         of      416. is          of what          417. What percent of            is

                                          number?

418. What percent of is

In the following exercises, translate and solve using proportions.

419. What number is         of      420. of what number is            421.  is           of what

                                                                            number?

422. What percent of        is

Practice Test

In the following exercises, convert each percent to  a decimal  a simplified fraction.

423.                                424.                              425.

In the following exercises, convert each fraction to a percent. (Round to decimal places if needed.)

426.                                427.                              428.

In the following exercises, solve the percent problem.

429. is what percent of             430. What number is       of      431.  of what number is

432. Yuki's monthly paycheck        433. The total number of          434. Kyle bought a bicycle in

      is         She pays                 vehicles on one freeway           Denver where the sales

      for rent. What percent of           dropped from        to            tax was      of the

      her paycheck goes to                   Find the percent               purchase price. The

      rent?                               decrease (round to the            purchase price of the

                                          nearest tenth of a                bicycle was     What

                                          percent).                         was the total cost?
538 6 · Exercises

435. Mara received               436. Kiyoshi bought a                437. Oxana bought a dresser

commission when she              television set on sale for           at a garage sale for

sold a             suit. What         The original price              She refinished it, then

was her rate of                  was  Find:                           added a  markup

commission?                       the amount of                       before advertising it for

                                 discount                             sale. What price did she

                                  the discount rate                   ask for the dresser?

                                 (round to the nearest

                                 tenth of a percent)

438. Find the simple interest    439. Brenda borrowed                 440. Write as a proportion:
        earned after years on            from her brother. Two                gallons to miles is the
                 invested at an          years later, she repaid the          same as gallons to
        interest rate of                         plus interest.               miles.
                                         What was the rate of
441. Solve for a:                        interest?

                                 442. Vin read pages of a
                                         book in minutes. At
                                         that rate, how long will it
                                         take him to read
                                         pages?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     7 · Introduction to the Properties of Real Numbers 539

7  THE PROPERTIES OF REAL NUMBERS

Figure 7.1 Quiltmakers know that by rearranging the same basic blocks the resulting quilts can look very different. What
happens when we rearrange the numbers in an expression? Does the resulting value change? We will answer these
questions in this chapter as we will learn about the properties of numbers. (credit: Hans, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  7.1 Rational and Irrational Numbers
  7.2 Commutative and Associative Properties
  7.3 Distributive Property
  7.4 Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero
  7.5 Systems of Measurement

      Introduction to the Properties of Real Numbers

A quilt is formed by sewing many different pieces of fabric together. The pieces can vary in color, size, and shape. The
combinations of different kinds of pieces provide for an endless possibility of patterns. Much like the pieces of fabric,
mathematicians distinguish among different types of numbers. The kinds of numbers in an expression provide for an
endless possibility of outcomes. We have already described counting numbers, whole numbers, and integers. In this
chapter, we will learn about other types of numbers and their properties.

7.1 Rational and Irrational Numbers

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Identify rational numbers and irrational numbers
           Classify different types of real numbers

   BE PREPARED 7.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                    Write  as an improper fraction.

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.4.

   BE PREPARED 7.2  Write as a decimal.
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.30.

   BE PREPARED 7.3  Simplify:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 5.69.
540 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

     Identify Rational Numbers and Irrational Numbers

       Congratulations! You have completed the first six chapters of this book! It's time to take stock of what you have done so
       far in this course and think about what is ahead. You have learned how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide whole
       numbers, fractions, integers, and decimals. You have become familiar with the language and symbols of algebra, and
       have simplified and evaluated algebraic expressions. You have solved many different types of applications. You have
       established a good solid foundation that you need so you can be successful in algebra.
       In this chapter, we'll make sure your skills are firmly set. We'll take another look at the kinds of numbers we have worked
       with in all previous chapters. We'll work with properties of numbers that will help you improve your number sense. And
       we'll practice using them in ways that we'll use when we solve equations and complete other procedures in algebra.
       We have already described numbers as counting numbers, whole numbers, and integers. Do you remember what the
       difference is among these types of numbers?

                                                          counting numbers

                                                          whole numbers

                                                          integers

      Rational Numbers

       What type of numbers would you get if you started with all the integers and then included all the fractions? The numbers
       you would have form the set of rational numbers. A rational number is a number that can be written as a ratio of two
       integers.

         Rational Numbers

         A rational number is a number that can be written in the form where and are integers and

       All fractions, both positive and negative, are rational numbers. A few examples are

Each numerator and each denominator is an integer.

We need to look at all the numbers we have used so far and verify that they are rational. The definition of rational
numbers tells us that all fractions are rational. We will now look at the counting numbers, whole numbers, integers, and
decimals to make sure they are rational.

Are integers rational numbers? To decide if an integer is a rational number, we try to write it as a ratio of two integers. An
easy way to do this is to write it as a fraction with denominator one.

Since any integer can be written as the ratio of two integers, all integers are rational numbers. Remember that all the
counting numbers and all the whole numbers are also integers, and so they, too, are rational.

What about decimals? Are they rational? Let's look at a few to see if we can write each of them as the ratio of two
integers. We've already seen that integers are rational numbers. The integer could be written as the decimal
So, clearly, some decimals are rational.

Think about the decimal          Can we write it as a ratio of two integers? Because means  we can write it as an
improper fraction, So            is the ratio of the integers and It is a rational number.

In general, any decimal that ends after a number of digits (such as or  is a rational number. We can use the

reciprocal (or multiplicative inverse) of the place value of the last digit as the denominator when writing the decimal as a

fraction.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               7.1 · Rational and Irrational Numbers 541

EXAMPLE 7.1

Write each as the ratio of two integers:             

Solution



Write the integer as a fraction with denominator 1.



Write the decimal as a mixed number.
Then convert it to an improper fraction.



Convert the mixed number to an improper fraction.

       TRY IT 7.1 Write each as the ratio of two integers:   

       TRY IT 7.2 Write each as the ratio of two integers:   

Let's look at the decimal form of the numbers we know are rational. We have seen that every integer is a rational

number, since  for any integer, We can also change any integer to a decimal by adding a decimal point and a

zero.

We have also seen that every fraction is a rational number. Look at the decimal form of the fractions we just considered.

What do these examples tell you? Every rational number can be written both as a ratio of integers and as a decimal that
either stops or repeats. The table below shows the numbers we looked at expressed as a ratio of integers and as a
decimal.
542 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

                                            Rational Numbers

                                            Fractions         Integers

                   Number

                   Ratio of Integer

                   Decimal number

Irrational Numbers

Are there any decimals that do not stop or repeat? Yes. The number (the Greek letter pi, pronounced `pie'), which is very
important in describing circles, has a decimal form that does not stop or repeat.

Similarly, the decimal representations of square roots of whole numbers that are not perfect squares never stop and
never repeat. For example,

A decimal that does not stop and does not repeat cannot be written as the ratio of integers. We call this kind of number
an irrational number.

  Irrational Number

  An irrational number is a number that cannot be written as the ratio of two integers. Its decimal form does not stop
  and does not repeat.

Let's summarize a method we can use to determine whether a number is rational or irrational.

If the decimal form of a number

  · stops or repeats, the number is rational.
  · does not stop and does not repeat, the number is irrational.

EXAMPLE 7.2

Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:

 Solution                                                   is a repeating decimal, and is therefore a rational number.

                   indicates that it repeats. Therefore,
The bar above the



This decimal stops after the , so it is a rational number.

              means that this number does not stop. There is no repeating pattern of digits. Since the number doesn't

The ellipsis

stop and doesn't repeat, it is irrational.

TRY IT 7.3         Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:

                    

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           7.1 · Rational and Irrational Numbers 543

  TRY IT 7.4    Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:

                 

Let's think about square roots now. Square roots of perfect squares are always whole numbers, so they are rational. But
the decimal forms of square roots of numbers that are not perfect squares never stop and never repeat, so these square
roots are irrational.

EXAMPLE 7.3

Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:

            

  Solution

 The number is a perfect square, since                     So  Therefore   is rational.

 Remember that                and    so  is not a perfect square.

This means    is irrational.

  TRY IT 7.5    Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:
  TRY IT 7.6
                                   

                Identify each of the following as rational or irrational:

                                   

Classify Real Numbers

We have seen that all counting numbers are whole numbers, all whole numbers are integers, and all integers are
rational numbers. Irrational numbers are a separate category of their own. When we put together the rational numbers
and the irrational numbers, we get the set of real numbers.

Figure 7.2 illustrates how the number sets are related.

              Figure 7.2 This diagram illustrates the relationships between the different types of real numbers.
Real Numbers
Real numbers are numbers that are either rational or irrational.
544 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

Does the term "real numbers" seem strange to you? Are there any numbers that are not "real", and, if so, what could they
be? For centuries, the only numbers people knew about were what we now call the real numbers. Then mathematicians
discovered the set of imaginary numbers. You won't encounter imaginary numbers in this course, but you will later on in
your studies of algebra.

EXAMPLE 7.4

Determine whether each of the numbers in the following list is a   whole number,    integer,   rational number,
 irrational number, and  real number.

Solution

 The whole numbers are                  The number is the only whole number given.

 The integers are the whole numbers, their opposites, and From the given numbers,   and are integers. Also,

notice that is the square of so          So the integers are

 Since all integers are rational, the numbers                are also rational. Rational numbers also include
                                                         are rational.
fractions and decimals that terminate or repeat, so

 The number is not a perfect square, so  is irrational.
 All of the numbers listed are real.

We'll summarize the results in a table.

                                 Number Whole Integer Rational Irrational Real

TRY IT 7.7   Determine whether each number is a          whole number,   integer,   rational number, 
             irrational number, and  real number:

TRY IT 7.8   Determine whether each number is a          whole number,   integer,   rational number, 
             irrational number, and  real number:

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Sets of Real Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24RealNumber)
Real Numbers (http://www.openstax.org/l/24RealNumbers)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         7.1 · Rational and Irrational Numbers 545

        SECTION 7.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Rational Numbers

In the following exercises, write as the ratio of two integers.

1.                        2.                                      3.                 
4.         

In the following exercises, determine which of the given numbers are rational and which are irrational.

5.    ,     ,             6.    ,                       ,         7.       ,             ,

8.               ,

In the following exercises, identify whether each number is rational or irrational.

9.                        10.                                     11.                  

12.            

Classifying Real Numbers

In the following exercises, determine whether each number is whole, integer, rational, irrational, and real.

13. ,               ,, ,                                   14. ,  ,     ,            ,,

15.      ,, ,, ,

Everyday Math                                              17. Child care Serena wants to open a licensed child
                                                                 care center. Her state requires that there be no
16. Field trip All the graders at Lincoln                        more than children for each teacher. She would
      Elementary School will go on a field trip to the           like her child care center to serve children.
      science museum. Counting all the children,                  How many teachers will be needed?
      teachers, and chaperones, there will be
      people. Each bus holds people.                              Why must the answer be a whole number?

    How many buses will be needed?                                Why shouldn't you round the answer the usual
    Why must the answer be a whole number?                       way?
    Why shouldn't you round the answer the

      usual way?

Writing Exercises

18. In your own words, explain the difference              19. Explain how the sets of numbers (counting, whole,
      between a rational number and an irrational                integer, rational, irrationals, reals) are related to
      number.                                                    each other.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
546 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

7.2 Commutative and Associative Properties

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the commutative and associative properties
           Evaluate expressions using the commutative and associative properties
           Simplify expressions using the commutative and associative properties

       BE PREPARED 7.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.22.

BE PREPARED 7.5                         Multiply:
                                        If you missed this problem, review Example 4.28.

BE PREPARED 7.6                         Find the opposite of
                                        If you missed this problem, review Example 3.3.

In the next few sections, we will take a look at the properties of real numbers. Many of these properties will describe
things you already know, but it will help to give names to the properties and define them formally. This way we'll be able
to refer to them and use them as we solve equations in the next chapter.

Use the Commutative and Associative Properties

Think about adding two numbers, such as and

The results are the same.
Notice, the order in which we add does not matter. The same is true when multiplying and

Again, the results are the same!        The order in which we multiply does not matter.

These examples illustrate the commutative properties of addition and multiplication.

Commutative Properties

Commutative Property of Addition: if and are real numbers, then

Commutative Property of Multiplication: if and are real numbers, then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          7.2 · Commutative and Associative Properties 547

The commutative properties have to do with order. If you change the order of the numbers when adding or multiplying,
the result is the same.

  EXAMPLE 7.5

Use the commutative properties to rewrite the following expressions:

               

  Solution

  

  Use the commutative property of addition to change the order.

  

  Use the commutative property of multiplication to change the order.

    TRY IT 7.9 Use the commutative properties to rewrite the following:

                   

    TRY IT 7.10 Use the commutative properties to rewrite the following:

                     

What about subtraction? Does order matter when we subtract numbers? Does  give the same result as

Since changing the order of the subtraction did not give the same result, we can say that subtraction is not commutative.
Let's see what happens when we divide two numbers. Is division commutative?

Since changing the order of the division did not give the same result, division is not commutative.
Addition and multiplication are commutative. Subtraction and division are not commutative.
Suppose you were asked to simplify this expression.
548 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

How would you do it and what would your answer be?

Some people would think                 and then          Others might start with  and then

Both ways give the same result, as shown in Figure 7.3. (Remember that parentheses are grouping symbols that indicate
which operations should be done first.)

                                                                              Figure 7.3
When adding three numbers, changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. This is known as the
Associative Property of Addition.
The same principle holds true for multiplication as well. Suppose we want to find the value of the following expression:

Changing the grouping of the numbers gives the same result, as shown in Figure 7.4.

                                                                              Figure 7.4
When multiplying three numbers, changing the grouping of the numbers does not change the result. This is known as
the Associative Property of Multiplication.
If we multiply three numbers, changing the grouping does not affect the product.
You probably know this, but the terminology may be new to you. These examples illustrate the Associative Properties.

  Associative Properties

  Associative Property of Addition: if and are real numbers, then

  Associative Property of Multiplication: if and are real numbers, then

  EXAMPLE 7.6

Use the associative properties to rewrite the following:

                                        

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                7.2 · Commutative and Associative Properties 549

  Solution



Change the grouping.

Notice that  is so the addition will be easier if we group as shown on the right.

 

Change the grouping.

Notice that  is The multiplication will be easier if we group as shown on the right.

TRY IT 7.11           Use the associative properties to rewrite the following:

                                                             

TRY IT 7.12           Use the associative properties to rewrite the following:

                                                             

Besides using the associative properties to make calculations easier, we will often use it to simplify expressions with
variables.

  EXAMPLE 7.7
Use the Associative Property of Multiplication to simplify:

     Solution

Change the grouping.
Multiply in the parentheses.

Notice that we can multiply   but we could not multiply      without having a value for

       TRY IT 7.13 Use the Associative Property of Multiplication to simplify the given expression:

       TRY IT 7.14 Use the Associative Property of Multiplication to simplify the given expression:

Evaluate Expressions using the Commutative and Associative Properties

The commutative and associative properties can make it easier to evaluate some algebraic expressions. Since order does
not matter when adding or multiplying three or more terms, we can rearrange and re-group terms to make our work
easier, as the next several examples illustrate.
550 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

         EXAMPLE 7.8
       Evaluate each expression when

     Solution 
     

  Substitute for .
  Convert fractions to decimals.
  Add left to right.
  Subtract.

  

  Substitute for x.

  Add opposites first.

What was the difference between part    and part  ? Only the order changed. By the Commutative Property of
                                          But wasn't part  much easier?
Addition,

    TRY IT 7.15 Evaluate each expression when        
                                                       
    TRY IT 7.16 Evaluate each expression when      

Let's do one more, this time with multiplication.

  EXAMPLE 7.9

Evaluate each expression when

            

  Solution

  

Access for free at openstax.org
                                              7.2 · Commutative and Associative Properties 551

Substitute 17 for n.
Multiply in the parentheses first.
Multiply again.



Substitute 17 for n.

Multiply. The product of reciprocals is 1.
Multiply again.

What was the difference between part  and part  here? Only the grouping changed. By the Associative Property
of Multiplication,                  By carefully choosing how to group the factors, we can make the work easier.

TRY IT 7.17 Evaluate each expression when     

TRY IT 7.18 Evaluate each expression when     

Simplify Expressions Using the Commutative and Associative Properties

When we have to simplify algebraic expressions, we can often make the work easier by applying the Commutative or
Associative Property first instead of automatically following the order of operations. Notice that in Example 7.8 part 
was easier to simplify than part  because the opposites were next to each other and their sum is Likewise, part  in
Example 7.9 was easier, with the reciprocals grouped together, because their product is In the next few examples, we'll
use our number sense to look for ways to apply these properties to make our work easier.

EXAMPLE 7.10

Simplify:

     Solution
Notice the first and third terms are opposites, so we can use the commutative property of addition to reorder the terms.

Re-order the terms.
Add left to right.
Add.
552 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

              TRY IT 7.19 Simplify:
              TRY IT 7.20 Simplify:
       Now we will see how recognizing reciprocals is helpful. Before multiplying left to right, look for reciprocals--their product
       is
         EXAMPLE 7.11
       Simplify:
            Solution
       Notice the first and third terms are reciprocals, so we can use the Commutative Property of Multiplication to reorder the
       factors.

         Re-order the terms.
         Multiply left to right.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 7.21 Simplify:
              TRY IT 7.22 Simplify:
       In expressions where we need to add or subtract three or more fractions, combine those with a common denominator
       first.
         EXAMPLE 7.12
       Simplify:
            Solution
       Notice that the second and third terms have a common denominator, so this work will be easier if we change the
       grouping.

         Group the terms with a common denominator.
         Add in the parentheses first.
         Simplify the fraction.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           7.2 · Commutative and Associative Properties 553

Add.
Convert to an improper fraction.

       TRY IT 7.23 Simplify:

       TRY IT 7.24 Simplify:

When adding and subtracting three or more terms involving decimals, look for terms that combine to give whole
numbers.

  EXAMPLE 7.13
Simplify:

     Solution
Notice that the sum of the second and third coefficients is a whole number.

Change the grouping.
Add in the parentheses first.
Add.

Many people have good number sense when they deal with money. Think about adding  cents and cent. Do you see
how this applies to adding

TRY IT 7.25 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.26 Simplify:

No matter what you are doing, it is always a good idea to think ahead. When simplifying an expression, think about what
your steps will be. The next example will show you how using the Associative Property of Multiplication can make your
work easier if you plan ahead.

EXAMPLE 7.14

Simplify the expression:       is easier than multiplying  because it gives a whole number. (Think about having

     Solution
Notice that multiplying

  quarters--that makes

Regroup.
554 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

Multiply in the brackets first.
Multiply.

       TRY IT 7.27 Simplify:

       TRY IT 7.28 Simplify:
When simplifying expressions that contain variables, we can use the commutative and associative properties to re-order
or regroup terms, as shown in the next pair of examples.

  EXAMPLE 7.15
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use the associative property of multiplication to re-group.
  Multiply in the parentheses.

TRY IT 7.29 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.30 Simplify:

In The Language of Algebra, we learned to combine like terms by rearranging an expression so the like terms were

together. We simplified the expression  by rewriting it as                             and then simplified it to

We were using the Commutative Property of Addition.

EXAMPLE 7.16

Simplify:

     Solution
Use the Commutative Property of Addition to re-order so that like terms are together.

Re-order terms.
Combine like terms.

TRY IT 7.31 Simplify:
TRY IT 7.32 Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           7.2 · Commutative and Associative Properties 555

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity, "Each Orange Had 8 Slices" will provide you with another view of the topics covered in
this section.

        SECTION 7.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, use the commutative properties to rewrite the given expression.

20.                                    21.                 22.

23.                                    24.                 25.

26.                                    27.                 28.

29.                                    30.                 31.

In the following exercises, use the associative properties to rewrite the given expression.

32.                                    33.                 34.

35.                                    36.                 37.

38.                                    39.                 40.

41.                                    42.                 43.

Evaluate Expressions using the Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression for the given value.

44. If  evaluate:                      45. If  evaluate:   46. If            evaluate:
          evaluate:                                                        evaluate:
            evaluate:                          evaluate:      
                                                              
                                                  
47. If                                 48. If              49. If
                                                evaluate:
                                                              
                                                              
                                       51. If
50. If
                                          
                                          
   

Simplify Expressions Using the Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, simplify.

52.                                    53.                 54.

55.                                    56.                 57.

58.                                    59.                 60.

61.                                    62.                 63.

64.                                    65.                 66.
556 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

67.                                     68.                 69.

70.                                     71.                 72.

73.                                     74.                 75.

76.                                     77.                 78.

79.                                     80.                      81.

82.                                     83.                 84.

85.

Everyday Math

86. Stamps Allie and Loren need to buy stamps. Allie        87. Counting Cash Grant is totaling up the cash from
                                                                  a fundraising dinner. In one envelope, he has
     needs four    stamps and nine           stamps.              twenty-three bills, eighteen bills, and
                                                                  thirty-four bills. In another envelope, he has
     Loren needs eight  stamps and three                          fourteen bills, nine bills, and twenty-seven
                                                                        bills.
     stamps.                                                       How much money is in the first envelope?

      How much will Allie's stamps cost?                           How much money is in the second envelope?

      How much will Loren's stamps cost?                           What is the total value of all the cash?

      What is the total cost of the girls' stamps?                 What is the value of all the bills?

      How many          stamps do the girls need                   What is the value of all bills?

     altogether? How much will they cost?                          What is the value of all bills?

      How many          stamps do the girls need

     altogether? How much will they cost?

Writing Exercises

88. In your own words, state the Commutative                89. In your own words, state the Associative Property
      Property of Addition and explain why it is useful.          of Multiplication and explain why it is useful.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

7.3 Distributive Property

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions using the distributive property
           Evaluate expressions using the distributive property

       BE PREPARED 7.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
                                           Multiply:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          7.3 · Distributive Property 557

                       If you missed this problem, review Example 5.15

    BE PREPARED 7.8    Simplify:
                       If you missed this problem, review Example 3.51

    BE PREPARED 7.9    Combine like terms:
                       If you missed this problem, review Example 2.22.

Simplify Expressions Using the Distributive Property

Suppose three friends are going to the movies. They each need  that is, dollars and       quarter. How much money

do they need all together? You can think about the dollars separately from the quarters.

They need times so     and times quarter, so cents. In total, they need

If you think about doing the math in this way, you are using the Distributive Property.

Distributive Property

If         are real numbers, then

Back to our friends at the movies, we could show the math steps we take to find the total amount of money they need
like this:

In algebra, we use the Distributive Property to remove parentheses as we simplify expressions. For example, if we are

asked to simplify the expression   the order of operations says to work in the parentheses first. But we cannot

add and since they are not like terms. So we use the Distributive Property, as shown in Example 7.17.

EXAMPLE 7.17

Simplify:
558 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

            Solution

         Distribute.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 7.33 Simplify:
              TRY IT 7.34 Simplify:
       Some students find it helpful to draw in arrows to remind them how to use the Distributive Property. Then the first step
       in Example 7.17 would look like this:

         EXAMPLE 7.18
       Simplify:

            Solution

Distribute.
Multiply.

    TRY IT 7.35 Simplify:

    TRY IT 7.36 Simplify:

The distributive property can be used to simplify expressions that look slightly different from  Here are two
other forms.

Distributive Property

If  are real numbers, then

Other forms

Access for free at openstax.org
                              7.3 · Distributive Property 559

  EXAMPLE 7.19
Simplify:

     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 7.37 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.38 Simplify:
Do you remember how to multiply a fraction by a whole number? We'll need to do that in the next two examples.
  EXAMPLE 7.20
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.39 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.40 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 7.21
Simplify:
560 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

            Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 7.41 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.42 Simplify:
Using the Distributive Property as shown in the next example will be very useful when we solve money applications later.
  EXAMPLE 7.22
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.

       TRY IT 7.43 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.44 Simplify:
In the next example we'll multiply by a variable. We'll need to do this in a later chapter.
  EXAMPLE 7.23
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.                           We can do this because of the Commutative Property of Multiplication. When a term is
  Multiply.
Notice that we wrote

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               7.3 · Distributive Property 561

the product of a number and a variable, we write the number first.

       TRY IT 7.45 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.46 Simplify:
The next example will use the `backwards' form of the Distributive Property,
  EXAMPLE 7.24
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.

       TRY IT 7.47 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.48 Simplify:
When you distribute a negative number, you need to be extra careful to get the signs correct.
  EXAMPLE 7.25
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.49 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.50 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 7.26
Simplify:
562 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

            Solution

  Distribute.                               Do you know why?
  Multiply.
  Simplify.
You could also write the result as

       TRY IT 7.51 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.52 Simplify:
In the next example, we will show how to use the Distributive Property to find the opposite of an expression. Remember,

  EXAMPLE 7.27
Simplify:

     Solution

Multiplying by -1 results in the opposite.
Distribute.
Simplify.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 7.53 Simplify:

       TRY IT 7.54 Simplify:

Sometimes we need to use the Distributive Property as part of the order of operations. Start by looking at the
parentheses. If the expression inside the parentheses cannot be simplified, the next step would be multiply using the
distributive property, which removes the parentheses. The next two examples will illustrate this.

  EXAMPLE 7.28
Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                7.3 · Distributive Property 563

  Solution

Distribute.
Multiply.
Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 7.55 Simplify:
       TRY IT 7.56 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 7.29
Simplify:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.

  TRY IT 7.57 Simplify:

  TRY IT 7.58 Simplify:

Evaluate Expressions Using the Distributive Property

Some students need to be convinced that the Distributive Property always works.

In the examples below, we will practice evaluating some of the expressions from previous examples; in part  , we will
evaluate the form with parentheses, and in part  we will evaluate the form we got after distributing. If we evaluate both
expressions correctly, this will show that they are indeed equal.

EXAMPLE 7.30

When      evaluate:           

Solution


564 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

         Simplify in the parentheses.
         Multiply.

     

  Simplify.
  Add.
Notice, the answers are the same. When
Try it yourself for a different value of

  TRY IT 7.59 Evaluate when                 

  TRY IT 7.60 Evaluate when                 

EXAMPLE 7.31

When      evaluate                      

Solution



Simplify in the parentheses.
Multiply.



  Multiply.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     7.3 · Distributive Property 565

Subtract.
The answers are the same. When

  TRY IT 7.61 Evaluate when                           

  TRY IT 7.62 Evaluate when                           

EXAMPLE 7.32

When      evaluate              and     to show that

Solution



Add in the parentheses.
Simplify.



Simplify.                       demonstrating that
The answers are the same when

  TRY IT 7.63 Evaluate when                                         to show that
                                                                       to show that
  TRY IT 7.64 Evaluate when                         

  MEDIA

  ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
  Model Distribution (http://www.openstax.org/l/24ModelDist)
  The Distributive Property (http://www.openstax.org/l/24DistProp)
566 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

        SECTION 7.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions Using the Distributive Property

In the following exercises, simplify using the distributive property.

90.                                     91.                            92.

93.                                     94.                            95.

96.                                     97.                            98.

99.                                     100.                           101.

102.                                    103.                           104.

105.                                    106.                           107.

108.                                    109.                           110.

111.                                    112.                           113.

114.                                    115.                           116.

117.                                    118.                           119.

120.                                    121.                           122.

123.                                    124.                           125.

126.                                    127.                           128.

129.                                    130.                           131.

132.                                    133.                           134.

135.                                    136.                           137.

138.                                    139.                           140.

141.

Evaluate Expressions Using the Distributive Property

In the following exercises, evaluate both expressions for the given value.

142. If   evaluate                      143. If  evaluate              144. If  evaluate
         evaluate                                evaluate                        evaluate
                                                                           
           evaluate                                evaluate                        evaluate
                                                                                   evaluate
145. If                                 146. If                        147. If

                                                                           
                                                                           

148. If                                 149. If                        150. If

                                                                           
                                                                           

151. If  evaluate                       152. If  evaluate              153. If

                                                                           
                                                                           

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 567

Everyday Math

154. Buying by the case Joe can buy his favorite ice  155. Multi-pack purchase Adele's shampoo sells for
                                                                      per bottle at the drug store. At the
tea at a convenience store for      per bottle.
                                                              warehouse store, the same shampoo is sold as a
At the grocery store, he can buy a case of                              for

bottles for                                                    Show how you can use the distributive
                                                              property to find the cost of bottles bought
 Use the distributive property to find the cost of            individually at the drug store.

bottles bought individually at the convenience                 How much would Adele save by buying the
                                                                        at the warehouse store?
store. (Hint: notice that       is           )

 Is it a bargain to buy the iced tea at the
grocery store by the case?

Writing Exercises

156. Simplify      using the distributive             157. Explain how you can multiply     without

property and explain each step.                       paper or a calculator by thinking of  as

                                                      and then using the distributive

                                                      property.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

7.4 Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Recognize the identity properties of addition and multiplication
           Use the inverse properties of addition and multiplication
           Use the properties of zero
           Simplify expressions using the properties of identities, inverses, and zero

       BE PREPARED 7.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Find the opposite of
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 3.3.

BE PREPARED 7.11           Find the reciprocal of
                           If you missed this problem, review Example 4.29.

BE PREPARED 7.12           Multiply:
                           If you missed this problem, review Example 4.27.

Recognize the Identity Properties of Addition and Multiplication

What happens when we add zero to any number? Adding zero doesn't change the value. For this reason, we call the
additive identity.

For example,
568 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

       What happens when you multiply any number by one? Multiplying by one doesn't change the value. So we call the
       multiplicative identity.
       For example,

         Identity Properties
         The identity property of addition: for any real number

         The identity property of multiplication: for any real number

  EXAMPLE 7.33

Identify whether each equation demonstrates the identity property of addition or multiplication.

            

  Solution

  

  We are adding 0. We are using the identity property of addition.

  

  We are multiplying by 1. We are using the identity property of multiplication.

    TRY IT 7.65  Identify whether each equation demonstrates the identity property of addition or multiplication:
    TRY IT 7.66
                                 

                 Identify whether each equation demonstrates the identity property of addition or multiplication:

                                 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 569

Use the Inverse Properties of Addition and Multiplication

  What number added to 5 gives the additive identity, 0?

  What number added to -6 gives the additive identity, 0?

Notice that in each case, the missing number was the opposite of the number.

We call the additive inverse of     The opposite of a number is its additive inverse. A number and its opposite add to
   which is the additive identity.

What number multiplied by gives the multiplicative identity, In other words, two-thirds times what results in

What number multiplied by gives the multiplicative identity, In other words two times what results in

Notice that in each case, the missing number was the reciprocal of the number.

We call the multiplicative inverse of              The reciprocal of a number is its multiplicative inverse. A number and

its reciprocal multiply to which is the multiplicative identity.

We'll formally state the Inverse Properties here:

Inverse Properties

Inverse Property of Addition for any real number

Inverse Property of Multiplication for any real number

  EXAMPLE 7.34                                          .

Find the additive inverse of each expression:  

     Solution
To find the additive inverse, we find the opposite.
570 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

 The additive inverse of         is its opposite,      The additive inverse of is its opposite,
 The additive inverse of         is its opposite,

  TRY IT 7.67             Find the additive inverse:          .
  TRY IT 7.68             Find the additive inverse:         .

EXAMPLE 7.35

Find the multiplicative inverse:                      .

Solution

To find the multiplicative inverse, we find the reciprocal.

 The multiplicative inverse of is its reciprocal,       The multiplicative inverse of is its reciprocal,

 To find the multiplicative inverse of we first convert to a fraction, Then we find the reciprocal,

  TRY IT 7.69 Find the multiplicative inverse:                 .

  TRY IT 7.70             Find the multiplicative inverse:     .

Use the Properties of Zero

We have already learned that zero is the additive identity, since it can be added to any number without changing the
number's identity. But zero also has some special properties when it comes to multiplication and division.

Multiplication by Zero                                Multiplying by makes the product equal zero. The product of any real

What happens when you multiply a number by
number and is

Multiplication by Zero

For any real number

EXAMPLE 7.36

Simplify:                                          .

Solution



The product of any real number and 0 is 0.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                        7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 571



The product of any real number and 0 is 0.



The product of any real number and 0 is 0.

  TRY IT 7.71 Simplify:                     

  TRY IT 7.72 Simplify:                               

Dividing with Zero

What about dividing with Think about a real example: if there are no cookies in the cookie jar and three people want
to share them, how many cookies would each person get? There are cookies to share, so each person gets cookies.

Remember that we can always check division with the related multiplication fact. So, we know that

Division of Zero

For any real number except     and

Zero divided by any real number except zero is zero.

EXAMPLE 7.37

Simplify:                   .

Solution



Zero divided by any real number, except 0, is zero.
572 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers



Zero divided by any real number, except 0, is zero.



Zero divided by any real number, except 0, is zero.

TRY IT 7.73 Simplify:                                     .

TRY IT 7.74 Simplify:                                        .

Now let's think about dividing a number by zero. What is the result of dividing by  Think about the related
multiplication fact. Is there a number that multiplied by gives

Since any real number multiplied by equals there is no real number that can be multiplied by to obtain       We can

conclude that there is no answer to     and so we say that division by zero is undefined.

Division by Zero

For any real number              and    are undefined.

Division by zero is undefined.

EXAMPLE 7.38

Simplify:                               .

     Solution

 

Division by zero is undefined. undefined

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 573



Division by zero is undefined. undefined



Division by zero is undefined. undefined

TRY IT 7.75 Simplify:                          .

TRY IT 7.76 Simplify:                        

We summarize the properties of zero.

Properties of Zero

Multiplication by Zero: For any real number

Division by Zero: For any real number
                       Zero divided by any real number, except itself, is zero.

                 is undefined. Division by zero is undefined.

Simplify Expressions using the Properties of Identities, Inverses, and Zero

We will now practice using the properties of identities, inverses, and zero to simplify expressions.

  EXAMPLE 7.39
Simplify:

     Solution

Notice the additive inverses, and .
Add.

TRY IT 7.77 Simplify:
574 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

              TRY IT 7.78 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 7.40
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Regroup, using the associative property.
         Multiply.
         Simplify; 1 is the multiplicative identity.

TRY IT 7.79 Simplify:
TRY IT 7.80 Simplify:

EXAMPLE 7.41

Simplify: , where                .

Solution

Zero divided by any real number except itself is zero.

TRY IT 7.81 Simplify: , where                            .

TRY IT 7.82 Simplify: , where                         .

  EXAMPLE 7.42
Simplify:

     Solution

Division by zero is undefined. undefined

TRY IT 7.83 Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 575

       TRY IT 7.84 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 7.43
Simplify:

     Solution
We cannot combine the terms in parentheses, so we multiply the two fractions first.

Multiply; the product of reciprocals is 1.
Simplify by recognizing the multiplicative identity.

TRY IT 7.85 Simplify:

TRY IT 7.86 Simplify:

All the properties of real numbers we have used in this chapter are summarized in Table 7.1.

Property                                              Of Addition    Of Multiplication

Commutative Property

If a and b are real numbers then...

Associative Property

If a, b, and c are real numbers then...

Identity Property                        is the additive identity    is the multiplicative identity

For any real number a,

Inverse Property                         is the additive inverse of

                                                                     is the multiplicative inverse of

For any real number a,

Distributive Property                  are real numbers, then
                                   If

Properties of Zero

Table 7.1 Properties of Real Numbers
576 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

                         Property             Of Addition                                     Of Multiplication
      For any real number a,

      For any real number

                                              is undefined

      Table 7.1 Properties of Real Numbers

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Multiplying and Dividing Involving Zero (http://www.openstax.org/l/24MultDivZero)

        SECTION 7.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Recognize the Identity Properties of Addition and Multiplication

In the following exercises, identify whether each example is using the identity property of addition or multiplication.

158.                                    159.                        160.

161.

Use the Inverse Properties of Addition and Multiplication

In the following exercises, find the multiplicative inverse.

162.                                    163.                        164.

165.                                    166.                        167.

168.                                    169.                        170.

171.                                    172.                        173.

Use the Properties of Zero

In the following exercises, simplify using the properties of zero.

174.                                    175.                        176.

177.                                    178.                        179.

180.                                    181.                        182.

183.                                    184.                        185.

Simplify Expressions using the Properties of Identities, Inverses, and Zero

In the following exercises, simplify using the properties of identities, inverses, and zero.

186.                                    187.                        188.

189.                                    190.                        191.

192.                                    193.                        194.     , where

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.4 · Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero 577

195.  , where                           196.    , where              197.           , where

198.        , where                     199.                , where  200.           , where

201.  , where                           202.        , where          203.           , where

204.           , where                  205.                , where  206.

207.                                    208.                         209.

Everyday Math

210. Insurance copayment Carrie had to have                  211. Cooking time Helen bought a   turkey

      fillings done. Each filling cost        Her dental             for her family's Thanksgiving dinner and wants

      insurance required her to pay           of the cost.           to know what time to put the turkey in the oven.

      Calculate Carrie's cost                                        She wants to allow minutes per pound

       by finding her copay for each filling, then                   cooking time.

      finding her total cost for fillings, and                        Calculate the length of time needed to roast

       by multiplying                                                the turkey by multiplying  to find the

                                                                     number of minutes and then multiplying the

       Which of the Properties of Real Numbers did                   product by to convert minutes into hours.
      you use for part (b)?

                                                                      Multiply

                                                                      Which of the Properties of Real Numbers

                                                                     allows you to multiply     instead of

Writing Exercises

212. In your own words, describe the difference              213. How can the use of the properties of real
        between the additive inverse and the                         numbers make it easier to simplify expressions?
        multiplicative inverse of a number.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
578 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

7.5 Systems of Measurement

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Make unit conversions in the U.S. system
           Use mixed units of measurement in the U.S. system
           Make unit conversions in the metric system
           Use mixed units of measurement in the metric system
           Convert between the U.S. and the metric systems of measurement
           Convert between Fahrenheit and Celsius temperatures

       BE PREPARED 7.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Multiply:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 5.18.

BE PREPARED 7.14                        Simplify:
                                        If you missed this problem, review Example 4.20.

BE PREPARED 7.15                        Multiply:
                                        If you missed this problem, review Example 4.27.

In this section we will see how to convert among different types of units, such as feet to miles or kilograms to pounds.
The basic idea in all of the unit conversions will be to use a form of the multiplicative identity, to change the units but
not the value of a quantity.

Make Unit Conversions in the U.S. System

There are two systems of measurement commonly used around the world. Most countries use the metric system. The
United States uses a different system of measurement, usually called the U.S. system. We will look at the U.S. system
first.

The U.S. system of measurement uses units of inch, foot, yard, and mile to measure length and pound and ton to
measure weight. For capacity, the units used are cup, pint, quart and gallons. Both the U.S. system and the metric
system measure time in seconds, minutes, or hours.

The equivalencies among the basic units of the U.S. system of measurement are listed in Table 7.2. The table also shows,
in parentheses, the common abbreviations for each measurement.

                                                     U.S. System Units

                                 Length                              Volume

                                        foot (ft) =  inches (in)     teaspoons (t) = tablespoon (T)
                                        yard (yd) =  feet (ft)        Tablespoons (T) = cup (C)
                                        mile (mi) =
                                                          feet (ft)  cup (C) = fluid ounces (fl oz)
                                                                     pint (pt) = cups (C)
                                                                     quart (qt) = pints (pt)
                                                                     gallon (gal) = quarts (qt)

                                 Table 7.2

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               7.5 · Systems of Measurement 579

                                   U.S. System Units

                        Weight                    Time

                        pound (lb) = ounces (oz)  minute (min) = seconds (s)
                                                  hour (h) = minutes (min)
                        ton =      pounds (lb)    day = hours (h)
                                                  week (wk) = days
                                                  year (yr) = days

                        Table 7.2

In many real-life applications, we need to convert between units of measurement. We will use the identity property of
multiplication to do these conversions. We'll restate the Identity Property of Multiplication here for easy reference.

To use the identity property of multiplication, we write in a form that will help us convert the units. For example,
suppose we want to convert inches to feet. We know that foot is equal to inches, so we can write as the fraction

        When we multiply by this fraction, we do not change the value but just change the units.

But      also equals How do we decide whether to multiply by            or  We choose the fraction that will make

the units we want to convert from divide out. For example, suppose we wanted to convert  inches to feet. If we choose
the fraction that has inches in the denominator, we can eliminate the inches.

On the other hand, if we wanted to convert feet to inches, we would choose the fraction that has feet in the
denominator.

We treat the unit words like factors and `divide out' common units like we do common factors.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Make unit conversions.

Step 1.  Multiply the measurement to be converted by write as a fraction relating the units given and the units
         needed.
Step 2.  Multiply.
Step 3.  Simplify the fraction, performing the indicated operations and removing the common units.

  EXAMPLE 7.44                                                              inches
Mary Anne is inches tall. What is her height in feet?

     Solution
  Convert 66 inches into feet.
  Multiply the measurement to be converted by 1.

  Write 1 as a fraction relating the units given and the units needed.
580 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

         Multiply.
         Simplify the fraction.

       Notice that the when we simplified the fraction, we first divided out the inches.
       Mary Anne is feet tall.

              TRY IT 7.87 Lexie is inches tall. Convert her height to feet.
              TRY IT 7.88 Rene bought a hose that is yards long. Convert the length to feet.
       When we use the Identity Property of Multiplication to convert units, we need to make sure the units we want to change
       from will divide out. Usually this means we want the conversion fraction to have those units in the denominator.
         EXAMPLE 7.45
       Ndula, an elephant at the San Diego Safari Park, weighs almost tons. Convert her weight to pounds.

                                         Figure 7.5 (credit: Guldo Da Rozze, Flickr)

     Solution    tons into pounds, using the equivalencies in Table 7.2. We will use the Identity Property of
We will convert

Multiplication, writing as the fraction

Multiply the measurement to be converted by 1.
Write 1 as a fraction relating tons and pounds.

Simplify.

Multiply.

                                                 Ndula weighs almost 6,400 pounds.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   7.5 · Systems of Measurement 581

TRY IT 7.89 Arnold's SUV weighs about tons. Convert the weight to pounds.

TRY IT 7.90 A cruise ship weighs              tons. Convert the weight to pounds.

Sometimes to convert from one unit to another, we may need to use several other units in between, so we will need to
multiply several fractions.

  EXAMPLE 7.46

Juliet is going with her family to their summer home. She will be away for weeks. Convert the time to minutes.
     Solution

To convert weeks into minutes, we will convert weeks to days, days to hours, and then hours to minutes. To do this, we
will multiply by conversion factors of

Write 1 as            .
Cancel common units.       Juliet will be away for 90,720 minutes.
Multiply.

TRY IT 7.91 The distance between Earth and the moon is about        miles. Convert this length to yards.

TRY IT 7.92 A team of astronauts spends weeks in space. Convert the time to minutes.

  EXAMPLE 7.47
How many fluid ounces are in gallon of milk?

                                                    Figure 7.6 (credit: www.bluewaikiki.com, Flickr)

     Solution
Use conversion factors to get the right units: convert gallons to quarts, quarts to pints, pints to cups, and cups to fluid
ounces.
582 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

                                                                         1 gallon
Multiply the measurement to be converted by 1.

Simplify.                               128 fluid ounces
Multiply.                               There are 128 fluid ounces in a gallon.
Simplify.

TRY IT 7.93 How many cups are in gallon?

TRY IT 7.94 How many teaspoons are in cup?

Use Mixed Units of Measurement in the U.S. System

Performing arithmetic operations on measurements with mixed units of measures requires care. Be sure to add or
subtract like units.

EXAMPLE 7.48

Charlie bought three steaks for a barbecue. Their weights were                     ounces, pound ounces, and pound ounces.
How many total pounds of steak did he buy?

                                                         Figure 7.7 (credit: Helen Penjam, Flickr)
     Solution
We will add the weights of the steaks to find the total weight of the steaks.

  Add the ounces. Then add the pounds.

  Convert 22 ounces to pounds and ounces.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.5 · Systems of Measurement 583

Add the pounds.                         2 pounds + 1 pound, 6 ounces
                                        3 pounds, 6 ounces

                                        Charlie bought 3 pounds 6 ounces of steak.

TRY IT 7.95      Laura gave birth to triplets weighing pounds ounces, pounds ounces, and pounds
                 ounces. What was the total birth weight of the three babies?

TRY IT 7.96      Seymour cut two pieces of crown molding for his family room that were feet inches and
                 feet inches. What was the total length of the molding?

  EXAMPLE 7.49

Anthony bought four planks of wood that were each feet inches long. If the four planks are placed end-to-end, what
is the total length of the wood?

     Solution
We will multiply the length of one plank by to find the total length.

Multiply the inches and then the feet.

Convert 16 inches to feet.              24 feet + 1 foot 4 inches
Add the feet.                           25 feet 4 inches
                                        Anthony bought 25 feet 4 inches of wood.

TRY IT 7.97      Henri wants to triple his spaghetti sauce recipe, which calls for pound ounces of ground
                 turkey. How many pounds of ground turkey will he need?

TRY IT 7.98      Joellen wants to double a solution of gallons quarts. How many gallons of solution will she
                 have in all?

Make Unit Conversions in the Metric System

In the metric system, units are related by powers of The root words of their names reflect this relation. For example,

the basic unit for measuring length is a meter. One kilometer is       meters; the prefix kilo- means thousand. One

centimeter is of a meter, because the prefix centi- means one one-hundredth (just like one cent is of one dollar).

The equivalencies of measurements in the metric system are shown in Table 7.3. The common abbreviations for each
measurement are given in parentheses.
584 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

                                                      Metric Measurements

                                 Length                       Mass             Volume/Capacity

              kilometer (km) =            m           kilogram (kg) =    g     kiloliter (kL) =    L
              hectometer (hm) =             m         hectogram (hg) =     g   hectoliter (hL) =     L
              dekameter (dam) =           m           dekagram (dag) =   g     dekaliter (daL) =   L
              meter (m) = m                           gram (g) = g             liter (L) = L
              decimeter (dm) =           m            decigram (dg) =   g      deciliter (dL) =   L
              centimeter (cm) =            m          centigram (cg) =    g    centiliter (cL) =    L
              millimeter (mm) =              m        milligram (mg) =      g  milliliter (mL) =      L

              meter =                   centimeters   gram =  centigrams       liter =  centiliters
              meter =                    millimeters  gram =   milligrams      liter =   milliliters

            Table 7.3

To make conversions in the metric system, we will use the same technique we did in the U.S. system. Using the identity
property of multiplication, we will multiply by a conversion factor of one to get to the correct units.

Have you ever run a or                  race? The lengths of those races are measured in kilometers. The metric system is

commonly used in the United States when talking about the length of a race.

EXAMPLE 7.50

Nick ran a    race. How many meters did he run?

                                                         Figure 7.8 (credit: William Warby, Flickr)
     Solution
We will convert kilometers to meters using the Identity Property of Multiplication and the equivalencies in Table 7.3.

                                                                                 10 kilometers

  Multiply the measurement to be converted by 1.

  Write 1 as a fraction relating kilometers and meters.

Simplify.                                             10,000 m
Multiply.                                             Nick ran 10,000 meters.

TRY IT 7.99 Sandy completed her first                 race. How many meters did she run?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.5 · Systems of Measurement 585

  TRY IT 7.100 Herman bought a rug meters in length. How many centimeters is the length?

  EXAMPLE 7.51                       grams. How many kilograms did the baby weigh?

Eleanor's newborn baby weighed
     Solution

We will convert grams to kilograms.

Multiply the measurement to be converted by 1.
Write 1 as a fraction relating kilograms and grams.

Simplify.

Multiply.                                                         3.2 kilograms
Divide.                                              The baby weighed kilograms.

  TRY IT 7.101 Kari's newborn baby weighed                   grams. How many kilograms did the baby weigh?

  TRY IT 7.102  Anderson received a package that was marked                        grams. How many kilograms did this
                package weigh?

Since the metric system is based on multiples of ten, conversions involve multiplying by multiples of ten. In Decimal
Operations, we learned how to simplify these calculations by just moving the decimal.

To multiply by               we move the decimal to the right          places, respectively. To multiply by

                we move the decimal to the left              places respectively.

We can apply this pattern when we make measurement conversions in the metric system.

In Example 7.51, we changed      grams to kilograms by multiplying by               This is the same as moving the
decimal places to the left.

EXAMPLE 7.52

Convert:

          liters to kiloliters       liters to milliliters.

  Solution

 We will convert liters to kiloliters. In Table 7.3, we see that
586 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

                                                                                            350 L
Multiply by 1, writing 1 as a fraction relating liters to kiloliters.
Simplify.

Move the decimal 3 units to the left.

                                                                        0.35 kL

 We will convert liters to milliliters. In Table 7.3, we see that

                                                                        4.1 L

Multiply by 1, writing 1 as a fraction relating milliliters to liters.

Simplify.

Move the decimal 3 units to the left.

                                                                        4100 mL

TRY IT 7.103 Convert:                   L to kL   L to mL.

TRY IT 7.104 Convert:                   hL to L   L to cL.

Use Mixed Units of Measurement in the Metric System

Performing arithmetic operations on measurements with mixed units of measures in the metric system requires the
same care we used in the U.S. system. But it may be easier because of the relation of the units to the powers of We
still must make sure to add or subtract like units.

EXAMPLE 7.53

Ryland is meters tall. His younger brother is centimeters tall. How much taller is Ryland than his younger brother?

Solution

We will subtract the lengths in meters. Convert  centimeters to meters by moving the decimal places to the left;

cm is the same as  m.

Now that both measurements are in meters, subtract to find out how much taller Ryland is than his brother.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      7.5 · Systems of Measurement 587

Ryland is  meters taller than his brother.

TRY IT 7.105           Mariella is       meters tall. Her daughter is centimeters tall. How much taller is Mariella

                       than her daughter? Write the answer in centimeters.

TRY IT 7.106           The fence around Hank's yard is meters high. Hank is  centimeters tall. How much shorter
                       than the fence is Hank? Write the answer in meters.

EXAMPLE 7.54

Dena's recipe for lentil soup calls for  milliliters of olive oil. Dena wants to triple the recipe. How many liters of olive oil
will she need?

     Solution
We will find the amount of olive oil in milliliters then convert to liters.

                       Triple 150 mL

Translate to algebra.

Multiply.

Convert to liters.

Simplify.

                       Dena needs 0.45 liter of olive oil.

TRY IT 7.107           A recipe for Alfredo sauce calls for milliliters of milk. Renata is making pasta with Alfredo
                       sauce for a big party and needs to multiply the recipe amounts by How many liters of milk
                       will she need?

TRY IT 7.108           To make one pan of baklava, Dorothea needs grams of filo pastry. If Dorothea plans to
                       make pans of baklava, how many kilograms of filo pastry will she need?

Convert Between U.S. and Metric Systems of Measurement

Many measurements in the United States are made in metric units. A drink may come in  bottles, calcium may

come in       capsules, and we may run a race. To work easily in both systems, we need to be able to convert

between the two systems.
588 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

Table 7.4 shows some of the most common conversions.

                                        Conversion Factors Between U.S. and Metric Systems

                                        Length            Weight               Volume

                                        in =       cm     lb =    kg           qt =  L

                                        ft =       m      oz = g               fl oz = mL

                                        yd =           m

                                        mi =       km

                                        m =        ft     kg = lb              L =   qt

                                        Table 7.4

We make conversions between the systems just as we do within the systems--by multiplying by unit conversion factors.

  EXAMPLE 7.55                   mL of water. How many fluid ounces are in the bottle? Round to the nearest tenth of an
                                                                                     500 mL
Lee's water bottle holds
ounce.

     Solution

Multiply by a unit conversion factor relating mL and ounces.

Simplify.

Divide.

                                                                   The water bottle holds 16.7 fluid ounces.

TRY IT 7.109 How many quarts of soda are in a                         bottle?

TRY IT 7.110 How many liters are in quarts of milk?

The conversion factors in Table 7.4 are not exact, but the approximations they give are close enough for everyday
purposes. In Example 7.55, we rounded the number of fluid ounces to the nearest tenth.

  EXAMPLE 7.56

Soleil lives in Minnesota but often travels in Canada for work. While driving on a Canadian highway, she passes a sign
that says the next rest stop is in kilometers. How many miles until the next rest stop? Round your answer to the
nearest mile.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                7.5 · Systems of Measurement 589

Solution

                                                                     100 kilometers

Multiply by a unit conversion factor relating kilometers and miles.

Simplify.                                                            62 mi
Divide.                                                              It is about 62 miles to the next rest stop.

TRY IT 7.111  The height of Mount Kilimanjaro is  meters. Convert the height to feet. Round to the
              nearest foot.

TRY IT 7.112  The flight distance from New York City to London is    kilometers. Convert the distance to
              miles. Round to the nearest mile.

Convert Between Fahrenheit and Celsius Temperatures                                                What does that

Have you ever been in a foreign country and heard the weather forecast? If the forecast is for
mean?

The U.S. and metric systems use different scales to measure temperature. The U.S. system uses degrees Fahrenheit,
written The metric system uses degrees Celsius, written Figure 7.9 shows the relationship between the two
systems.

              Figure 7.9 A temperature of         is equivalent to

If we know the temperature in one system, we can use a formula to convert it to the other system.
590 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

         Temperature Conversion
         To convert from Fahrenheit temperature, to Celsius temperature, use the formula

         To convert from Celsius temperature, to Fahrenheit temperature, use the formula

EXAMPLE 7.57

Convert    into degrees Celsius.

     Solution       into the formula to find
We will substitute

Use the formula for converting °F to °C

Simplify in parentheses.
Multiply.

                                         A temperature of 50°F is equivalent to 10°C.

TRY IT 7.113 Convert the Fahrenheit temperatures to degrees Celsius:
TRY IT 7.114 Convert the Fahrenheit temperatures to degrees Celsius:

EXAMPLE 7.58

The weather forecast for Paris predicts a high of  Convert the temperature into degrees Fahrenheit.

     Solution       into the formula to find
We will substitute

Use the formula for converting °F to °C

Multiply.
Add.

                                         So 20°C is equivalent to 68°F.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              7.5 · Systems of Measurement 591

TRY IT 7.115  Convert the Celsius temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit:
              The temperature in Helsinki, Finland was

TRY IT 7.116  Convert the Celsius temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit:
              The temperature in Sydney, Australia was

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
American Unit Conversion (http://www.openstax.org/l/24USConversion)
Time Conversions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24TimeConversio)
Metric Unit Conversions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24MetricConvers)
American and Metric Conversions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24UStoMetric)
Convert from Celsius to Fahrenheit (http://www.openstax.org/l/24CtoFdegrees)
Convert from Fahrenheit to Celsius (http://www.openstax.org/l/24FtoCdegrees)

        SECTION 7.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Make Unit Conversions in the U.S. System

In the following exercises, convert the units.

214. A park bench is feet            215. A floor tile is feet wide.   216. A ribbon is inches
        long. Convert the length             Convert the width to              long. Convert the length
        to inches.                           inches.                           to feet.

217. Carson is inches tall.          218. Jon is feet inches tall.     219. Faye is feet inches
        Convert his height to feet.          Convert his height to             tall. Convert her height to
                                             inches.                           inches.

220. A football field is feet        221. On a baseball diamond,       222. Ulises lives miles from
        wide. Convert the width              the distance from home            school. Convert the
        to yards.                            plate to first base is            distance to feet.
                                             yards. Convert the
                                             distance to feet.         225. Blue whales can weigh as
                                                                               much as tons.
223. Denver, Colorado, is            224. A killer whale weighs                Convert the weight to
        feet above sea level.                tons. Convert the weight          pounds.
        Convert the height to                to pounds.
        miles.                                                         228. The voyage of the
                                                                               Mayflower took months
226. An empty bus weighs             227. At take-off, an airplane             and days. Convert the
                  pounds. Convert                                              time to days (30 days = 1
                                     weighs     pounds.                        month).
        the weight to tons.
                                     Convert the weight to             231. Misty's surgery lasted
                                                                               hours. Convert the time
                                     tons.                                     to seconds.

229. Lynn's cruise lasted days       230. Rocco waited hours           234. JJ's cat, Posy, weighs
        and hours. Convert the               for his appointment.              pounds. Convert her
        time to hours.                       Convert the time to               weight to ounces.
                                             seconds.
232. How many teaspoons are
        in a pint?                   233. How many tablespoons
                                             are in a gallon?
592 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

235. April's dog, Beans, weighs         236. Baby Preston weighed               237. Baby Audrey weighed
          pounds. Convert his                   pounds ounces at birth.                 pounds ounces at
                                                Convert his weight to                   birth. Convert her weight
        weight to ounces.                       ounces.                                 to ounces.

238. Crista will serve cups             239. Lance needs cups of
        of juice at her son's party.            water for the runners in a
        Convert the volume to                   race. Convert the volume
        gallons.                                to gallons.

Use Mixed Units of Measurement in the U.S. System

In the following exercises, solve and write your answer in mixed units.

240. Eli caught three fish. The         241. Judy bought pound                  242. One day Anya kept track of the
        weights of the fish were                ounces of almonds,                      number of minutes she spent
        pounds ounces,                          pounds ounces of                        driving. She recorded trips of
        pound ounces, and                       walnuts, and ounces of
        pounds ounces. What                     cashews. What was the                   How much time (in hours and
        was the total weight of                 total weight of the nuts?               minutes) did Anya spend
        the three fish?                                                                 driving?

243. Last year Eric went on             244. Renee attached a                   245. Fawzi's SUV is feet
        business trips. The                                        extension            inches tall. If he puts a
        number of days of each                                                                               box on top
        was                                     cord to her computer's                  of his SUV, what is the
        How much time (in weeks                                    power cord.          total height of the SUV
        and days) did Eric spend                                                        and the box?
        on business trips last                  What was the total length
        year?                                   of the cords?

246. Leilani wants to make              247. Mireille needs to cut
        placemats. For each                     inches of ribbon for each
        placemat she needs                      of the girls in her
        inches of fabric. How                   dance class. How many
        many yards of fabric will               yards of ribbon will she
        she need for the                        need altogether?
        placemats?

Make Unit Conversions in the Metric System

In the following exercises, convert the units.

248. Ghalib ran kilometers.             249. Kitaka hiked kilometers.           250. Estrella is  meters tall.
        Convert the length to                   Convert the length to
        meters.                                 meters.                         Convert her height to

                                                                                centimeters.

251. The width of the wading            252. Mount Whitney is                   253. The depth of the Mariana
                                                meters tall. Convert the
pool is   meters.                               height to kilometers.           Trench is         meters.

Convert the width to                                                            Convert the depth to

centimeters.                                                                    kilometers.

254. June's multivitamin                255. A typical ruby-throated            256. One stick of butter
                                                hummingbird weights
contains      milligrams                        grams. Convert this to          contains          grams of
                                                milligrams.
of calcium. Convert this to                                                     fat. Convert this to

grams.                                                                          milligrams.

257. One serving of gourmet             258. The maximum mass of an             259. Dimitri's daughter
        ice cream has grams of                  airmail letter is                       weighed kilograms at
        fat. Convert this to                    kilograms. Convert this to              birth. Convert this to
        milligrams.                             grams.                                  grams.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    7.5 · Systems of Measurement 593

260. A bottle of wine contained        261. A bottle of medicine
              milliliters. Convert             contained milliliters.
                                               Convert this to liters.
        this to liters.

Use Mixed Units of Measurement in the Metric System

In the following exercises, solve and write your answer in mixed units.

262. Matthias is meters                263. Stavros is meters tall.       264. A typical dove weighs
        tall. His son is                       His sister is                      grams. A typical duck
        centimeters tall. How                  centimeters tall. How              weighs kilograms.
        much taller, in                        much taller, in                    What is the difference, in
        centimeters, is Matthias               centimeters, is Stavros            grams, of the weights of a
        than his son?                          than his sister?                   duck and a dove?

265. Concetta had a                    266. Harry mailed packages         267. One glass of orange juice
                        bag of flour.          that weighed grams                 provides milligrams
                                               each. What was the total           of potassium. Linda
        She used grams of                      weight of the packages in          drinks one glass of
        flour to make biscotti.                kilograms?                         orange juice every
        How many kilograms of                                                     morning. How many
        flour are left in the bag?                                                grams of potassium does
                                                                                  Linda get from her
                                                                                  orange juice in days?

268. Jonas drinks milliliters          269. One serving of whole
        of water times a day.                  grain sandwich bread
        How many liters of water               provides grams of
        does Jonas drink in a day?             protein. How many
                                               milligrams of protein are
                                               provided by servings of
                                               whole grain sandwich
                                               bread?

Convert Between U.S. and Metric Systems

In the following exercises, make the unit conversions. Round to the nearest tenth.

270. Bill is inches tall.              271. Frankie is inches tall.       272. Marcus passed a football
        Convert his height to                  Convert his height to                  yards. Convert the
        centimeters.                           centimeters.
                                                                                  pass length to meters.

273. Connie bought yards of            274. Each American throws out      275. An average American will
        fabric to make drapes.                 an average of                      throw away
        Convert the fabric length              pounds of garbage per              pounds of trash over his
        to meters.                             year. Convert this weight          or her lifetime. Convert
                                               to kilograms (2.20 pounds          this weight to kilograms
                                               = 1 kilogram).                     (2.20 pounds = 1
                                                                                  kilogram).

276. A run is kilometers               277. Kathryn is meters tall.       278. Dawn's suitcase weighed
        long. Convert this length              Convert her height to                  kilograms. Convert the
        to miles.                              feet.
                                                                                  weight to pounds.

279. Jackson's backpack                280. Ozzie put gallons of          281. Bernard bought gallons
        weighs kilograms.                      gas in his truck. Convert          of paint. Convert the
        Convert the weight to                  the volume to liters.              volume to liters.
        pounds.
594 7 · The Properties of Real Numbers

Convert between Fahrenheit and Celsius

In the following exercises, convert the Fahrenheit temperature to degrees Celsius. Round to the nearest tenth.

282.                                    283.            284.

285.                                    286.            287.

288.                                    289.

In the following exercises, convert the Celsius temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit. Round to the nearest tenth.

290.                                    291.            292.

293.                                    294.            295.

296.                                    297.

Everyday Math

298. Nutrition Julian drinks one can of soda every      299. Reflectors The reflectors in each lane-marking
        day. Each can of soda contains grams of                 stripe on a highway are spaced yards apart.
        sugar. How many kilograms of sugar does Julian          How many reflectors are needed for a one-mile-
        get from soda in year?                                  long stretch of highway?

Writing Exercises

300. Some people think that to Fahrenheit is            301.  Did you grow up using the U.S. customary or
        the ideal temperature range.                        the metric system of measurement?  Describe
         What is your ideal temperature range? Why do
        you think so?                                           two examples in your life when you had to

         Convert your ideal temperatures from               convert between systems of measurement. 
        Fahrenheit to Celsius.
                                                                Which system do you think is easier to use?
                                                                Explain.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                          7 · Chapter Review 595

Chapter Review

Key Terms

Additive Identity The additive identity is 0. When zero is added to any number, it does not change the value.
Additive Inverse The opposite of a number is its additive inverse. The additive inverse of a is .
Irrational number An irrational number is a number that cannot be written as the ratio of two integers. Its decimal

    form does not stop and does not repeat.
Multiplicative Identity The multiplicative identity is 1. When one multiplies any number, it does not change the

    value.
Multiplicative Inverse The reciprocal of a number is its multiplicative inverse. The multiplicative inverse of a is .
Rational number A rational number is a number that can be written in the form , where p and q are integers and

            . Its decimal form stops or repeats.
Real number a real number is a number that is either rational or irrational.

Key Concepts
7.1 Rational and Irrational Numbers

  · Real numbers



7.2 Commutative and Associative Properties

  · Commutative Properties
       Commutative Property of Addition:
       If are real numbers, then

 Commutative Property of Multiplication:
 If are real numbers, then

· Associative Properties

 Associative Property of Addition:

 If  are real numbers then

 Associative Property of Multiplication:

 If  are real numbers then

7.3 Distributive Property

· Distributive Property:

 If  are real numbers then







7.4 Properties of Identity, Inverses, and Zero                      0 is the additive identity
                                                                         1 is the multiplicative
  · Identity Properties
       Identity Property of Addition: For any real number a:
       Identity Property of Multiplication: For any real number a:
596 7 · Exercises

        identity                                                                  is the additive inverse of a
                                                                                                  is the multiplicative
· Inverse Properties
    Inverse Property of Addition: For any real number a:
    Inverse Property of Multiplication: For any real number a:
        inverse of a

· Properties of Zero
    Multiplication by Zero: For any real number a,

       Division of Zero: For any real number a,

       Division by Zero: For any real number a, is undefined and             is undefined. Division by zero is undefined.
                                                                         304.
Exercises

Review Exercises

Rational and Irrational Numbers

In the following exercises, write as the ratio of two integers.

302.                             303.

305.

In the following exercises, determine which of the numbers is rational.

306.                             307.

In the following exercises, identify whether each given number is rational or irrational.

308.                             309.            

In the following exercises, list the  whole numbers,  integers,  rational numbers,  irrational numbers,  real
numbers for each set of numbers.

310.                             311.

Commutative and Associative Properties

In the following exercises, use the commutative property to rewrite the given expression.

312.                             313.                                    314.

315.

In the following exercises, use the associative property to rewrite the given expression.

316.                             317.                                    318.

319.

In the following exercises, evaluate each expression for the given value.

320. If            evaluate:     321. If         evaluate:               322. If           evaluate:
                     evaluate:
                                                                             
                                                                             

323. If

    
    

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               7 · Exercises 597

In the following exercises, simplify using the commutative and associative properties.

324.                                   325.                            326.

327.                                   328.                            329.

330.                                   331.                            332.

333.

Distributive Property

In the following exercises, simplify using the distributive property.

334.                                   335.                            336.

337.                                   338.                            339.

340.                                   341.

In the following exercises, evaluate using the distributive property.

342. If  evaluate                                             343. If  evaluate
                    to show that                                              and
                                                                                 to show that
                                                                  

344. If  evaluate                                             345. If        evaluate
                            and                                                   and
                                                                  
                                             to show that                      to show that

Properties of Identities, Inverses, and Zero

In the following exercises, identify whether each example is using the identity property of addition or multiplication.

346.                                   347.                            348.

349.

In the following exercises, find the additive inverse.

350.                                   351.                            352.

353.

In the following exercises, find the multiplicative inverse.

354.                                   355.                            356.

357.

In the following exercises, simplify.

358.                                   359.                            360.

361.                                   362.                            363.

364.                                   365.                            366.

367.
598 7 · Exercises

Systems of Measurement

In the following exercises, convert between U.S. units. Round to the nearest tenth.

368. A floral arbor is feet tall.   369. A picture frame is               370. Kelly is feet inches tall.
        Convert the height to               inches wide. Convert the              Convert her height to
        inches.                             width to feet.                        inches.

371. A playground is feet           372. The height of Mount              373. Shamu weighs tons.
        wide. Convert the width                                                   Convert the weight to
        to yards.                   Shasta is              feet.                  pounds.

                                    Convert the height to

                                    miles.

374. The play lasted hours.         375. How many tablespoons             376. Naomi's baby weighed
        Convert the time to                 are in a quart?                       pounds ounces at
        minutes.                                                                  birth. Convert the weight
                                                                                  to ounces.

377. Trinh needs cups of
        paint for her class art
        project. Convert the
        volume to gallons.

In the following exercises, solve, and state your answer in mixed units.

378. John caught lobsters.          379. Every day last week, Pedro       380. Fouad is feet inches
        The weights of the                  recorded the amount of                tall. If he stands on a rung
        lobsters were pound                 time he spent reading. He             of a ladder feet
        ounces, pound                       read for                              inches high, how high off
        ounces, pounds                                                            the ground is the top of
        ounces, and pounds                  minutes. How much time, in            Fouad's head?
        ounces. What was the                hours and minutes, did
        total weight of the                 Pedro spend reading?
        lobsters?

381. Dalila wants to make
        pillow covers. Each cover
        takes inches of fabric.
        How many yards and
        inches of fabric does she
        need for pillow covers?

In the following exercises, convert between metric units.

382. Donna is meters tall.          383. Mount Everest is                 384. One cup of yogurt
        Convert her height to               meters tall. Convert the              contains milligrams
        centimeters.                        height to kilometers.                 of calcium. Convert this to
                                                                                  grams.
385. One cup of yogurt              386. Sergio weighed
        contains grams of                   kilograms at birth.           387. A bottle of water
        protein. Convert this to            Convert this to grams.                contained milliliters.
        milligrams.                                                               Convert this to liters.

In the following exercises, solve.  389. Selma had a       bottle         390. One serving of cranberry
                                                                                  juice contains grams of
388. Minh is meters tall. His       of water. If she drank                        sugar. How many
        daughter is                                                               kilograms of sugar are in
        centimeters tall. How       milliliters, how much                             servings of cranberry
        much taller, in meters, is                                                juice?
        Minh than his daughter?     water, in milliliters, was

                                    left in the bottle?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                  7 · Exercises 599

391. One ounce of tofu
        provides grams of
        protein. How many
        milligrams of protein are
        provided by ounces of
        tofu?

In the following exercises, convert between U.S. and metric units. Round to the nearest tenth.

392. Majid is inches tall.                   393. A college basketball court    394. Caroline walked
        Convert his height to                        is feet long. Convert              kilometers. Convert this
        centimeters.                                 this length to meters.             length to miles.

395. Lucas weighs                            396. Steve's car holds liters      397. A box of books weighs
        kilograms. Convert his                       of gas. Convert this to            pounds. Convert this
        weight to pounds.                            gallons.                           weight to kilograms.

In the following exercises, convert the Fahrenheit temperatures to degrees Celsius. Round to the nearest tenth.

398.                                         399.                               400.

401.

In the following exercises, convert the Celsius temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit. Round to the nearest tenth.

402.                                         403.                               404.

405.

Practice Test                                407. Is  rational or               408. From the numbers

406. For the numbers                               irrational?
                                       list
                                             410. Rewrite the expression using        which are  integers
    the  rational numbers                            the associative property:         rational  irrational
    and  irrational                                                                    real numbers?

        numbers.                                                                      411. Rewrite the expression
                                                                                              using the associative
409. Rewrite using the                                                                        property:
        commutative property:

412. Evaluate  when                          413. For the number find

                                                 the  additive inverse
                                                  multiplicative inverse.

In the following exercises, simplify the given expression.

414.                                         415.                               416.

417.                                         418.                               419.

420.                                         421.                               422.

423.                                         424.                               425.

426.                                         427.                               428.

429.
600 7 · Exercises

In the following exercises, solve using the appropriate unit conversions.

430. Azize walked miles.          431. One cup of milk contains            432. Larry had phone
        Convert this distance to                milligrams of calcium.             customer phone calls
        feet.                                                                      yesterday. The calls lasted
                                          Convert this to grams.

                                                                           minutes. How much time,
                                                                           in hours and minutes, did
                                                                           Larry spend on the
                                                                           phone?

433. Janice ran kilometers.       434. Yolie is inches tall.               435. Use the formula
        Convert this distance to          Convert her height to                                        to convert
        miles. Round to the               centimeters. Round to the
        nearest hundredth of a            nearest centimeter.                              to degrees
        mile.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      8 · Introduction to Solving Linear Equations 601

8  SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS

Figure 8.1 A Calder mobile is balanced and has several elements on each side. (credit: paurian, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  8.1 Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality
  8.2 Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality
  8.3 Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides
  8.4 Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

      Introduction to Solving Linear Equations

Teetering high above the floor, this amazing mobile remains aloft thanks to its carefully balanced mass. Any shift in
either direction could cause the mobile to become lopsided, or even crash downward. In this chapter, we will solve
equations by keeping quantities on both sides of an equal sign in perfect balance.

8.1 Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of
Equality

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve equations using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality
           Solve equations that need to be simplified
           Translate an equation and solve
           Translate and solve applications

       BE PREPARED 8.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Solve:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.33.

   BE PREPARED 8.2  Translate into algebra `five less than
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 2.24.

   BE PREPARED 8.3  Is  a solution to

                    If you missed this problem, review Example 2.28.

We are now ready to "get to the good stuff." You have the basics down and are ready to begin one of the most important
602 8 · Solving Linear Equations

topics in algebra: solving equations. The applications are limitless and extend to all careers and fields. Also, the skills and
techniques you learn here will help improve your critical thinking and problem-solving skills. This is a great benefit of
studying mathematics and will be useful in your life in ways you may not see right now.

Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

We began our work solving equations in previous chapters. It has been a while since we have seen an equation, so we
will review some of the key concepts before we go any further.

We said that solving an equation is like discovering the answer to a puzzle. The purpose in solving an equation is to find
the value or values of the variable that make each side of the equation the same. Any value of the variable that makes
the equation true is called a solution to the equation. It is the answer to the puzzle.

  Solution of an Equation

  A solution of an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when substituted into the equation.

In the earlier sections, we listed the steps to determine if a value is a solution. We restate them here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.

Step 1.  Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
Step 2.
Step 3.  Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.

         Determine whether the resulting equation is true.
           If it is true, the number is a solution.
           If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

  EXAMPLE 8.1                     is a solution for
Determine whether

     Solution

Multiply.
Add.

Since      results in a true equation, is a solution to the equation

TRY IT 8.1 Is                     a solution for

TRY IT 8.2 Is                     a solution for

We introduced the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality in Solving Equations Using the Subtraction and
Addition Properties of Equality. In that section, we modeled how these properties work and then applied them to solving

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 603

equations with whole numbers. We used these properties again each time we introduced a new system of numbers.
Let's review those properties here.

Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

Subtraction Property of Equality  then
For all real numbers and if       then
Addition Property of Equality
For all real numbers and if

When you add or subtract the same quantity from both sides of an equation, you still have equality.

We introduced the Subtraction Property of Equality earlier by modeling equations with envelopes and counters. Figure
8.2 models the equation

                                                                              Figure 8.2

The goal is to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. So we `took away' from both sides of the equation and
found the solution

Some people picture a balance scale, as in Figure 8.3, when they solve equations.

                                                                              Figure 8.3

The quantities on both sides of the equal sign in an equation are equal, or balanced. Just as with the balance scale,
whatever you do to one side of the equation you must also do to the other to keep it balanced.

Let's review how to use Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality to solve equations. We need to isolate the
variable on one side of the equation. And we check our solutions by substituting the value into the equation to make
sure we have a true statement.
604 8 · Solving Linear Equations

  EXAMPLE 8.2                       by using the Subtraction Property of Equality.

Solve:
     Solution

To isolate we undo the addition of

We "undo" the subtraction of 11 by adding 11 to each side.

Simplify.
Check:

Substitute  .

Since      makes                  a true statement, we know that it is a solution to the equation.

       TRY IT 8.3 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.4 Solve:

In the original equation in the previous example, was added to the , so we subtracted to `undo' the addition. In
the next example, we will need to `undo' subtraction by using the Addition Property of Equality.

  EXAMPLE 8.3
Solve:

     Solution

Subtract 4 from each side to "undo" the addition.

Simplify.
Check:

Substitute        .

                                                   The solution to  is              .

       TRY IT 8.5 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 605

       TRY IT 8.6 Solve:
Now let's review solving equations with fractions.

  EXAMPLE 8.4
Solve:

     Solution

  Use the Addition Property of Equality.
  Find the LCD to add the fractions on the right.
  Simplify
  Check:

  Subtract.
  Simplify.
  The solution checks.

       TRY IT 8.7 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.8 Solve:
In Solve Equations with Decimals, we solved equations that contained decimals. We'll review this next.
  EXAMPLE 8.5
Solve
     Solution

  Use the Addition Property of Equality.
606 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Add.
Check:

Substitute  .

Simplify.
The solution checks.

       TRY IT 8.9 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.10 Solve:

Solve Equations That Need to Be Simplified

In the examples up to this point, we have been able to isolate the variable with just one operation. Many of the
equations we encounter in algebra will take more steps to solve. Usually, we will need to simplify one or both sides of an
equation before using the Subtraction or Addition Properties of Equality. You should always simplify as much as possible
before trying to isolate the variable.

  EXAMPLE 8.6

Solve:
     Solution

The left side of the equation has an expression that we should simplify before trying to isolate the variable.

Rearrange the terms, using the Commutative Property of Addition.

Combine like terms.

Add 11 to both sides to isolate .

Simplify.

Check.         into the original equation.
Substitute

The solution checks.
       TRY IT 8.11 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 607

       TRY IT 8.12 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.7
Solve:

     Solution
The left side of the equation has an expression that we should simplify.

Distribute on the left.

Use the Commutative Property to rearrange terms.

Combine like terms.

Isolate n using the Addition Property of Equality.

Simplify.

Check.      into the original equation.
Substitute

  The solution checks.

       TRY IT 8.13 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.14 Solve:
  EXAMPLE 8.8
Solve:
     Solution
Both sides of the equation have expressions that we should simplify before we isolate the variable.

  Distribute on the left, subtract on the right.
  Use the Commutative Property of Addition.
  Combine like terms.
608 8 · Solving Linear Equations

         Undo subtraction by using the Addition Property of Equality.
         Simplify.
         Check.
         Let

         The solution checks.

              TRY IT 8.15 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.16 Solve:

     Translate an Equation and Solve

       In previous chapters, we translated word sentences into equations. The first step is to look for the word (or words) that
       translate(s) to the equal sign. Table 8.1 reminds us of some of the words that translate to the equal sign.

                                                                                      Equals (=)
                                         is is equal to is the same as the result is gives was will be
                                      Table 8.1
       Let's review the steps we used to translate a sentence into an equation.

                      ...

                        HOW TO
         Translate a word sentence to an algebraic equation.
         Step 1. Locate the "equals" word(s). Translate to an equal sign.
         Step 2. Translate the words to the left of the "equals" word(s) into an algebraic expression.
         Step 3. Translate the words to the right of the "equals" word(s) into an algebraic expression.
       Now we are ready to try an example.
         EXAMPLE 8.9
       Translate and solve: five more than is equal to

        Access for free at openstax.org
                             8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 609

  Solution
Translate.

Subtract 5 from both sides.
Simplify.
Check:
Is five more than ?

The solution checks.

       TRY IT 8.17 Translate and solve: Eleven more than is equal to
       TRY IT 8.18 Translate and solve: Twelve less than is equal to

  EXAMPLE 8.10
Translate and solve: The difference of and is

     Solution
  Translate.

  Simplify.
  Check:

  The solution checks.

       TRY IT 8.19 Translate and solve: The difference of and is
       TRY IT 8.20 Translate and solve: The difference of and is

Translate and Solve Applications

In most of the application problems we solved earlier, we were able to find the quantity we were looking for by
simplifying an algebraic expression. Now we will be using equations to solve application problems. We'll start by
610 8 · Solving Linear Equations

restating the problem in just one sentence, assign a variable, and then translate the sentence into an equation to solve.
When assigning a variable, choose a letter that reminds you of what you are looking for.

EXAMPLE 8.11

The Robles family has two dogs, Buster and Chandler. Together, they weigh    pounds.
Chandler weighs pounds. How much does Buster weigh?

     Solution
  Read the problem carefully.

Identify what you are asked to find, and choose a variable to represent it.  How much does Buster weigh?
                                                                             Let Buster's weight

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.                      Buster's weight plus Chandler's
                                                                             weight equals 71 pounds.

We will restate the problem, and then include the given information.         Buster's weight plus 28 equals 71.

Translate the sentence into an equation, using the variable .

Solve the equation using good algebraic techniques.

Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Is 43 pounds a reasonable weight for a dog? Yes. Does Buster's weight plus
Chandler's weight equal 71 pounds?

Write a complete sentence that answers the question, "How much does          Buster weighs 43 pounds
Buster weigh?"

TRY IT 8.21                       Translate into an algebraic equation and solve: The Pappas family has two cats, Zeus and
                                  Athena. Together, they weigh pounds. Zeus weighs pounds. How much does Athena weigh?

TRY IT 8.22                       Translate into an algebraic equation and solve: Sam and Henry are roommates. Together, they
                                  have books. Sam has books. How many books does Henry have?

           ...

              HOW TO

Devise a problem-solving strategy.

Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 611

Step 4.  Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
         information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

EXAMPLE 8.12

Shayla paid         for her new car. This was  less than the sticker price. What was the sticker price of the car?
                                                        "What was the sticker price of the car?"
Solution

What are you asked to find?

Assign a variable.                                       Let the sticker price of the car.

Write a sentence that gives the information to find it.  $24,575 is $875 less than the sticker price
                                                         $24,575 is $875 less than

Translate into an equation.

Solve.

Check:
Is $875 less than $25,450 equal to $24,575?

Write a sentence that answers the question.              The sticker price was $25,450.

TRY IT 8.23         Translate into an algebraic equation and solve: Eddie paid           for his new car. This was

                             less than the sticker price. What was the sticker price of the car?

TRY IT 8.24         Translate into an algebraic equation and solve: The admission price for the movies during the

                    day is   This is           less than the price at night. How much does the movie cost at night?

The Links to Literacy activity, "The 100-pound Problem", will provide you with another view of the topics covered in this
section.

       MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Solving One Step Equations By Addition and Subtraction (http://www.openstax.org/l/24Solveonestep)
      Solve One Step Equations By Add and Subtract Whole Numbers (Variable on Left) (http://www.openstax.org/l/
      24SolveByAdd)
      Solve One Step Equations By Add and Subtract Whole Numbers (Variable on Right) (http://www.openstax.org/l/
      24AddSubtrWhole)
612 8 · Solving Linear Equations

        SECTION 8.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, determine whether the given value is a solution to the equation.

1. Is  a solution of              2. Is           a solution of       3. Is    a solution of

4. Is  a solution of

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

5.                                6.                                  7.
                                                                      10.
8.                                9.                                  13.
                                                                      16.
11.                               12.                                 19.

14.                               15.

17.                               18.

20.                               21.

Solve Equations that Need to be Simplified

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

22.                               23.                                 24.
                                                                      27.
25.                               26.                                 30.
                                                                      33.
28.                               29.
                                                                         36.
31.                               32.                                 39.

34.                               35.

37.                               38.

40.                               41.

Translate to an Equation and Solve

In the following exercises, translate to an equation and then solve.

42. Five more than is equal       43. The sum of and is               44. Ten less than is
      to

45. Three less than is            46. The sum of and is               47. Eight more than is equal
                                                                            to
48. The difference of and         49. The difference of and
          is                            is                            50. The difference of and
                                                                            is
51. The difference of and         52. The sum of and is
      is                                                              53. The sum of          and

                                                                           is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  8.1 · Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality 613

Translate and Solve Applications

In the following exercises, translate into an equation and solve.

54. Pilar drove from home to       55. Jeff read a total of pages      56. Pablo's father is years
      school and then to her             in his English and                  older than his mother.
      aunt's house, a total of           Psychology textbooks. He            Pablo's mother is years
      miles. The distance from           read pages in his                   old. How old is his father?
      Pilar's house to school is         English textbook. How
      miles. What is the distance        many pages did he read in
      from school to her aunt's          his Psychology textbook?
      house?

57. Eva's daughter is years        58. Allie weighs pounds less        59. For a family birthday
      younger than her son.              than her twin sister Lorrie.        dinner, Celeste bought a
      Eva's son is years old.            Allie weighs pounds.                turkey that weighed
      How old is her daughter?           How much does Lorrie                pounds less than the one
                                         weigh?                              she bought for
                                                                             Thanksgiving. The birthday
                                                                             dinner turkey weighed
                                                                             pounds. How much did the
                                                                             Thanksgiving turkey
                                                                             weigh?

60. The nurse reported that        61. Connor's temperature was        62. Melissa's math book cost
                                              degrees higher this
Tricia's daughter had                                                              less than her art
                                         morning than it had been
gained pounds since                      last night. His temperature         book cost. Her math book
                                         this morning was
her last checkup and now                 degrees. What was his               cost  How much did
                                         temperature last night?
weighs  pounds. How                                                          her art book cost?

much did Tricia's daughter

weigh at her last checkup?

63. Ron's paycheck this week

was     less than his

paycheck last week. His

paycheck this week was

        How much was

Ron's paycheck last week?

Everyday Math

64. Baking Kelsey needs cup of sugar for the      65. Construction Miguel wants to drill a hole for a

cookie recipe she wants to make. She only has                          screw. The screw should be inch larger

cup of sugar and will borrow the rest from her                     than the hole. Let equal the size of the hole he

neighbor. Let equal the amount of sugar she will                   should drill. Solve the equation       to see

borrow. Solve the equation         to find the                     what size the hole should be.

amount of sugar she should ask to borrow.

Writing Exercises

66. Is a solution to the equation                 67. Write a word sentence that translates the
      How do you know?
                                                                   equation        and then make up an

                                                                   application that uses this equation in its solution.
614 8 · Solving Linear Equations

     Self Check

       After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

8.2 Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties
of Equality

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve equations using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality
           Solve equations that need to be simplified

       BE PREPARED 8.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 4.28.

BE PREPARED 8.5                  What is the reciprocal of
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.29.

BE PREPARED 8.6                  Evaluate  when

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.56.

Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality

We introduced the Multiplication and Division Properties of Equality in Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division
Property of Equality and Solve Equations with Fractions. We modeled how these properties worked using envelopes and
counters and then applied them to solving equations (See Solve Equations Using Integers; The Division Property of
Equality). We restate them again here as we prepare to use these properties again.

Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality

Division Property of Equality: For all real numbers        and      if        then

Multiplication Property of Equality: For all real numbers       if      then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         8.2 · Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality 615

When you divide or multiply both sides of an equation by the same quantity, you still have equality.
Let's review how these properties of equality can be applied in order to solve equations. Remember, the goal is to `undo'
the operation on the variable. In the example below the variable is multiplied by so we will divide both sides by to
`undo' the multiplication.

  EXAMPLE 8.13

Solve:
     Solution

We use the Division Property of Equality to divide both sides by

Divide both sides by 4 to undo the multiplication.

Simplify.

Check your answer. Let           .

Since this is a true statement,     is a solution to

TRY IT 8.25 Solve:

TRY IT 8.26 Solve:

In the previous example, to `undo' multiplication, we divided. How do you think we `undo' division?

EXAMPLE 8.14

Solve:              We can multiply both sides by to isolate

     Solution
Here is divided by

Multiply both sides by .
Simplify.
616 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Check your answer. Let            .

       TRY IT 8.27 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.28 Solve:
  EXAMPLE 8.15
Solve:
     Solution
Remember is equivalent to

  Rewrite as .
  Divide both sides by .

  Check.
  Substitute
  Simplify.
In Solve Equations with Fractions, we saw that there are two other ways to solve
We could multiply both sides by
We could take the opposite of both sides.

       TRY IT 8.29 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.30 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     8.2 · Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality 617

EXAMPLE 8.16

Solve:

     Solution                                        our strategy will be to isolate by multiplying by the reciprocal of
Since the product of a number and its reciprocal is

Multiply by the reciprocal of .
Reciprocals multiply to one.
Multiply.
Check your answer. Let

Notice that we could have divided both sides of the equation  by to isolate While this would work,
multiplying by the reciprocal requires fewer steps.

       TRY IT 8.31 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.32 Solve:

Solve Equations That Need to be Simplified

Many equations start out more complicated than the ones we've just solved. First, we need to simplify both sides of the
equation as much as possible

  EXAMPLE 8.17
Solve:

     Solution
Start by combining like terms to simplify each side.

Combine like terms.
618 8 · Solving Linear Equations

         Divide both sides by 12 to isolate x.
         Simplify.
         Check your answer. Let

              TRY IT 8.33 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.34 Solve:
         EXAMPLE 8.18
      Solve:
            Solution
      Simplify each side by combining like terms.
         Simplify each side.
         Divide both sides by 3 to isolate y.
         Simplify.
         Check your answer. Let

      Notice that the variable ended up on the right side of the equal sign when we solved the equation. You may prefer to
      take one more step to write the solution with the variable on the left side of the equal sign.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                            8.2 · Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality 619

       TRY IT 8.35 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.36 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.19
Solve:

     Solution
Remember--always simplify each side first.

Distribute.
Simplify.

Divide both sides by -3 to isolate n.

Check your answer. Let  .

     TRY IT 8.37 Solve:

     TRY IT 8.38 Solve:

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity, "Everybody Wins" will provide you with another view of the topics covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Solving One Step Equation by Mult/Div. Integers (Var on Left) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24OneStepMultiL)
    Solving One Step Equation by Mult/Div. Integers (Var on Right) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24OneStepMultiR)
    Solving One Step Equation in the Form: -x = -a (http://www.openstax.org/l/24xa)
620 8 · Solving Linear Equations

        SECTION 8.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation for the variable using the Division Property of Equality and check the
solution.

68.                               69.                     70.

71.                               72.                     73.

74.                               75.                     76.

77.                               78.                     79.

In the following exercises, solve each equation for the variable using the Multiplication Property of Equality and check
the solution.

80.                               81.                     82.

83.                               84.                     85.

86.                               87.                     88.

89.                               90.                     91.

92.                               93.

Solve Equations That Need to be Simplified

In the following exercises, solve the equation.

94.                               95.                     96.
                                                          99.
97.                               98.                     102.

100.                              101.

103.

Everyday Math

104. Balloons Ramona bought balloons for a                105. Teaching Connie's kindergarten class has
        party. She wants to make equal bunches. Find              children. She wants them to get into equal
        the number of balloons in each bunch, by                  groups. Find the number of children in each
        solving the equation                                      group, by solving the equation

106. Ticket price Daria paid      for children's          107. Unit price Nishant paid  for a pack of

      tickets at the ice skating rink. Find the price of  juice bottles. Find the price of each bottle, by

      each ticket, by solving the equation                solving the equation

108. Fuel economy Tania's SUV gets half as many           109. Fabric The drill team used yards of fabric to
                                                                  make flags for one-third of the members. Find
      miles per gallon (mpg) as her husband's hybrid              how much fabric, they would need to make
                                                                  flags for the whole team by solving the equation
      car. The SUV gets           Find the miles per

      gallons, of the hybrid car, by solving the

      equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 621

Writing Exercises

110. Frida started to solve the equation     by  111. Emiliano thinks       is the solution to the
                                                         equation      Explain why he is wrong.
adding to both sides. Explain why Frida's

method will result in the correct solution.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

8.3 Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve an equation with constants on both sides
           Solve an equation with variables on both sides
           Solve an equation with variables and constants on both sides
           Solve equations using a general strategy

       BE PREPARED 8.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Simplify:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.22.

BE PREPARED 8.8    Solve:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 2.31.

BE PREPARED 8.9    Solve:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 3.65.

Solve an Equation with Constants on Both Sides

You may have noticed that in all the equations we have solved so far, all the variable terms were on only one side of the
equation with the constants on the other side. This does not happen all the time--so now we'll see how to solve
equations where the variable terms and/or constant terms are on both sides of the equation.

Our strategy will involve choosing one side of the equation to be the variable side, and the other side of the equation to
be the constant side. Then, we will use the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality, step by step, to get all the
variable terms together on one side of the equation and the constant terms together on the other side.

By doing this, we will transform the equation that started with variables and constants on both sides into the form
           We already know how to solve equations of this form by using the Division or Multiplication Properties of

Equality.

  EXAMPLE 8.20

Solve:

     Solution
In this equation, the variable is only on the left side. It makes sense to call the left side the variable side. Therefore, the
right side will be the constant side. We'll write the labels above the equation to help us remember what goes where.
622 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Since the left side is the variable side, the 6 is out of place. We must "undo" adding 6 by
subtracting 6, and to keep the equality we must subtract 6 from both sides. Use the
Subtraction Property of Equality.

Simplify.

Now all the s are on the left and the constant on the right.

Use the Division Property of Equality.

Simplify.

Check:

Let        .

       TRY IT 8.39 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.40 Solve:
  EXAMPLE 8.21
Solve:
     Solution
Notice that the variable is only on the left side of the equation, so this will be the variable side and the right side will be
the constant side. Since the left side is the variable side, the is out of place. It is subtracted from the so to `undo'
subtraction, add to both sides.

  Add 7 to both sides.
  Simplify.
  The variables are now on one side and the constants on the other.
  Divide both sides by 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
                8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 623

Simplify.
Check:

Substitute:  .

       TRY IT 8.41 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.42 Solve:

Solve an Equation with Variables on Both Sides

What if there are variables on both sides of the equation? We will start like we did above--choosing a variable side and a
constant side, and then use the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality to collect all variables on one side and all
constants on the other side. Remember, what you do to the left side of the equation, you must do to the right side too.

  EXAMPLE 8.22
Solve:

     Solution
Here the variable, is on both sides, but the constants appear only on the right side, so let's make the right side the
"constant" side. Then the left side will be the "variable" side.

  We don't want any variables on the right, so subtract the .
  Simplify.
  We have all the variables on one side and the constants on the other. We have solved the
  equation.
  Check:
  Substitute 7 for .

       TRY IT 8.43 Solve:
624 8 · Solving Linear Equations

TRY IT 8.44 Solve:

EXAMPLE 8.23

Solve:                                                                is on both sides. Let's leave the constant on the

     Solution
The only constant, is on the left side of the equation and variable,
left and collect the variables to the right.

Subtract from both sides.
Simplify.

We have the variables on the right and the constants on the left. Divide both sides by 2.

Simplify.

Rewrite with the variable on the left.

Check: Let          .

TRY IT 8.45 Solve:
TRY IT 8.46 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.24         is on the right, so let the left side be the variable side.

Solve:
     Solution

The only constant,

Remove the from the right side by adding to both sides.

Access for free at openstax.org
                            8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 625

Simplify.

All the variables are on the left and the constants are on the right. Divide both sides by 8.

Simplify.

Check: Substitute        .

       TRY IT 8.47 Solve:

       TRY IT 8.48 Solve:

Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides

The next example will be the first to have variables and constants on both sides of the equation. As we did before, we'll
collect the variable terms to one side and the constants to the other side.

  EXAMPLE 8.25
Solve:

     Solution
Start by choosing which side will be the variable side and which side will be the constant side. The variable terms are
and Since is greater than make the left side the variable side and so the right side will be the constant side.

Collect the variable terms to the left side by subtracting from both sides.

Simplify.

Now, collect the constants to the right side by subtracting 5 from both sides.

Simplify.

The solution is       .

Check: Let         .
626 8 · Solving Linear Equations

TRY IT 8.49 Solve:

TRY IT 8.50 Solve:

We'll summarize the steps we took so you can easily refer to them.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Solve an equation with variables and constants on both sides.

Step 1.  Choose one side to be the variable side and then the other will be the constant side.
Step 2.  Collect the variable terms to the variable side, using the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
Step 3.  Collect the constants to the other side, using the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
Step 4.  Make the coefficient of the variable using the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
Step 5.  Check the solution by substituting it into the original equation.

It is a good idea to make the variable side the one in which the variable has the larger coefficient. This usually makes the
arithmetic easier.

EXAMPLE 8.26

Solve:                            on the right. Since  make the left side the "variable" side.

     Solution
We have on the left and

We don't want variables on the right side--add         to both sides to leave only
constants on the right.

Combine like terms.

We don't want any constants on the left side, so add 2 to both sides.

Simplify.

The variable term is on the left and the constant term is on the right.
To get the coefficient of to be one, divide both sides by 9.

Simplify.

Check: Substitute 1 for .

       TRY IT 8.51 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
TRY IT 8.52 Solve:                                             8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 627

  EXAMPLE 8.27         on the left and  on the right. Since  make the right side the variable side and the left side

Solve:

     Solution
This equation has
the constant side.

Subtract from both sides to remove the variable term from the left.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 8 from both sides to remove the constant from the right.
Simplify.

Divide both sides by 3 to make 1 the coefficient of .

Simplify.

Check: Let          .

Note that we could have made the left side the variable side instead of the right side, but it would have led to a negative
coefficient on the variable term. While we could work with the negative, there is less chance of error when working with
positives. The strategy outlined above helps avoid the negatives!

TRY IT 8.53 Solve:

TRY IT 8.54 Solve:

To solve an equation with fractions, we still follow the same steps to get the solution.

EXAMPLE 8.28

Solve:

Solution

Since       make the left side the variable side and the right side the constant side.
628 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Subtract from both sides.

Combine like terms.

Subtract 5 from both sides.

Simplify.

Check: Let     .

TRY IT 8.55 Solve:

TRY IT 8.56 Solve:

We follow the same steps when the equation has decimals, too.

EXAMPLE 8.29

Solve:         make the left side the variable side and the right side the constant side.

     Solution
Since

Subtract       from both sides.

Combine like terms.

Subtract 4 from both sides.

Simplify.

Use the Division Property of Equality.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 629

Check: Let      .

TRY IT 8.57 Solve:

TRY IT 8.58 Solve:

Solve Equations Using a General Strategy

Each of the first few sections of this chapter has dealt with solving one specific form of a linear equation. It's time now to
lay out an overall strategy that can be used to solve any linear equation. We call this the general strategy. Some
equations won't require all the steps to solve, but many will. Simplifying each side of the equation as much as possible
first makes the rest of the steps easier.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a general strategy for solving linear equations.

Step 1.  Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible. Use the Distributive Property to remove any
Step 2.  parentheses. Combine like terms.
Step 3.  Collect all the variable terms to one side of the equation. Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
Step 4.  Collect all the constant terms to the other side of the equation. Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of
Step 5.  Equality.
         Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
         State the solution to the equation.
         Check the solution. Substitute the solution into the original equation to make sure the result is a true
         statement.

  EXAMPLE 8.30
Solve:

     Solution

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Use the Distributive Property.

Collect all variable terms on one side of the equation--all s are already on the left side.

Collect constant terms on the other side of the equation.
Subtract 6 from each side

Simplify.
630 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1. Divide each side by 3.

Simplify.

Check: Let  .

       TRY IT 8.59 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.60 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.31
Solve:

     Solution

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible by distributing.
The only term is on the left side, so all variable terms are on the left side of the equation.

Add 5 to both sides to get all constant terms on the right side of the equation.

Simplify.

Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1 by multiplying both sides by -1.

Simplify.

Check: Let     .

       TRY IT 8.61 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.62 Solve:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 631

  EXAMPLE 8.32
Solve:

     Solution

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Distribute.
Combine like terms
The only is on the left side, so all variable terms are on one side of the equation.
Add 3 to both sides to get all constant terms on the other side of the equation.
Simplify.

Make the coefficient of the variable term equal to 1 by dividing both sides by 4.

Simplify.

Check: Let      .

       TRY IT 8.63 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.64 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.33
Solve:

     Solution
Be careful when distributing the negative.

  Simplify--use the Distributive Property.
  Combine like terms.
  Add 2 to both sides to collect constants on the right.
632 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Simplify.
Divide both sides by -6.

Simplify.

Check: Let    .

       TRY IT 8.65 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.66 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.34
Solve:

     Solution

Distribute.

Combine like terms.

Subtract to get all the variables on the right since  .

Simplify.

Subtract 9 to get the constants on the left.

Simplify.

Divide by 5.

Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 633

Check: Substitute:  .

       TRY IT 8.67 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.68 Solve:
  EXAMPLE 8.35
Solve:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Add to get all the variables on the left.
  Simplify.
  Add 1 to get constants on the right.
  Simplify.
  Divide by 4.
  Simplify.
634 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Check: Let  .

       TRY IT 8.69 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.70 Solve:
In many applications, we will have to solve equations with decimals. The same general strategy will work for these
equations.
  EXAMPLE 8.36
Solve:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Subtract to get all the s to the left.
  Simplify.
  Subtract 1.2 to get the constants to the right.
  Simplify.
  Divide.
  Simplify.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   8.3 · Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides 635

Check: Let  .

      TRY IT 8.71 Solve:

      TRY IT 8.72 Solve:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Solving Multi-Step Equations (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SolveMultStep)
      Solve an Equation with Variable Terms on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/24SolveEquatVar)
      Solving Multi-Step Equations (L5.4) (http://www.openstax.org/l/24MultiStepEqu)
      Solve an Equation with Variables and Parentheses on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/24EquVarParen)

        SECTION 8.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve an Equation with Constants on Both Sides

In the following exercises, solve the equation for the variable.

112.           113.                                                114.

115.           116.                                                117.

118.           119.                                                120.

121.           122.                                                123.

Solve an Equation with Variables on Both Sides

In the following exercises, solve the equation for the variable.

124.           125.                                                126.

127.           128.                                                129.

130.           131.                                                132.

133.           134.                                                135.

Solve an Equation with Variables and Constants on Both Sides

In the following exercises, solve the equations for the variable.

136.           137.                                                138.

139.           140.                                                141.

142.           143.                                                144.
636 8 · Solving Linear Equations

145.                              146.                      147.

148.                              149.                      150.

151.                              152.                      153.

154.                              155.                      156.

157.                              158.                      159.

160.                              161.

Solve an Equation Using the General Strategy

In the following exercises, solve the linear equation using the general strategy.

162.                              163.                      164.

165.                              166.                      167.

168.                              169.                      170.

171.                              172.                      173.

174.                              175.                      176.

177.                              178.                      179.

180.                              181.                      182.

183.                              184.                      185.

186.                              187.                      188.

189.                              190.                      191.

192.                              193.                      194.

195.                                    196.

197.                              198.

Everyday Math

199. Making a fence Jovani has a fence around the           200. Concert tickets At a school concert, the total
        rectangular garden in his backyard. The
        perimeter of the fence is feet. The length is       value of tickets sold was  Student tickets
            feet more than the width. Find the width,
        by solving the equation                             sold for and adult tickets sold for The

                                                            number of adult tickets sold was less than

                                                            times the number of student tickets. Find the

                                                            number of student tickets sold, by solving the

                                                            equation

201. Coins Rhonda has             in nickels and dimes.     202. Fencing Micah has feet of fencing to make a
                                                                    rectangular dog pen in his yard. He wants the
      The number of dimes is one less than twice the                length to be feet more than the width. Find
                                                                    the length, by solving the equation
      number of nickels. Find the number of nickels,

      by solving the equation

Writing Exercises

203. When solving an equation with variables on both        204. Solve the equation
        sides, why is it usually better to choose the side          explaining all the steps of your solution.
        with the larger coefficient as the variable side?
                                                            206. Solve the equation
205. What is the first step you take when solving the               explaining all the steps of your solution as in the
                                                                    examples in this section.
      equation                    Explain why this is

      your first step.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            8.4 · Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 637

207. Using your own words, list the steps in the        208. Explain why you should simplify both sides of an
        General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.          equation as much as possible before collecting
                                                                the variable terms to one side and the constant
                                                                terms to the other side.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

8.4 Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve equations with fraction coefficients
           Solve equations with decimal coefficients

       BE PREPARED 8.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Multiply:
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 4.28

BE PREPARED 8.11  Find the LCD of
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 4.63

BE PREPARED 8.12  Multiply:  by

                  If you missed this problem, review Example 5.18

Solve Equations with Fraction Coefficients

Let's use the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations introduced earlier to solve the equation

To isolate the term, subtract from both sides.
Simplify the left side.
Change the constants to equivalent fractions with the LCD.
Subtract.
638 8 · Solving Linear Equations

         Multiply both sides by the reciprocal of .
         Simplify.
       This method worked fine, but many students don't feel very confident when they see all those fractions. So we are going
       to show an alternate method to solve equations with fractions. This alternate method eliminates the fractions.
       We will apply the Multiplication Property of Equality and multiply both sides of an equation by the least common
       denominator of all the fractions in the equation. The result of this operation will be a new equation, equivalent to the
       first, but with no fractions. This process is called clearing the equation of fractions. Let's solve the same equation again,
       but this time use the method that clears the fractions.
         EXAMPLE 8.37
       Solve:

            Solution
         Find the least common denominator of all the fractions in the equation.
         Multiply both sides of the equation by that LCD, 8. This clears the fractions.
         Use the Distributive Property.
         Simplify -- and notice, no more fractions!
         Solve using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.
         Simplify.
         Check: Let

              TRY IT 8.73 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.74 Solve:
       Notice in Example 8.37 that once we cleared the equation of fractions, the equation was like those we solved earlier in

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                          8.4 · Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 639

this chapter. We changed the problem to one we already knew how to solve! We then used the General Strategy for
Solving Linear Equations.

             ...

                 HOW TO
  Solve equations with fraction coefficients by clearing the fractions.
  Step 1. Find the least common denominator of all the fractions in the equation.
  Step 2. Multiply both sides of the equation by that LCD. This clears the fractions.
  Step 3. Solve using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.

  EXAMPLE 8.38
Solve:

     Solution
We want to clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD of all the fractions in the equation.

  Find the least common denominator of all the fractions in the equation.

  Multiply both sides of the equation by 12.

  Distribute.
  Simplify -- and notice, no more fractions!
  Combine like terms.
  Divide by 7.
  Simplify.
  Check: Let

       TRY IT 8.75 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.76 Solve:
In the next example, we'll have variables and fractions on both sides of the equation.
640 8 · Solving Linear Equations

         EXAMPLE 8.39
       Solve:

            Solution
          Find the LCD of all the fractions in the equation.
          Multiply both sides by the LCD.
          Distribute.
          Simplify -- no more fractions!
          Subtract from both sides.
          Simplify.
          Subtract 2 from both sides.
          Simplify.
          Divide by 5.
          Simplify.
          Check: Substitute

              TRY IT 8.77 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.78 Solve:
       In Example 8.40, we'll start by using the Distributive Property. This step will clear the fractions right away!

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     8.4 · Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 641

  EXAMPLE 8.40
Solve:

     Solution

  Distribute.
  Simplify. Now there are no fractions to clear!
  Subtract 1 from both sides.
  Simplify.
  Divide by 2.
  Simplify.
  Check: Let

       TRY IT 8.79 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.80 Solve:
Many times, there will still be fractions, even after distributing.
  EXAMPLE 8.41
Solve:
     Solution

  Distribute.
642 8 · Solving Linear Equations

          Simplify.
          Multiply by the LCD, 4.
          Distribute.
          Simplify.
          Collect the terms to the left.
          Simplify.
          Collect the constants to the right.
          Simplify.
          Check: Substitute for

TRY IT 8.81 Solve:

TRY IT 8.82 Solve:

Solve Equations with Decimal Coefficients

Some equations have decimals in them. This kind of equation will occur when we solve problems dealing with money

and percent. But decimals are really another way to represent fractions. For example,  and  So,

when we have an equation with decimals, we can use the same process we used to clear fractions--multiply both sides
of the equation by the least common denominator.

EXAMPLE 8.42

Solve:                                         Since  the LCD is We can multiply both sides by to clear the

     Solution
The only decimal in the equation is
decimal.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             8.4 · Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 643

Multiply both sides by the LCD.
Distribute.
Multiply, and notice, no more decimals!
Add 50 to get all constants to the right.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 8.
Simplify.
Check: Let

       TRY IT 8.83 Solve:
       TRY IT 8.84 Solve:

  EXAMPLE 8.43
Solve:

     Solution
Look at the decimals and think of the equivalent fractions.

Notice, the LCD is
By multiplying by the LCD we will clear the decimals.

  Multiply both sides by 100.
  Distribute.
  Multiply, and now no more decimals.
644 8 · Solving Linear Equations

          Collect the variables to the right.
          Simplify.
          Collect the constants to the left.
          Simplify.
          Divide by 19.
          Simplify.
          Check: Let

              TRY IT 8.85 Solve:
              TRY IT 8.86 Solve:
       The next example uses an equation that is typical of the ones we will see in the money applications in the next chapter.
       Notice that we will distribute the decimal first before we clear all decimals in the equation.
         EXAMPLE 8.44
       Solve:
            Solution

          Distribute first.
          Combine like terms.
          To clear decimals, multiply by 100.
          Distribute.
          Subtract 15 from both sides.
          Simplify.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           8.4 · Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients 645

Divide by 30.
Simplify.
Check: Let

      TRY IT 8.87 Solve:

      TRY IT 8.88 Solve:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Solve an Equation with Fractions with Variable Terms on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/24FracVariTerm)
      Ex 1: Solve an Equation with Fractions with Variable Terms on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/
      24Ex1VariTerms)
      Ex 2: Solve an Equation with Fractions with Variable Terms on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/
      24Ex2VariTerms)
      Solving Multiple Step Equations Involving Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24EquawithDec)
      Ex: Solve a Linear Equation With Decimals and Variables on Both Sides (http://www.openstax.org/l/24LinEquaDec)
      Ex: Solve an Equation with Decimals and Parentheses (http://www.openstax.org/l/24DecParens)

        SECTION 8.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve equations with fraction coefficients

In the following exercises, solve the equation by clearing the fractions.

209.           210.                                                        211.

212.           213.                                                        214.

215.           216.                                                        217.

218.           219.                                                        220.

221.           222.                                                        223.

224.           225.                                                        226.

227.           228.                                                        229.

230.           231.                                                        232.
646 8 · Solving Linear Equations

Solve Equations with Decimal Coefficients

In the following exercises, solve the equation by clearing the decimals.

233.                              234.                                    235.

236.                              237.                                    238.

239.                              240.                                          241.

242.                              243.                                    244.

245.                              246.                                    247.

248.

Everyday Math

249. Coins Taylor has             in dimes and pennies.  250. Stamps Travis bought      worth of

      The number of pennies is more than the             stamps and                   stamps. The number of

      number of dimes. Solve the equation                                 stamps was less than the number of

                                  for the number of                       stamps. Solve the equation

      dimes.                                                                            for to find the

                                                         number of                    stamps Travis bought.

Writing Exercises

251. Explain how to find the least common                252. If an equation has several fractions, how does
        denominator of                                           multiplying both sides by the LCD make it easier
                                                                 to solve?
253. If an equation has fractions only on one side,
        why do you have to multiply both sides of the    254. In the equation                         what is the
        equation by the LCD?                                     LCD? How do you know?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       8 · Chapter Review 647

Chapter Review

Key Terms

solution of an equation A solution of an equation is a value of a variable that makes a true statement when
    substituted into the equation.

Key Concepts

8.1 Solve Equations Using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

  · Determine whether a number is a solution to an equation.
      Step 1. Substitute the number for the variable in the equation.
      Step 2. Simplify the expressions on both sides of the equation.
      Step 3. Determine whether the resulting equation is true.

If it is true, the number is a solution.

If it is not true, the number is not a solution.

· Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality
    Subtraction Property of Equality

For all real numbers a, b, and c,

if a = b then  .

 Addition Property of Equality

For all real numbers a, b, and c,

if a = b then  .

· Translate a word sentence to an algebraic equation.
    Step 1. Locate the "equals" word(s). Translate to an equal sign.
    Step 2. Translate the words to the left of the "equals" word(s) into an algebraic expression.
    Step 3. Translate the words to the right of the "equals" word(s) into an algebraic expression.

· Problem-solving strategy
    Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas.
    Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
    Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
    Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to restate the problem in one sentence with all the important
               information. Then, translate the English sentence into an algebra equation.
    Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
    Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
    Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

8.2 Solve Equations Using the Division and Multiplication Properties of
Equality

  · Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality

 Division Property of Equality: For all real numbers a, b, c, and       , if  , then                .

 Multiplication Property of Equality: For all real numbers a, b, c, if        , then  .

8.3 Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides

  · Solve an equation with variables and constants on both sides
      Step 1. Choose one side to be the variable side and then the other will be the constant side.
      Step 2. Collect the variable terms to the variable side, using the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
      Step 3. Collect the constants to the other side, using the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
      Step 4. Make the coefficient of the variable 1, using the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
      Step 5. Check the solution by substituting into the original equation.

· General strategy for solving linear equations
    Step 1. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible. Use the Distributive Property to remove any
               parentheses. Combine like terms.
    Step 2. Collect all the variable terms to one side of the equation. Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of
               Equality.
    Step 3. Collect all the constant terms to the other side of the equation. Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of
               Equality.
    Step 4. Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1. Use the Multiplication or Division Property of
               Equality. State the solution to the equation.
648 8 · Exercises

      Step 5. Check the solution. Substitute the solution into the original equation to make sure the result is a true
                  statement.

8.4 Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients

  · Solve equations with fraction coefficients by clearing the fractions.
      Step 1. Find the least common denominator of all the fractions in the equation.
      Step 2. Multiply both sides of the equation by that LCD. This clears the fractions.
      Step 3. Solve using the General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Solve Equations using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, determine whether the given number is a solution to the equation.

255.                                   256.                           257.

258.

In the following exercises, solve the equation using the Subtraction Property of Equality.

259.                                   260.                           261.

262.

In the following exercises, solve the equation using the Addition Property of Equality.

263.                                   264.                           265.

266.

In the following exercises, solve the equation.

267.                                   268.                           269.

270.                                   271.                           272.

273.                                   274.

In the following exercises, translate each English sentence into an algebraic equation and then solve it.

275. The sum of and is                 276. Four less than is

In the following exercises, translate into an algebraic equation and solve.

277. Rochelle's daughter is            278. Tan weighs pounds.        279. Peter paid          to go to
        years old. Her son is                  Minh weighs pounds
        years younger. How old is              more than Tan. How            the movies, which was
        her son?                               much does Minh weigh?
                                                                              less than he paid

                                                                             to go to a concert. How

                                                                             much did he pay for the

                                                                             concert?

280. Elissa earned               this

      week, which was

      more than she earned

      last week. How much did

      she earn last week?

Solve Equations using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the Division Property of Equality.

281.                                   282.                           283.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                8 · Exercises 649

284.

In the following exercises, solve each equation using the Multiplication Property of Equality.

285.                             286.                       287.

288.

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

289.                             290.                       291.

292.                             293.                       294.

Solve Equations with Variables and Constants on Both Sides

In the following exercises, solve the equations with constants on both sides.

295.                             296.                       297.

298.

In the following exercises, solve the equations with variables on both sides.

299.                             300.                       301.

302.

In the following exercises, solve the equations with constants and variables on both sides.

303.                             304.                       305.

306.

In the following exercises, solve each linear equation using the general strategy.

307.                             308.                       309.

310.                             311.                       312.

313.                             314.                                               315.

316.

Solve Equations with Fraction or Decimal Coefficients
In the following exercises, solve each equation by clearing the fractions.

317.                             318.                       319.

320.

In the following exercises, solve each equation by clearing the decimals.

321.                             322.                                       323.

324.

Practice Test

325. Determine whether each
        number is a solution to
        the equation.

      
650 8 · Exercises

In the following exercises, solve each equation.

326.                             327.             328.
                                                  331.
329.                             330.
                                                  334.
332.                             333.             337.
                                                  340.
335.                             336.
                                                  343. Translate and solve: The
338.                             339.                     difference of twice and
                                                            is
341.                             342.

344. Samuel paid         for

      gas this week, which was

      less than he paid

      last week. How much did

      he pay last week?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              9 · Introduction 651

9  MATH MODELS AND GEOMETRY

Figure 9.1 Note the many individual shapes in this building. (credit: Bert Kaufmann, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  9.1 Use a Problem Solving Strategy
  9.2 Solve Money Applications
  9.3 Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem
  9.4 Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids
  9.5 Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures
  9.6 Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area
  9.7 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

      Introduction

We are surrounded by all sorts of geometry. Architects use geometry to design buildings. Artists create vivid images out
of colorful geometric shapes. Street signs, automobiles, and product packaging all take advantage of geometric
properties. In this chapter, we will begin by considering a formal approach to solving problems and use it to solve a
variety of common problems, including making decisions about money. Then we will explore geometry and relate it to
everyday situations, using the problem-solving strategy we develop.

9.1 Use a Problem Solving Strategy

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Approach word problems with a positive attitude
           Use a problem solving strategy for word problems
           Solve number problems

       BE PREPARED 9.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Translate less than twice into an algebraic expression.
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 2.25.

   BE PREPARED 9.2  Solve:
                    If you missed this problem, review Example 8.16.

   BE PREPARED 9.3 Solve:
652 9 · Math Models and Geometry

                                                   If you missed this problem, review Example 8.20.

     Approach Word Problems with a Positive Attitude

       The world is full of word problems. How much money do I need to fill the car with gas? How much should I tip the server
       at a restaurant? How many socks should I pack for vacation? How big a turkey do I need to buy for Thanksgiving dinner,
       and what time do I need to put it in the oven? If my sister and I buy our mother a present, how much will each of us pay?
       Now that we can solve equations, we are ready to apply our new skills to word problems. Do you know anyone who has
       had negative experiences in the past with word problems? Have you ever had thoughts like the student in Figure 9.2?

                                     Figure 9.2 Negative thoughts about word problems can be barriers to success.
       When we feel we have no control, and continue repeating negative thoughts, we set up barriers to success. We need to
       calm our fears and change our negative feelings.
       Start with a fresh slate and begin to think positive thoughts like the student in Figure 9.3. Read the positive thoughts and
       say them out loud.

                           Figure 9.3 When it comes to word problems, a positive attitude is a big step toward success.
       If we take control and believe we can be successful, we will be able to master word problems.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 653

Think of something that you can do now but couldn't do three years ago. Whether it's driving a car, snowboarding,
cooking a gourmet meal, or speaking a new language, you have been able to learn and master a new skill. Word
problems are no different. Even if you have struggled with word problems in the past, you have acquired many new
math skills that will help you succeed now!

Use a Problem-solving Strategy for Word Problems

In earlier chapters, you translated word phrases into algebraic expressions, using some basic mathematical vocabulary
and symbols. Since then you've increased your math vocabulary as you learned about more algebraic procedures, and
you've had more practice translating from words into algebra.

You have also translated word sentences into algebraic equations and solved some word problems. The word problems
applied math to everyday situations. You had to restate the situation in one sentence, assign a variable, and then write
an equation to solve. This method works as long as the situation is familiar to you and the math is not too complicated.

Now we'll develop a strategy you can use to solve any word problem. This strategy will help you become successful with
word problems. We'll demonstrate the strategy as we solve the following problem.

EXAMPLE 9.1

Pete bought a shirt on sale for  which is one-half the original price. What was the original price of the shirt?

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas. You may need to read the problem two or
more times. If there are words you don't understand, look them up in a dictionary or on the Internet.

· In this problem, do you understand what is being discussed? Do you understand every word?

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. It's hard to find something if you are not sure what it is! Read the problem
again and look for words that tell you what you are looking for!

· In this problem, the words "what was the original price of the shirt" tell you that what you are looking for: the
   original price of the shirt.

Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity. You can use any letter for the
variable, but it may help to choose one that helps you remember what it represents.

· Let the original price of the shirt

Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may help to first restate the problem in one sentence, with all the important
information. Then translate the sentence into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques. Even if you know the answer right away, using algebra will
better prepare you to solve problems that do not have obvious answers.

  Write the equation.

Multiply both sides by 2.

Simplify.

Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

· We found that            which means the original price was  Does            make sense in the problem? Yes, because
        is one-half of
                        and the shirt was on sale at half the original price.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
654 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         · The problem asked "What was the original price of the shirt?" The answer to the question is: "The original price of
             the shirt was

       If this were a homework exercise, our work might look like this:

TRY IT 9.1  Joaquin bought a bookcase on sale for  which was two-thirds the original price. What was
            the original price of the bookcase?

TRY IT 9.2  Two-fifths of the people in the senior center dining room are men. If there are  men, what is
            the total number of people in the dining room?

            We list the steps we took to solve the previous example.

Problem-Solving Strategy

Step 1.  Read the word problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas. You may need to read the
         problem two or more times. If there are words you don't understand, look them up in a dictionary or on the
Step 2.  internet.
Step 3.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 4.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 5.  Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to first restate the problem in one sentence before translating.
Step 6.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 7.  Check the answer in the problem. Make sure it makes sense.
         Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Let's use this approach with another example.

  EXAMPLE 9.2

Yash brought apples and bananas to a picnic. The number of apples was three more than twice the number of bananas.
Yash brought apples to the picnic. How many bananas did he bring?

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.  How many bananas did he bring?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 655

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.

Choose a variable to represent the number of          Let

bananas.

Step 4. Translate. Restate the problem in one
sentence with all the important information.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Subtract 3 from each side.
Simplify.

Divide each side by 2.

Simplify.                                             Yash brought 4 bananas to the picnic.

Step 6. Check: First, is our answer reasonable? Yes,
bringing four bananas to a picnic seems reasonable.
The problem says the number of apples was three
more than twice the number of bananas. If there are
four bananas, does that make eleven apples? Twice 4
bananas is 8. Three more than 8 is 11.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.3              Guillermo bought textbooks and notebooks at the bookstore. The number of textbooks was
                        more than the number of notebooks. He bought textbooks. How many notebooks did he buy?

TRY IT 9.4              Gerry worked Sudoku puzzles and crossword puzzles this week. The number of Sudoku puzzles
                        he completed is seven more than the number of crossword puzzles. He completed Sudoku
                        puzzles. How many crossword puzzles did he complete?

In Solve Sales Tax, Commission, and Discount Applications, we learned how to translate and solve basic percent
equations and used them to solve sales tax and commission applications. In the next example, we will apply our Problem
Solving Strategy to more applications of percent.

EXAMPLE 9.3

Nga's car insurance premium increased by       which was of the original cost. What was the original cost of the
premium?
656 9 · Math Models and Geometry

  Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Remember, if there are words you don't
understand, look them up.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                   the original cost of the premium

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent the original cost of premium. Let

Step 4. Translate. Restate as one sentence. Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Divide both sides by 0.08.

Simplify.
Step 6. Check: Is our answer reasonable? Yes, a $750 premium on auto
insurance is reasonable. Now let's check our algebra. Is 8% of 750 equal to
60?

Step 7. Answer the question.                                                 The original cost of Nga's premium
                                                                             was $750.

TRY IT 9.5  Pilar's rent increased by The increase was                   What was the original amount of Pilar's rent?

TRY IT 9.6  Steve saves           of his paycheck each month. If he saved       last month, how much was his
            paycheck?

Solve Number Problems

Now we will translate and solve number problems. In number problems, you are given some clues about one or more
numbers, and you use these clues to build an equation. Number problems don't usually arise on an everyday basis, but
they provide a good introduction to practicing the Problem Solving Strategy. Remember to look for clue words such as
difference, of, and and.

  EXAMPLE 9.4

The difference of a number and six is Find the number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 657

  Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Do you understand all the words?

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                      the number

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent the number.        Let

Step 4. Translate. Restate as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.                                     The number is 19.
Add 6 to both sides.
Simplify.

Step 6. Check:
The difference of 19 and 6 is 13. It checks.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.7 The difference of a number and eight is Find the number.
TRY IT 9.8 The difference of a number and eleven is Find the number.

  EXAMPLE 9.5                                 Find the number.
The sum of twice a number and seven is

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                      the number

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent the Let
number.

Step 4. Translate. Restate the problem as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Subtract 7 from each side and simplify.
Divide each side by 2 and simplify.
658 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check: is the sum of twice 4 and 7 equal to 15?

Step 7. Answer the question.                                      The number is 4.

TRY IT 9.9 The sum of four times a number and two is Find the number.

TRY IT 9.10 The sum of three times a number and seven is Find the number.

Some number word problems ask you to find two or more numbers. It may be tempting to name them all with different
variables, but so far we have only solved equations with one variable. We will define the numbers in terms of the same
variable. Be sure to read the problem carefully to discover how all the numbers relate to each other.

  EXAMPLE 9.6

One number is five more than another. The sum of the numbers is twenty-one. Find the numbers.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                        You are looking for two numbers.

Step 3. Name.                                                     Let
Choose a variable to represent the first                          One number is five more than another.
number.
What do you know about the second
number?
Translate.

Step 4. Translate.                                                The sum of the numbers is 21.
Restate the problem as one sentence with all                      The sum of the 1st number and the 2nd number
the important information.                                        is 21.
Translate into an equation.
Substitute the variable expressions.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Combine like terms.
Subtract five from both sides and simplify.
Divide by two and simplify.
Find the second number too.
Substitute n = 8

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                     9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 659

Step 6. Check:                          The numbers are 8 and 13.

Do these numbers check in the problem?
Is one number 5 more than the other?
Is thirteen, 5 more than 8? Yes.
Is the sum of the two numbers 21?

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.11 One number is six more than another. The sum of the numbers is twenty-four. Find the numbers.

TRY IT 9.12          The sum of two numbers is fifty-eight. One number is four more than the other. Find the
                     numbers.

  EXAMPLE 9.7
The sum of two numbers is negative fourteen. One number is four less than the other. Find the numbers.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking   two numbers
for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable.        Let n = 1st number
What do you know about the second
number?                                 One number is 4 less than the other.
Translate.                              n - 4 = 2nd number

Step 4. Translate.                      The sum of two numbers is negative fourteen.
Write as one sentence.
Translate into an equation.
Substitute the variable expressions.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Combine like terms.

Add 4 to each side and simplify.

Divide by 2.  to find the 2nd

Substitute
number.
660 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 6. Check:                                  The numbers are -5 and -9.
Is -9 four less than -5?
Is their sum -14?
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.13  The sum of two numbers is negative twenty-three. One number is less than the other. Find the
             numbers.

TRY IT 9.14  The sum of two numbers is negative eighteen. One number is         more than the other. Find the
             numbers.

  EXAMPLE 9.8
One number is ten more than twice another. Their sum is one. Find the numbers.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.      two numbers

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable.                Let x = 1st number
One number is ten more than twice another.      2x + 10 = 2nd number

Step 4. Translate. Restate as one sentence.     Their sum is one.

Translate into an equation

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 10 from each side.
Divide each side by 3 to get the first number.
Substitute to get the second number.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 661

Step 6. Check.                                                 The numbers are -3 and 4.
Is 4 ten more than twice -3?
Is their sum 1?
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.15 One number is eight more than twice another. Their sum is negative four. Find the numbers.

TRY IT 9.16             One number is three more than three times another. Their sum is negative five. Find the
                        numbers.

Consecutive integers are integers that immediately follow each other. Some examples of consecutive integers are:

Notice that each number is one more than the number preceding it. So if we define the first integer as  the next

consecutive integer is  The one after that is one more than    so it is  or

  EXAMPLE 9.9                               Find the numbers.
The sum of two consecutive integers is

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                     two consecutive integers
Step 3. Name.
                                                               Let n = 1st integer
                                                               n + 1 = next consecutive integer
662 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 4. Translate.
         Restate as one sentence.
         Translate into an equation.
         Step 5. Solve the equation.
         Combine like terms.
         Subtract 1 from each side.
         Divide each side by 2.
         Substitute to get the second number.

Step 6. Check:                                      The two consecutive integers are 23 and 24.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.17 The sum of two consecutive integers is Find the numbers.

TRY IT 9.18 The sum of two consecutive integers is  Find the numbers.

  EXAMPLE 9.10                                      three consecutive integers
Find three consecutive integers whose sum is
                                                    Let n = 1st integer
     Solution                                       n + 1 = 2nd consecutive integer
  Step 1. Read the problem.                         n + 2 = 3rd consecutive integer

  Step 2. Identify what you are looking
  for.

  Step 3. Name.

  Step 4. Translate.
  Restate as one sentence.
  Translate into an equation.

  Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 663

Combine like terms.
Subtract 3 from each side.
Divide each side by 3.
Substitute to get the second number.

Substitute to get the third number.

Step 6. Check:                                                    The three consecutive integers are 13, 14, and
Step 7. Answer the question.                                      15.

     TRY IT 9.19 Find three consecutive integers whose sum is
     TRY IT 9.20 Find three consecutive integers whose sum is

        LINKS TO LITERACY
The Links to Literacy activities Math Curse, Missing Mittens and Among the Odds and Evens will provide you with
another view of the topics covered in this section.

        SECTION 9.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use a Problem-solving Strategy for Word Problems

In the following exercises, use the problem-solving strategy for word problems to solve. Answer in complete sentences.

1. Two-thirds of the children in  2. Three-fifths of the members  3. Zachary has country
    the fourth-grade class are        of the school choir are         music CDs, which is one-fifth
    girls. If there are girls,        women. If there are             of his CD collection. How
    what is the total number of       women, what is the total        many CDs does Zachary
    children in the class?            number of choir members?        have?
664 9 · Math Models and Geometry

4. One-fourth of the candies in     5. There are girls in a school       6. There are Cub Scouts in
    a bag of are red. If there are      club. The number of girls is
         red candies, how many             more than twice the           Troop  The number of
    candies are in the bag?             number of boys. Find the
                                        number of boys in the club.      scouts is more than five

                                    8. The number of puppies in          times the number of adult
                                        the pet store window is
                                        twelve less than the number      leaders. Find the number of
                                        of dogs in the store. If there
                                        are puppies in the window,       adult leaders.
                                        what is the number of dogs
7. Lee is emptying dishes and           in the store?                    9. After months on a diet,
    glasses from the
    dishwasher. The number of       11. Tim left a tip for a             Lisa had lost     of her
    dishes is less than the               restaurant bill. What
    number of glasses. If there           percent tip did he leave?      original weight. She lost
    are dishes, what is the
    number of glasses?                                                   pounds. What was Lisa's

                                                                         original weight?

10. Tricia got a raise on her                                            12. Rashid left a tip for a
      weekly salary. The raise                                                       restaurant bill. What
      was per week. What
      was her original weekly                                                  percent tip did he leave?
      salary?

13. Yuki bought a dress on sale     14. Kim bought a pair of shoes

for  The sale price was             on sale for  The sale

     of the original price.         price was    of the

What was the original price         original price. What was

of the dress?                       the original price of the

                                    shoes?

Solve Number Problems

In the following exercises, solve each number word problem.

15. The sum of a number and         16. The sum of a number and          17. The difference of a number
      eight is Find the                   nine is Find the                     and twelve is Find the
      number.                             number.                              number.

18. The difference of a number      19. The sum of three times a         20. The sum of twice a number
      and eight is Find the               number and eight is                  and six is Find the
      number.                             Find the number.                     number.

21. The difference of twice a       22. The difference of four           23. Three times the sum of a
      number and seven is                 times a number and seven             number and nine is
      Find the number.                    is Find the number.                  Find the number.

24. Six times the sum of a          25. One number is six more           26. One number is five more
      number and eight is                 than the other. Their sum is         than the other. Their sum is
      Find the number.                    forty-two. Find the                  thirty-three. Find the
                                          numbers.                             numbers.

27. The sum of two numbers is       28. The sum of two numbers is        29. A number is one more than
      twenty. One number is four          twenty-seven. One number             twice another number.
      less than the other. Find           is seven less than the other.        Their sum is negative five.
      the numbers.                        Find the numbers.                    Find the numbers.

30. One number is six more          31. The sum of two numbers is        32. The sum of two numbers is
      than five times another.            fourteen. One number is              zero. One number is nine
      Their sum is six. Find the          two less than three times            less than twice the other.
      numbers.                            the other. Find the                  Find the numbers.
                                          numbers.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          9.1 · Use a Problem Solving Strategy 665

33. One number is fourteen         34. One number is eleven less     35. The sum of two
      less than another. If their        than another. If their sum        consecutive integers is
      sum is increased by seven,         is increased by eight, the        Find the integers.
      the result is Find the             result is Find the
      numbers.                           numbers.                    38. The sum of two
                                                                           consecutive integers is
36. The sum of two                 37. The sum of two                              Find the integers.
      consecutive integers is            consecutive integers is
      Find the integers.                         Find the integers.  41. Find three consecutive
                                                                           integers whose sum is
39. The sum of three               40. The sum of three
      consecutive integers is            consecutive integers is
      Find the integers.                 Find the integers.

42. Find three consecutive
      integers whose sum is

Everyday Math

43. Shopping Patty paid for a purse on sale for              44. Shopping Travis bought a pair of boots on sale for
            off the original price. What was the original                off the original price. He paid for the

      price of the purse?                                          boots. What was the original price of the boots?

45. Shopping Minh spent            on sticker books to       46. Shopping Alicia bought a package of peaches

give his nephews. Find the cost of each sticker              for     Find the cost of each peach.

book.

47. Shopping Tom paid              for a new                 48. Shopping Kenji paid      for a new living room

refrigerator, including            tax. What was the         set, including  tax. What was the price of the

price of the refrigerator before tax?                        living room set before tax?

Writing Exercises

49. Write a few sentences about your thoughts and            50. When you start to solve a word problem, how do
      opinions of word problems. Are these thoughts                you decide what to let the variable represent?
      positive, negative, or neutral? If they are negative,
      how might you change your way of thinking in
      order to do better?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.
666 9 · Math Models and Geometry

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

9.2 Solve Money Applications

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Solve coin word problems
           Solve ticket and stamp word problems

       BE PREPARED 9.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Multiply:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 5.15.

BE PREPARED 9.5                   Simplify:
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 7.22.

BE PREPARED 9.6                   Solve:
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 8.44.

Solve Coin Word Problems

Imagine taking a handful of coins from your pocket or purse and placing them on your desk. How would you determine
the value of that pile of coins?

If you can form a step-by-step plan for finding the total value of the coins, it will help you as you begin solving coin word
problems.

One way to bring some order to the mess of coins would be to separate the coins into stacks according to their value.
Quarters would go with quarters, dimes with dimes, nickels with nickels, and so on. To get the total value of all the coins,
you would add the total value of each pile.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 9.2 · Solve Money Applications 667

Figure 9.4 To determine the total value of a stack of nickels, multiply the number of nickels times the value of one
nickel.(Credit: Darren Hester via ppdigital)

How would you determine the value of each pile? Think about the dime pile--how much is it worth? If you count the
number of dimes, you'll know how many you have--the number of dimes.

But this does not tell you the value of all the dimes. Say you counted dimes, how much are they worth? Each dime is

worth  --that is the value of one dime. To find the total value of the pile of dimes, multiply by  to get

       This is the total value of all dimes.

Finding the Total Value for Coins of the Same Type
For coins of the same type, the total value can be found as follows:
where number is the number of coins, value is the value of each coin, and total value is the total value of all the coins.

You could continue this process for each type of coin, and then you would know the total value of each type of coin. To
get the total value of all the coins, add the total value of each type of coin.

Let's look at a specific case. Suppose there are quarters, dimes, nickels, and   pennies. We'll make a table to
organize the information - the type of coin, the number of each, and the value.

                                     Type

                                     Quarters

                                     Dimes

                                     Nickels

                                     Pennies

                                     Table 9.1

The total value of all the coins is  Notice how Table 9.1 helped us organize all the information. Let's see how this

method is used to solve a coin word problem.
668 9 · Math Models and Geometry

EXAMPLE 9.11

Adalberto has       in dimes and nickels in his pocket. He has nine more nickels than dimes. How many of each type of

coin does he have?

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas.

· Determine the types of coins involved.

Think about the strategy we used to find the value of the handful of coins. The first thing you need is to notice what
types of coins are involved. Adalberto has dimes and nickels.

· Create a table to organize the information.
    Label the columns `type', `number', `value', `total value'.
    List the types of coins.
    Write in the value of each type of coin.
    Write in the total value of all the coins.

We can work this problem all in cents or in dollars. Here we will do it in dollars and put in the dollar sign ($) in the table
as a reminder.

The value of a dime is            and the value of a nickel is   The total value of all the coins is

                                  Type

                                  Dimes

                                  Nickels

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
  · We are asked to find the number of dimes and nickels Adalberto has.

Step 3. Name what you are looking for.
  · Use variable expressions to represent the number of each type of coin.
  · Multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin.
      In this problem you cannot count each type of coin--that is what you are looking for--but you have a clue. There
      are nine more nickels than dimes. The number of nickels is nine more than the number of dimes.

      Fill in the "number" column to help get everything organized.

                                                    Type

                                                   Dimes

                                                   Nickels

Now we have all the information we need from the problem!

You multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin. While you do not know the actual
number, you do have an expression to represent it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       9.2 · Solve Money Applications 669

And so now multiply  and write the results in the Total Value column.
                      Type
                     Dimes
                     Nickels

Step 4. Translate into an equation. Restate the problem in one sentence. Then translate into an equation.

Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
  Write the equation.
  Distribute.
  Combine like terms.
  Subtract 0.45 from each side.
  Divide to find the number of dimes.
  The number of nickels is d + 9

Step 6. Check.

Step 7. Answer the question.
If this were a homework exercise, our work might look like this:
670 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Check:

TRY IT 9.21          Michaela has  in dimes and nickels in her change purse. She has seven more dimes than

                     nickels. How many coins of each type does she have?

TRY IT 9.22          Liliana has   in nickels and quarters in her backpack. She has     more nickels than

                     quarters. How many coins of each type does she have?

        ...

             HOW TO

Solve a coin word problem.

Step 1.  Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas, and create a table to organize the
         information.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.

           Use variable expressions to represent the number of each type of coin and write them in the table.
           Multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin.

Step 4.  Translate into an equation. Write the equation by adding the total values of all the types of coins.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

You may find it helpful to put all the numbers into the table to make sure they check.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      9.2 · Solve Money Applications 671

                           Type Number Value ($) Total Value

                           Table 9.2

EXAMPLE 9.12

Maria has     in quarters and pennies in her wallet. She has twice as many pennies as quarters. How many coins of

each type does she have?

     Solution
Step 1. Read the problem.

· Determine the types of coins involved.

    We know that Maria has quarters and pennies.

· Create a table to organize the information.
    Label the columns type, number, value, total value.
    List the types of coins.
    Write in the value of each type of coin.
    Write in the total value of all the coins.

                           Type

                           Quarters

                           Pennies

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name: Represent the number of quarters and pennies using variables.

                                                    Type
                                                 Quarters
                                                 Pennies

Multiply the `number' and the `value' to get the `total value' of each type of coin.
672 9 · Math Models and Geometry

                                                           Type
                                                         Quarters
                                                         Pennies

       Step 4. Translate. Write the equation by adding the 'total value' of all the types of coins.
       Step 5. Solve the equation.

         Write the equation.
         Multiply.
         Combine like terms.
         Divide by 0.27.

         The number of pennies is 2q.

       Step 6. Check the answer in the problem.
       Maria has quarters and pennies. Does this make

Step 7. Answer the question. Maria has nine quarters and eighteen pennies.

TRY IT 9.23   Sumanta has        in nickels and dimes in her desk drawer. She has twice as many nickels as

              dimes. How many coins of each type does she have?

TRY IT 9.24   Alison has three times as many dimes as quarters in her purse. She has                 altogether. How
              many coins of each type does she have?

              In the next example, we'll show only the completed table--make sure you understand how to fill
              it in step by step.

EXAMPLE 9.13

Danny has     worth of pennies and nickels in his piggy bank. The number of nickels is two more than ten times the

number of pennies. How many nickels and how many pennies does Danny have?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            9.2 · Solve Money Applications 673

  Solution                                                                                  Pennies and nickels
Step 1: Read the problem.
Determine the types of coins involved.                                                      Pennies are worth
Create a table.                                                                             Nickels are worth
                                                                                            the number of pennies and
Write in the value of each type of coin.                                                    nickels

Step 2: Identify what you are looking for.                                                  Let

Step 3: Name. Represent the number of each type of coin using variables.
The number of nickels is defined in terms of the number of pennies, so start with
pennies.
The number of nickels is two more than then times the number of pennies.

Multiply the number and the value to get the total value of each type of coin.
                                                    Type

                                                  pennies
                                                  nickels

Step 4. Translate: Write the equation by adding the total value of all the types of coins.
Step 5. Solve the equation.

  How many nickels?
Step 6. Check. Is the total value of pennies and nickels equal to
674 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 7. Answer the question. Danny has pennies and nickels.

TRY IT 9.25   Jesse has           worth of quarters and nickels in his pocket. The number of nickels is five more

              than two times the number of quarters. How many nickels and how many quarters does Jesse

              have?

TRY IT 9.26   Elaine has                 in dimes and nickels in her coin jar. The number of dimes that Elaine has is

              seven less than three times the number of nickels. How many of each coin does Elaine have?

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

The strategies we used for coin problems can be easily applied to some other kinds of problems too. Problems involving
tickets or stamps are very similar to coin problems, for example. Like coins, tickets and stamps have different values; so
we can organize the information in tables much like we did for coin problems.

EXAMPLE 9.14

At a school concert, the total value of tickets sold was  Student tickets sold for each and adult tickets sold for

each. The number of adult tickets sold was less than three times the number of student tickets sold. How many

student tickets and how many adult tickets were sold?

     Solution
Step 1: Read the problem.

· Determine the types of tickets involved.
    There are student tickets and adult tickets.

· Create a table to organize the information.

                                  Type

                                  Student

                                  Adult

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name. Represent the number of each type of ticket using variables.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          9.2 · Solve Money Applications 675

                                  Type
                                Student
                                Adult

Step 4. Translate: Write the equation by adding the total values of each type of ticket.
Step 5. Solve the equation.

Substitute to find the number of adults.

Step 6. Check. There were student tickets at each and adult tickets at each. Is the total value            We

find the total value of each type of ticket by multiplying the number of tickets times its value; we then add to get the total

value of all the tickets sold.

Step 7. Answer the question. They sold student tickets and adult tickets.

TRY IT 9.27             The first day of a water polo tournament, the total value of tickets sold was      One-day

                        passes sold for and tournament passes sold for             The number of tournament passes

                        sold was more than the number of day passes sold. How many day passes and how many

                        tournament passes were sold?

TRY IT 9.28             At the movie theater, the total value of tickets sold was         Adult tickets sold for each

                        and senior/child tickets sold for  each. The number of senior/child tickets sold was less

                        than twice the number of adult tickets sold. How many senior/child tickets and how many adult

                        tickets were sold?

Now we'll do one where we fill in the table all at once.

EXAMPLE 9.15

Monica paid      for stamps she needed to mail the invitations to her sister's baby shower. The number of

stamps was four more than twice the number of             stamps. How many         stamps and how many     stamps

did Monica buy?

     Solution                   stamps and     stamps. Their names also give the value.
The type of stamps are

"The number of cent stamps was four more than twice the number of cent stamps."
676 9 · Math Models and Geometry

                                                           Type
                                                                stamps

                                                              stamps

         Write the equation from the total values.
         Solve the equation.
         Monica bought 8 eight-cent stamps.
         Find the number of 49-cent stamps she bought by evaluating.

Check.

Monica bought eight              stamps and twenty  stamps.

TRY IT 9.29          Eric paid    for stamps so he could mail thank you notes for his wedding gifts. The number

                     of          stamps was eight more than twice the number of  stamps. How many

                     stamps and how many            stamps did Eric buy?

TRY IT 9.30          Kailee paid  for stamps. The number of               stamps was four less than three times the
                     number of
                     buy?         stamps. How many                      stamps and how many  stamps did Kailee

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       9.2 · Solve Money Applications 677

        SECTION 9.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Solve Coin Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve the coin word problems.

51. Jaime has         in dimes  52. Lee has      in dimes and          53. Ngo has a collection of

and nickels. The number of      nickels. The number of                 dimes and quarters with a

dimes is more than the          nickels is more than the               total value of         The

number of nickels. How          number of dimes. How                   number of dimes is more

many of each coin does he       many of each coin does he              than the number of

have?                           have?                                  quarters. How many of

                                                                       each coin does he have?

54. Connor has a collection of  55. Carolyn has            in her      56. Julio has   in his

dimes and quarters with a       purse in nickels and dimes.            pocket in nickels and

total value of            The   The number of nickels is               dimes. The number of

number of dimes is              less than three times the              dimes is less than twice

more than the number of         number of dimes. Find the              the number of nickels. Find

quarters. How many of           number of each type of                 the number of each type of

each coin does he have?         coin.                                  coin.

57. Chi has     in dimes        58. Tyler has    in dimes              59. A cash box of and

and quarters. The number        and quarters. The number               bills is worth  The

of dimes is more than           of quarters is more than               number of bills is

three times the number of       four times the number of               more than the number of

quarters. How many dimes        dimes. How many of each                bills. How many of each

and nickels does Chi have?      coin does he have?                     bill does it contain?

60. Joe's wallet contains and   61. In a cash drawer there is          62. John has    in and
                                              in and bills.
bills worth               The                                          bills in his drawer. The
                                      The number of bills is
number of bills is                    twice the number of              number of bills is three
                                      bills. How many of each are
more than the number of               in the drawer?                   times the number of

bills. How many of each                                                bills. How many of each are

bill does he have?                                                     in the drawer?

63. Mukul has         in        64. Vina has     in quarters,

quarters, dimes and nickels     dimes and nickels in her

in his pocket. He has five      purse. She has eight more

more dimes than quarters        dimes than quarters and

and nine more nickels than      six more nickels than

quarters. How many of           quarters. How many of

each coin are in his pocket?    each coin are in her purse?

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve the ticket and stamp word problems.

65. The play took in      one   66. If the number of child             67. The movie theater took in
                                                                                       one Monday night.
night. The number of $8         tickets is seventeen less
                                                                             The number of child
adult tickets was less          than three times the                         tickets was ten more than
                                                                             twice the number of
than twice the number of        number of adult                              adult tickets. How many of
                                                                             each were sold?
child tickets. How many         tickets and the theater

of each ticket were sold?       took in          how many of

                                each ticket were sold?
678 9 · Math Models and Geometry

68. The ball game took in          69. Julie went to the post office  70. Before he left for college
                one Saturday. The
                                   and bought both                    out of state, Jason went to
      number of adult
      tickets was more than        stamps and                         the post office and bought
      twice the number of
      child tickets. How many of   postcards for her office's         both           stamps and
      each were sold?
                                   bills She spent          The             postcards and spent

                                   number of stamps was                     The number of

                                   more than twice the                stamps was more than

                                   number of postcards. How           twice the number of

                                   many of each did she buy?          postcards. How many of

                                                                      each did he buy?

71. Maria spent     at the         72. Hector spent         at the    73. Hilda has  worth of

post office. She bought            post office. He bought four        and stock shares.

three times as many                times as many                      The numbers of shares

stamps as           stamps.        stamps as                stamps.   is more than twice the

How many of each did she           How many of each did he            number of shares.

buy?                               buy?                               How many of each does

                                                                      she have?

74. Mario invested   in

and stock shares. The

number of shares was

less than three times the

number of shares.

How many of each type of

share did he buy?

Everyday Math

75. Parent Volunteer As the treasurer of her                76. Parent Volunteer Laurie was completing the
                                                                  treasurer's report for her son's Boy Scout troop at
daughter's Girl Scout troop, Laney collected                      the end of the school year. She didn't remember
                                                                  how many boys had paid the full-year
money for some girls and adults to go to a                        registration fee and how many had paid a
                                                                  partial-year fee. She knew that the number of
camp. Each girl paid and each adult paid                          boys who paid for a full-year was ten more than
                                                                  the number who paid for a partial-year. If
The total amount of money collected for camp                      was collected for all the registrations, how many
                                                                  boys had paid the full-year fee and how many had
was        If the number of girls is three times the              paid the partial-year fee?

number of adults, how many girls and how many

adults paid for camp?

Writing Exercises

77. Suppose you have quarters, dimes, and                   78. Do you find it helpful to use a table when solving
      pennies. Explain how you find the total value of all        coin problems? Why or why not?
      the coins.
                                                            80. What similarities and differences did you see
79. In the table used to solve coin problems, one                 between solving the coin problems and the ticket
      column is labeled "number" and another column               and stamp problems?
      is labeled `"value." What is the difference between
      the number and the value?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 679

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

9.3 Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean
Theorem

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the properties of angles
           Use the properties of triangles
           Use the Pythagorean Theorem

       BE PREPARED 9.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                           Solve:
                                           If you missed this problem, review Example 8.6.

BE PREPARED 9.8  Solve:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 6.42.

BE PREPARED 9.9  Simplify:
                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.72.

So far in this chapter, we have focused on solving word problems, which are similar to many real-world applications of
algebra. In the next few sections, we will apply our problem-solving strategies to some common geometry problems.

Use the Properties of Angles

Are you familiar with the phrase `do a       It means to turn so that you face the opposite direction. It comes from the

fact that the measure of an angle that makes a straight line is degrees. See Figure 9.5.

                                                                              Figure 9.5

An angle is formed by two rays that share a common endpoint. Each ray is called a side of the angle and the common
endpoint is called the vertex. An angle is named by its vertex. In Figure 9.6, is the angle with vertex at point The
measure of is written

                 Figure 9.6 is the angle with vertex at

We measure angles in degrees, and use the symbol to represent degrees. We use the abbreviation  for the measure
of an angle. So if is we would write

If the sum of the measures of two angles is  then they are called supplementary angles. In Figure 9.7, each pair of

angles is supplementary because their measures add to  Each angle is the supplement of the other.
680 9 · Math Models and Geometry

                                    Figure 9.7 The sum of the measures of supplementary angles is

If the sum of the measures of two angles is then the angles are complementary angles. In Figure 9.8, each pair of
angles is complementary, because their measures add to Each angle is the complement of the other.

         Figure 9.8 The sum of the measures of complementary angles is

Supplementary and Complementary Angles

If the sum of the measures of two angles is   then the angles are supplementary.
If and are supplementary, then               then the angles are complementary.
If the sum of the measures of two angles is
If and are complementary, then

In this section and the next, you will be introduced to some common geometry formulas. We will adapt our Problem
Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications. The geometry formula will name the variables and give us the equation to
solve.

In addition, since these applications will all involve geometric shapes, it will be helpful to draw a figure and then label it
with the information from the problem. We will include this step in the Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry
Applications.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications.

Step 1.  Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw a figure and label it with the
         given information.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for and choose a variable to represent it.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
         given information.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

The next example will show how you can use the Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications to answer
questions about supplementary and complementary angles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                   9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 681

  EXAMPLE 9.16     Find  its supplement, and  its complement.
An angle measures

     Solution

 

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula for the situation and substitute in the
given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.



Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula for the situation and substitute in the
given information.
Step 5. Solve the equation.
682 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.31 An angle measures Find its:  supplement  complement.

TRY IT 9.32 An angle measures Find its:  supplement  complement.

Did you notice that the words complementary and supplementary are in alphabetical order just like and  are in
numerical order?

  EXAMPLE 9.17                                        more than the smaller angle. Find the measure of both angles.
Two angles are supplementary. The larger angle is

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
The larger angle is 30° more than the smaller angle.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                              9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 683

TRY IT 9.33  Two angles are supplementary. The larger angle is       more than the smaller angle. Find the
             measures of both angles.

TRY IT 9.34  Two angles are complementary. The larger angle is       more than the smaller angle. Find the
             measures of both angles.

Use the Properties of Triangles

What do you already know about triangles? Triangle have three sides and three angles. Triangles are named by their

vertices. The triangle in Figure 9.9 is called       read `triangle  '. We label each side with a lower case letter to

match the upper case letter of the opposite vertex.

             Figure 9.9                         has vertices         and sides

The three angles of a triangle are related in a special way. The sum of their measures is

Sum of the Measures of the Angles of a Triangle

For any  the sum of the measures of the angles is

  EXAMPLE 9.18                                       Find the measure of the third angle.
The measures of two angles of a triangle are and

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute.
684 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.35 The measures of two angles of a triangle are and                              Find the measure of the third angle.

TRY IT 9.36 A triangle has angles of and Find the measure of the third angle.

Right Triangles                                                                                        angle, which is

Some triangles have special names. We will look first at the right triangle. A right triangle has one
often marked with the symbol shown in Figure 9.10.

                                                                             Figure 9.10  so we only need the measure of one

If we know that a triangle is a right triangle, we know that one angle measures
of the other angles in order to determine the measure of the third angle.

EXAMPLE 9.19

One angle of a right triangle measures  What is the measure of the third angle?
     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                 9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 685

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.37 One angle of a right triangle measures What is the measure of the other angle?

TRY IT 9.38 One angle of a right triangle measures What is the measure of the other angle?

In the examples so far, we could draw a figure and label it directly after reading the problem. In the next example, we will
have to define one angle in terms of another. So we will wait to draw the figure until we write expressions for all the
angles we are looking for.

EXAMPLE 9.20

The measure of one angle of a right triangle is  more than the measure of the smallest angle. Find the measures of all
three angles.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                      the measures of all three angles

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
Now draw the figure and label it with the given information.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute into the formula.
686 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.39          The measure of one angle of a right triangle is  more than the measure of the smallest
                     angle. Find the measures of all three angles.

TRY IT 9.40          The measure of one angle of a right triangle is  more than the measure of the smallest
                     angle. Find the measures of all three angles.

Similar Triangles

When we use a map to plan a trip, a sketch to build a bookcase, or a pattern to sew a dress, we are working with similar
figures. In geometry, if two figures have exactly the same shape but different sizes, we say they are similar figures. One
is a scale model of the other. The corresponding sides of the two figures have the same ratio, and all their corresponding
angles have the same measures.

The two triangles in Figure 9.11 are similar. Each side of  is four times the length of the corresponding side of

and their corresponding angles have equal measures.

Figure 9.11     and               are similar triangles. Their corresponding sides have the same ratio and the

corresponding angles have the same measure.

Properties of Similar Triangles

If two triangles are similar, then their corresponding angle measures are equal and their corresponding side lengths
are in the same ratio.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 687

The length of a side of a triangle may be referred to by its endpoints, two vertices of the triangle. For example, in

We will often use this notation when we solve similar triangles because it will help us match up the corresponding side
lengths.

EXAMPLE 9.21

and                 are similar triangles. The lengths of two sides of each triangle are shown. Find the lengths of the

third side of each triangle.

  Solution                                                       The figure is provided.

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                       The length of the sides of similar triangles

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                 Let
                                                                 a = length of the third side of
                                                                 y = length of the third side

Step 4. Translate.

The triangles are similar, so the corresponding sides are in the same ratio. So

Since the side      corresponds to the side            , we will use the ratio   to find the other sides.

Be careful to match up corresponding sides correctly.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
688 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                  The third side of   is 6 and the third side of
                                                                         is 2.4.

TRY IT 9.41                       is similar to         Find

TRY IT 9.42                       is similar to         Find

Use the Pythagorean Theorem

The Pythagorean Theorem is a special property of right triangles that has been used since ancient times. It is named
after the Greek philosopher and mathematician Pythagoras who lived around BCE.

Remember that a right triangle has a angle, which we usually mark with a small square in the corner. The side of the
triangle opposite the angle is called the hypotenuse, and the other two sides are called the legs. See Figure 9.12.

Figure 9.12 In a right triangle, the side opposite the  angle is called the hypotenuse and each of the other sides is
called a leg.

The Pythagorean Theorem tells how the lengths of the three sides of a right triangle relate to each other. It states that in
any right triangle, the sum of the squares of the two legs equals the square of the hypotenuse.

The Pythagorean Theorem

In any right triangle

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 689

where is the length of the hypotenuse and are the lengths of the legs.

To solve problems that use the Pythagorean Theorem, we will need to find square roots. In Simplify and Use Square
Roots we introduced the notation and defined it in this way:

For example, we found that      is because

We will use this definition of square roots to solve for the length of a side in a right triangle.

EXAMPLE 9.22

Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.

  Solution                                        the length of the hypotenuse of the triangle
Step 1. Read the problem.                         Let
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
690 9 · Math Models and Geometry

          Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.      The length of the hypotenuse is 5.

TRY IT 9.43 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.

TRY IT 9.44 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.

  EXAMPLE 9.23                                                     The length of the leg of the
Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the longer leg.  triangle

     Solution                                                      Let
  Step 1. Read the problem.                                        Label side b
  Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

  Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 691

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula. Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation. Isolate the variable term. Use the definition of the
square root.
Simplify.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                             The length of the leg is 12.

TRY IT 9.45 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the leg.

TRY IT 9.46 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the leg.

EXAMPLE 9.24

Kelvin is building a gazebo and wants to brace each corner by placing a  wooden bracket diagonally as shown.

How far below the corner should he fasten the bracket if he wants the distances from the corner to each end of the

bracket to be equal? Approximate to the nearest tenth of an inch.
692 9 · Math Models and Geometry

  Solution                                   the distance from the corner that the bracket should be attached
Step 1. Read the problem.                    Let x = the distance from the corner
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to
represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Isolate the variable.
Use the definition of the square root.
Simplify. Approximate to the nearest tenth.

Step 6. Check:

Yes.                                         Kelvin should fasten each piece of wood approximately 7.1" from the
Step 7. Answer the question.                 corner.

TRY IT 9.47  John puts the base of a         ladder feet from the wall of his house. How far up the wall does
             the ladder reach?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                           9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 693

     TRY IT 9.48  Randy wants to attach a  string of lights to the top of the             mast of his sailboat. How far

                  from the base of the mast should he attach the end of the light string?

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Animation: The Sum of the Interior Angles of a Triangle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24sumintangles)
     Similar Polygons (http://www.openstax.org/l/24simpolygons)
     Example: Determine the Length of the Hypotenuse of a Right Triangle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24hyporighttri)

        SECTION 9.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Properties of Angles

In the following exercises, find  the supplement and  the complement of the given angle.

81.                                82.                              83.

84.

In the following exercises, use the properties of angles to solve.

85. Find the supplement of a       86. Find the complement of a     87. Find the complement of a
             angle.                            angle.                             angle.

88. Find the supplement of a       89. Two angles are               90. Two angles are
                angle.                   supplementary. The larger        supplementary. The
                                         angle is more than the           smaller angle is less
                                         smaller angle. Find the          than the larger angle. Find
                                         measures of both angles.         the measures of both
                                                                          angles.

91. Two angles are                 92. Two angles are
      complementary. The                 complementary. The larger
      smaller angle is less              angle is more than the
      than the larger angle. Find        smaller angle. Find the
      the measures of both               measures of both angles.
      angles.
694 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Use the Properties of Triangles

In the following exercises, solve using properties of triangles.

93. The measures of two            94. The measures of two              95. The measures of two
      angles of a triangle are           angles of a triangle are             angles of a triangle are
      and Find the measure               and Find the measure                        and Find the
      of the third angle.                of the third angle.                  measure of the third angle.

96. The measures of two            97. One angle of a right             98. One angle of a right
      angles of a triangle are           triangle measures                    triangle measures
      and Find the measure               What is the measure of the           What is the measure of the
      of the third angle.                other angle?                         other angle?

99. One angle of a right           100. One angle of a right            101. The two smaller angles of
      triangle measures                    triangle measures                    a right triangle have
      What is the measure of the           What is the measure of               equal measures. Find the
      other angle?                         the other angle?                     measures of all three
                                                                                angles.
102. The measure of the            103. The angles in a triangle
        smallest angle of a right          are such that the measure    104. The angles in a triangle
        triangle is less than              of one angle is twice the            are such that the measure
        the measure of the other           measure of the smallest              of one angle is more
        small angle. Find the              angle, while the measure             than the measure of the
        measures of all three              of the third angle is three          smallest angle, while the
        angles.                            times the measure of the             measure of the third
                                           smallest angle. Find the             angle is three times the
                                           measures of all three                measure of the smallest
                                           angles.                              angle. Find the measures
                                                                                of all three angles.

Find the Length of the Missing Side

In the following exercises,        is similar to  Find the length of the indicated side.

105. side                          106. side

On a map, San Francisco, Las Vegas, and Los Angeles form a triangle whose sides are shown in the figure below. The
actual distance from Los Angeles to Las Vegas is miles.

107. Find the distance from        108. Find the distance from
        Los Angeles to San                 San Francisco to Las
        Francisco.                         Vegas.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                     9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 695

Use the Pythagorean Theorem

In the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse.

109.                         110.    111.

112.

Find the Length of the Missing Side

In the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the missing side. Round to the nearest
tenth, if necessary.

113.                         114.    115.

116.                         117.    118.

119.                         120.
696 9 · Math Models and Geometry

In the following exercises, solve. Approximate to the nearest tenth, if necessary.

121. A  string of lights          122. Pam wants to put a banner       123. Chi is planning to put a path
                                          across her garage door to            of paving stones through
will be attached to the top               congratulate her son on his          her flower garden. The
                                          college graduation. The              flower garden is a square
of a       pole for a                     garage door is feet high             with sides of feet. What
                                          and feet wide. How long              will the length of the path
holiday display. How far                  should the banner be to fit          be?
                                          the garage door?
from the base of the pole

should the end of the

string of lights be

anchored?

124. Brian borrowed a             extension

ladder to paint his house. If he sets

the base of the ladder feet from the

house, how far up will the top of the

ladder reach?

Everyday Math

125. Building a scale model Joe wants to build a doll
        house for his daughter. He wants the doll house
        to look just like his house. His house is feet
        wide and feet tall at the highest point of the
        roof. If the dollhouse will be feet wide, how
        tall will its highest point be?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          9.3 · Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem 697

126. Measurement A city engineer plans to build a footbridge

across a lake from point to point as shown in the

picture below. To find the length of the footbridge, she

draws a right triangle  with right angle at She

measures the distance from to  feet, and from to

feet. How long will the bridge be?

Writing Exercises

127. Write three of the properties of triangles from
        this section and then explain each in your own
        words.

128. Explain how the figure below illustrates the Pythagorean
        Theorem for a triangle with legs of length and
698 9 · Math Models and Geometry

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

9.4 Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Understand linear, square, and cubic measure
           Use properties of rectangles
           Use properties of triangles
           Use properties of trapezoids

BE PREPARED 9.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                  The length of a rectangle is less than the width. Let  represent the width. Write an
                  expression for the length of the rectangle.
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.26.

BE PREPARED 9.11  Simplify:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 7.7.

BE PREPARED 9.12  Simplify:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 5.36.

In this section, we'll continue working with geometry applications. We will add some more properties of triangles, and
we'll learn about the properties of rectangles and trapezoids.

Understand Linear, Square, and Cubic Measure

When you measure your height or the length of a garden hose, you use a ruler or tape measure (Figure 9.13). A tape
measure might remind you of a line--you use it for linear measure, which measures length. Inch, foot, yard, mile,
centimeter and meter are units of linear measure.

                Figure 9.13 This tape measure measures inches along the top and centimeters along the bottom.

When you want to know how much tile is needed to cover a floor, or the size of a wall to be painted, you need to know
the area, a measure of the region needed to cover a surface. Area is measured is square units. We often use square
inches, square feet, square centimeters, or square miles to measure area. A square centimeter is a square that is one
centimeter (cm) on each side. A square inch is a square that is one inch on each side (Figure 9.14).

                                   Figure 9.14 Square measures have sides that are each unit in length.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 699

Figure 9.15 shows a rectangular rug that is feet long by feet wide. Each square is foot wide by foot long, or
square foot. The rug is made of squares. The area of the rug is square feet.

          Figure 9.15 The rug contains six squares of 1 square foot each, so the total area of the rug is 6 square feet.
When you measure how much it takes to fill a container, such as the amount of gasoline that can fit in a tank, or the
amount of medicine in a syringe, you are measuring volume. Volume is measured in cubic units such as cubic inches or
cubic centimeters. When measuring the volume of a rectangular solid, you measure how many cubes fill the container.
We often use cubic centimeters, cubic inches, and cubic feet. A cubic centimeter is a cube that measures one centimeter
on each side, while a cubic inch is a cube that measures one inch on each side (Figure 9.16).

                                        Figure 9.16 Cubic measures have sides that are 1 unit in length.

Suppose the cube in Figure 9.17 measures inches on each side and is cut on the lines shown. How many little cubes
does it contain? If we were to take the big cube apart, we would find little cubes, with each one measuring one inch
on all sides. So each little cube has a volume of cubic inch, and the volume of the big cube is cubic inches.

      Figure 9.17 A cube that measures 3 inches on each side is made up of 27 one-inch cubes, or 27 cubic inches.

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Visualizing Area and Perimeter will help you develop a better
understanding of the difference between the area of a figure and its perimeter.

EXAMPLE 9.25

For each item, state whether you would use linear, square, or cubic measure:
 amount of carpeting needed in a room  extension cord length  amount of sand in a sandbox
 length of a curtain rod  amount of flour in a canister  size of the roof of a doghouse.

     Solution

 You are measuring how much surface the carpet covers, which is the area. square measure

 You are measuring how long the extension cord is, which is the length.  linear measure
700 9 · Math Models and Geometry

 You are measuring the volume of the sand.                   cubic measure
 You are measuring the length of the curtain rod.            linear measure
 You are measuring the volume of the flour.                  cubic measure
 You are measuring the area of the roof.                     square measure

TRY IT 9.49         Determine whether you would use linear, square, or cubic measure for each item.

                     amount of paint in a can  height of a tree  floor of your bedroom               diameter of
                    bike wheel  size of a piece of sod  amount of water in a swimming pool

TRY IT 9.50         Determine whether you would use linear, square, or cubic measure for each item.

                     volume of a packing box  size of patio  amount of medicine in a syringe         length
                    of a piece of yarn  size of housing lot  height of a flagpole

Many geometry applications will involve finding the perimeter or the area of a figure. There are also many applications
of perimeter and area in everyday life, so it is important to make sure you understand what they each mean.

Picture a room that needs new floor tiles. The tiles come in squares that are a foot on each side--one square foot. How
many of those squares are needed to cover the floor? This is the area of the floor.

Next, think about putting new baseboard around the room, once the tiles have been laid. To figure out how many strips
are needed, you must know the distance around the room. You would use a tape measure to measure the number of
feet around the room. This distance is the perimeter.

Perimeter and Area

The perimeter is a measure of the distance around a figure.
The area is a measure of the surface covered by a figure.

Figure 9.18 shows a square tile that is inch on each side. If an ant walked around the edge of the tile, it would walk
inches. This distance is the perimeter of the tile.

Since the tile is a square that is inch on each side, its area is one square inch. The area of a shape is measured by
determining how many square units cover the shape.

Figure 9.18
When the ant walks completely around the tile on its edge, it is tracing the perimeter of the tile. The area of the tile is 1
square inch.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 701

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity Measuring Area and Perimeter will help you develop a better
  understanding of how to measure the area and perimeter of a figure.

  EXAMPLE 9.26
Each of two square tiles is square inch. Two tiles are shown together.

                                                           What is the area?
 What is the perimeter of the figure?

     Solution                                                                               square inches.

 The perimeter is the distance around the figure. The perimeter is inches.
 The area is the surface covered by the figure. There are square inch tiles so the area is

TRY IT 9.51 Each box in the figure below is 1 square inch. Find the  perimeter and  area of the figure:

TRY IT 9.52  Each box in the figure below is 1 square inch. Find the  perimeter and  area of the

             figure:

Use the Properties of Rectangles

A rectangle has four sides and four right angles. The opposite sides of a rectangle are the same length. We refer to one
side of the rectangle as the length, and the adjacent side as the width, See Figure 9.19.

      Figure 9.19 A rectangle has four sides, and four right angles. The sides are labeled L for length and W for width.
The perimeter, of the rectangle is the distance around the rectangle. If you started at one corner and walked around
702 9 · Math Models and Geometry                units, or two lengths and two widths. The perimeter then is

       the rectangle, you would walk

What about the area of a rectangle? Remember the rectangular rug from the beginning of this section. It was feet long

by feet wide, and its area was square feet. See Figure 9.20. Since  we see that the area, is the length,

times the width, so the area of a rectangle is

                      Figure 9.20 The area of this rectangular rug is square feet, its length times its width.
Properties of Rectangles

· Rectangles have four sides and four right     angles.

· The lengths of opposite sides are equal.

· The perimeter, of a rectangle is the sum of twice the length and twice the width. See Figure 9.19.

· The area, of a rectangle is the length times the width.

For easy reference as we work the examples in this section, we will restate the Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry
Applications here.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications

Step 1.  Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw the figure and label it with
         the given information.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
         given information.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  EXAMPLE 9.27                        meters and the width is  meters. Find  the perimeter, and  the area.
The length of a rectangle is

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 703

  Solution



Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                             the perimeter of a rectangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let P = the perimeter
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                           The perimeter of the rectangle is 104
                                                                       meters.


Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                             the area of a rectangle
                                                                       Let A = the area
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.
704 9 · Math Models and Geometry

          Step 5. Solve the equation.
          Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                              The area of the rectangle is 640 square
                                                                          meters.

TRY IT 9.53  The length of a rectangle is         yards and the width is yards. Find  the perimeter and
TRY IT 9.54
              the area.

             The length of a rectangle is         feet and the width is   feet. Find  the perimeter and  the
             area.

  EXAMPLE 9.28                                 inches and width  inches.
Find the length of a rectangle with perimeter

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                the length of the rectangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                          Let L = the length
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 705

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                                   The length is 15 inches.

TRY IT 9.55 Find the length of a rectangle with a perimeter of inches and width of inches.

TRY IT 9.56 Find the length of a rectangle with a perimeter of yards and width of yards.

In the next example, the width is defined in terms of the length. We'll wait to draw the figure until we write an expression
for the width so that we can label one side with that expression.

EXAMPLE 9.29

The width of a rectangle is two inches less than the length. The perimeter is  inches. Find the length and width.
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.        the length and width of the rectangle

                                                  Since the width is defined in terms of the length, we let L =
                                                  length. The width is two feet less that the length, so we let L - 2
                                                  = width

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Now we can draw a figure using these
expressions for the length and width.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula. The formula for
the perimeter of a rectangle relates all the
information.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Combine like terms.

Add 4 to each side.

Divide by 4.
706 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Now we need to find the width.                    The length is 14 inches.
                                                  The width is 12 inches.
The width is L - 2.                               The length is 14 feet and the width is 12 feet.

Step 6. Check:                    , this works!
Since

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.57          The width of a rectangle is seven meters less than the length. The perimeter is  meters. Find
                     the length and width.

TRY IT 9.58          The length of a rectangle is eight feet more than the width. The perimeter is    feet. Find the
                     length and width.

  EXAMPLE 9.30                                                                             centimeters. Find the length

The length of a rectangle is four centimeters more than twice the width. The perimeter is
and width.

     Solution
  Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                 the length and width

                                                           let W = width
                                                           The length is four more than twice the
                                                           width.
                                                           2w + 4 = length

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute in the given
information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 707

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                            The length is 12 cm and the width is 4 cm.

TRY IT 9.59     The length of a rectangle is eight more than twice the width. The perimeter is  feet. Find the
                length and width.

TRY IT 9.60     The width of a rectangle is six less than twice the length. The perimeter is  centimeters. Find
                the length and width.

  EXAMPLE 9.31                     square feet. The length is feet. What is the width?
The area of a rectangular room is

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                              the width of a rectangular room

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                        Let W = width

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
708 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                     The width of the room is 12 feet.

TRY IT 9.61 The area of a rectangle is square feet. The length is feet. What is the width?
TRY IT 9.62 The width of a rectangle is meters. The area is square meters. What is the length?

  EXAMPLE 9.32                                    feet. The length is feet more than the width. Find the length and

The perimeter of a rectangular swimming pool is
width.

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                       the length and width of the pool
                                                                 Let
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
The length is 15 feet more than the width.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula and substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 709

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                   The length of the pool is 45 feet and the width
                                                               is 30 feet.

TRY IT 9.63          The perimeter of a rectangular swimming pool is  feet. The length is feet more than the
                     width. Find the length and width.

TRY IT 9.64          The length of a rectangular garden is  yards more than the width. The perimeter is  yards.
                     Find the length and width.

Use the Properties of Triangles

We now know how to find the area of a rectangle. We can use this fact to help us visualize the formula for the area of a
triangle. In the rectangle in Figure 9.20, we've labeled the length and the width so it's area is

                                    Figure 9.21 The area of a rectangle is the base, times the height,

We can divide this rectangle into two congruent triangles (Figure 9.22). Triangles that are congruent have identical side
lengths and angles, and so their areas are equal. The area of each triangle is one-half the area of the rectangle, or
This example helps us see why the formula for the area of a triangle is

Figure 9.22 A rectangle can be divided into two triangles of equal area. The area of each triangle is one-half the area of
the rectangle.

The formula for the area of a triangle is  where is the base and is the height.

To find the area of the triangle, you need to know its base and height. The base is the length of one side of the triangle,
usually the side at the bottom. The height is the length of the line that connects the base to the opposite vertex, and
makes a angle with the base. Figure 9.23 shows three triangles with the base and height of each marked.

Figure 9.23 The height of a triangle is the length of a line segment that connects the the base to the opposite vertex
and makes a angle with the base.

Triangle Properties

For any triangle     the sum of the measures of the angles is
710 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         The perimeter of a triangle is the sum of the lengths of the sides.
         The area of a triangle is one-half the base, times the height,

  EXAMPLE 9.33                             inches and whose height is inches.
Find the area of a triangle whose base is

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                    the area of the triangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                              let A = area of the triangle

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check:

  Step 7. Answer the question.                                                The area is 44 square inches.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 711

TRY IT 9.65 Find the area of a triangle with base inches and height inches.
TRY IT 9.66 Find the area of a triangle with base inches and height inches.

  EXAMPLE 9.34                             feet. The lengths of two sides are feet and feet. How long is the third side?
The perimeter of a triangular garden is

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                             length of the third side of a triangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                       Let c = the third side

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                           The third side is 11 feet long.

TRY IT 9.67  The perimeter of a triangular garden is  feet. The lengths of two sides are  feet and             feet.
             How long is the third side?

TRY IT 9.68  The lengths of two sides of a triangular window are feet and feet. The perimeter is        feet.
             How long is the third side?

  EXAMPLE 9.35                             square meters. The base of the window is  meters. What is the window's

The area of a triangular church window is
height?
712 9 · Math Models and Geometry

            Solution

         Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
         information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                      height of a triangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                                Let h = the height

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                                    The height of the triangle is 12
                                                                                meters.

       TRY IT 9.69 The area of a triangular painting is square inches. The base is inches. What is the height?

       TRY IT 9.70 A triangular tent door has an area of square feet. The height is feet. What is the base?

Isosceles and Equilateral Triangles

Besides the right triangle, some other triangles have special names. A triangle with two sides of equal length is called an
isosceles triangle. A triangle that has three sides of equal length is called an equilateral triangle. Figure 9.24 shows
both types of triangles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 713

Figure 9.24 In an isosceles triangle, two sides have the same length, and the third side is the base. In an equilateral
triangle, all three sides have the same length.

  Isosceles and Equilateral Triangles

  An isosceles triangle has two sides the same length.
  An equilateral triangle has three sides of equal length.

  EXAMPLE 9.36                               inches. Find the length of each side.
The perimeter of an equilateral triangle is

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given  Perimeter = 93 in.
information.
                                                                       length of the sides of an equilateral
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                             triangle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
Step 4.Translate.                                                      Let s = length of each side
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
714 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                     Each side is 31 inches.

       TRY IT 9.71 Find the length of each side of an equilateral triangle with perimeter inches.

       TRY IT 9.72 Find the length of each side of an equilateral triangle with perimeter centimeters.

  EXAMPLE 9.37
Arianna has inches of beading to use as trim around a scarf. The scarf will be an isosceles triangle with a base of

    inches. How long can she make the two equal sides?
     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the  P = 156 in.
given information.                                               the lengths of the two equal sides
                                                                 Let s = the length of each side
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 715

Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.                                 Arianna can make each of the two equal sides
                                                             48 inches long.

TRY IT 9.73     A backyard deck is in the shape of an isosceles triangle with a base of  feet. The perimeter of
                the deck is feet. How long is each of the equal sides of the deck?

TRY IT 9.74     A boat's sail is an isosceles triangle with base of meters. The perimeter is  meters. How long
                is each of the equal sides of the sail?

Use the Properties of Trapezoids

A trapezoid is four-sided figure, a quadrilateral, with two sides that are parallel and two sides that are not. The parallel
sides are called the bases. We call the length of the smaller base and the length of the bigger base The height, of
a trapezoid is the distance between the two bases as shown in Figure 9.25.

    Figure 9.25 A trapezoid has a larger base,  and a smaller base, The height is the distance between the bases.
The formula for the area of a trapezoid is:

Splitting the trapezoid into two triangles may help us understand the formula. The area of the trapezoid is the sum of
the areas of the two triangles. See Figure 9.26.

              Figure 9.26 Splitting a trapezoid into two triangles may help you understand the formula for its area.
The height of the trapezoid is also the height of each of the two triangles. See Figure 9.27.

                                                Figure 9.27

The formula for the area of a trapezoid is
If we distribute, we get,
716 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Properties of Trapezoids

· A trapezoid has four sides. See Figure 9.25.

· Two of its sides are parallel and two sides are not.

· The area, of a trapezoid is                     .

  EXAMPLE 9.38
Find the area of a trapezoid whose height is 6 inches and whose bases are and inches.

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                       the area of the trapezoid
                                                                 Let
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: Is this answer reasonable?

If we draw a rectangle around the trapezoid that has the same big base     and a height  its area should be greater than
that of the trapezoid.                                                     and a height  its area should be smaller than

If we draw a rectangle inside the trapezoid that has the same little base
that of the trapezoid.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 717

The area of the larger rectangle is square inches and the area of the smaller rectangle is  square inches. So it makes
sense that the area of the trapezoid is between and square inches

Step 7. Answer the question. The area of the trapezoid is square inches.

TRY IT 9.75 The height of a trapezoid is yards and the bases are and yards. What is the area?

TRY IT 9.76   The height of a trapezoid is        centimeters and the bases are  and centimeters. What is the
              area?

EXAMPLE 9.39

Find the area of a trapezoid whose height is feet and whose bases are  and       feet.

Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with
the given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                   the area of the trapezoid
                                                             Let A = the area
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.
718 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check: Is this answer reasonable?
         The area of the trapezoid should be less than the area of a
         rectangle with base 13.7 and height 5, but more than the
         area of a rectangle with base 10.3 and height 5.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                          The area of the trapezoid is 60 square feet.

TRY IT 9.77  The height of a trapezoid is centimeters and the bases are and centimeters. What is
             the area?

TRY IT 9.78 The height of a trapezoid is meters and the bases are and meters. What is the area?

  EXAMPLE 9.40

Vinny has a garden that is shaped like a trapezoid. The trapezoid has a height of yards and the bases are and
yards. How many square yards will be available to plant?

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with
the given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                            the area of a trapezoid
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                      Let A = the area

Step 4.Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                    9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 719

Step 6. Check: Is this answer reasonable?
Yes. The area of the trapezoid is less than the area of a rectangle with a base of 8.2 yd and height 3.4 yd, but more
than the area of a rectangle with base 5.6 yd and height 3.4 yd.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                 Vinny has 23.46 square yards in which he can plant.

TRY IT 9.79  Lin wants to sod his lawn, which is shaped like a trapezoid. The bases are        yards and

             yards, and the height is yards. How many square yards of sod does he need?

TRY IT 9.80  Kira wants cover his patio with concrete pavers. If the patio is shaped like a trapezoid whose
             bases are feet and feet and whose height is feet, how many square feet of pavers will
             he need?

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity Spaghetti and Meatballs for All will provide you with another view of the topics covered in
this section."

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
    Perimeter of a Rectangle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24perirect)
    Area of a Rectangle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24arearect)
    Perimeter and Area Formulas (http://www.openstax.org/l/24periareaform)
    Area of a Triangle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areatri)
    Area of a Triangle with Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areatrifract)
    Area of a Trapezoid (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areatrap)

        SECTION 9.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Understand Linear, Square, and Cubic Measure

In the following exercises, determine whether you would measure each item using linear, square, or cubic units.

129. amount of water in a fish  130. length of dental floss  131. living area of an
        tank                                                         apartment

132. floor space of a bathroom  133. height of a doorway     134. capacity of a truck trailer
        tile
720 9 · Math Models and Geometry

In the following exercises, find the  perimeter and  area of each figure. Assume each side of the square is cm.

135.                                136.                                 137.

138.                                139.                                 140.

Use the Properties of Rectangles

In the following exercises, find the  perimeter and  area of each rectangle.

141. The length of a rectangle      142. The length of a rectangle       143. A rectangular room is
        is feet and the width is            is inches and the width              feet wide by feet long.
            feet.                           is inches.

144. A driveway is in the shape
        of a rectangle feet
        wide by feet long.

In the following exercises, solve.  146. Find the length of a            147. Find the width of a
                                            rectangle with perimeter             rectangle with perimeter
145. Find the length of a                          yards and width of                meters and length
        rectangle with perimeter                 yards.                          meters.
              inches and width
        inches.                     149. The area of a rectangle is      150. The area of a rectangle is
                                                  square meters. The                   square centimeters.
148. Find the width of a
        rectangle with perimeter            length is meters. What               The width is
               meters and length            is the width?                        centimeters. What is the
             meters.                                                             length?
                                    152. The width of a rectangle is
151. The length of a rectangle                inches more than the       153. The perimeter of a
        is inches more than the                                                  rectangle is meters.
        width. The perimeter is             length. The perimeter is             The width of the rectangle
        inches. Find the length                 inches. Find the length          is meters less than the
        and the width.                                                           length. Find the length
                                            and the width.                       and the width of the
154. The perimeter of a                                                          rectangle.
        rectangle is feet. The
        width is feet less than     155. The width of the rectangle      156. The length of the
        the length. Find the
        length and the width.             is meters less than the              rectangle is meters

                                          length. The perimeter of a           less than the width. The

                                          rectangle is    meters.              perimeter of a rectangle

                                          Find the dimensions of               is  meters. Find the

                                          the rectangle.                       dimensions of the

                                                                               rectangle.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 721

157. The perimeter of a             158. The length of a rectangle      159. The length of a rectangle
        rectangle of feet. The              is three times the width.           is meters less than twice
        length of the rectangle is          The perimeter is feet.              the width. The perimeter
        twice the width. Find the           Find the length and width           is meters. Find the
        length and width of the             of the rectangle.                   length and width.
        rectangle.
                                    161. The width of a                 162. The length of a
160. The length of a rectangle              rectangular window is               rectangular poster is
        is inches more than                 inches. The area is                 inches. The area is
        twice the width. The                square inches. What is the          square inches. What is the
        perimeter is inches.                length?                             width?
        Find the length and width.
                                    164. The area of a rectangular      165. The perimeter of a
163. The area of a rectangular              tarp is square feet.                rectangular courtyard is
                                            The width is feet. What                   feet. The length is
roof is    square                           is the length?                      feet more than the width.
                                                                                Find the length and the
meters. The length is               167. The width of a                         width.
                                            rectangular window is
meters. What is the                         inches less than the        168. The width of a
                                            height. The perimeter of            rectangular playground is
width?                                      the doorway is                        meters less than the
                                            inches. Find the length             length. The perimeter of
166. The perimeter of a                     and the width.                      the playground is
        rectangular painting is                                                 meters. Find the length
              centimeters. The                                                  and the width.
        length is centimeters
        more than the width. Find
        the length and the width.

Use the Properties of Triangles

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of triangles.

169. Find the area of a triangle    170. Find the area of a triangle    171. Find the area of a triangle
        with base inches and                with base centimeters               with base meters and
        height inches.                      and height                          height meters.
                                            centimeters.
                                                                        174. A triangular window has
172. Find the area of a triangle    173. A triangular flag has base             base of feet and height
                                            of foot and height of               of feet. What is its area?
with base  feet and                         feet. What is its area?
                                                                        177. What is the base of a
height     feet.                                                                triangle with an area of
                                                                                      square inches and
175. If a triangle has sides of     176. If a triangle has sides of             height of inches?
        feet and feet and the                   centimeters and
        perimeter is feet, how                                          180. A triangular courtyard has
        long is the third side?             centimeters and the                 perimeter of meters.
                                            perimeter is                        The lengths of two sides
                                            centimeters, how long is            are meters and
                                            the third side?                     meters. How long is the
                                                                                third side?
178. What is the height of a        179. The perimeter of a
        triangle with an area of            triangular reflecting pool  183. Find the length of each
              square inches and             is yards. The lengths of            side of an equilateral
        base of inches?                     two sides are yards                 triangle with a perimeter
                                            and yards. How long is              of yards.
                                            the third side?

181. An isosceles triangle has a    182. An isosceles triangle has a
        base of centimeters. If             base of inches. If the
        the perimeter is                    perimeter is inches,
        centimeters, find the               find the length of each of
        length of each of the               the other sides.
        other sides.
722 9 · Math Models and Geometry

184. Find the length of each         185. The perimeter of an            186. The perimeter of an
        side of an equilateral               equilateral triangle is             equilateral triangle is
        triangle with a perimeter            meters. Find the length of          miles. Find the length of
        of meters.                           each side.                          each side.

187. The perimeter of an             188. The perimeter of an            189. A dish is in the shape of
        isosceles triangle is                isosceles triangle is               an equilateral triangle.
        feet. The length of the              inches. The length of the           Each side is inches long.
        shortest side is feet.               shortest side is inches.            Find the perimeter.
        Find the length of the               Find the length of the
        other two sides.                     other two sides.            192. A scarf in the shape of an

190. A floor tile is in the shape    191. A road sign in the shape       isosceles triangle has a
        of an equilateral triangle.          of an isosceles triangle
        Each side is feet long.              has a base of inches. If    base of       meters. If the
        Find the perimeter.                  the perimeter is
                                             inches, find the length of  perimeter is meters,
193. The perimeter of a                      each of the other sides.
        triangle is feet. One                                            find the length of each of
        side of the triangle is      194. The perimeter of a
        foot longer than the                 triangle is feet. One       the other sides.
        second side. The third               side of the triangle is
        side is feet longer than             feet longer than the        195. One side of a triangle is
        the second side. Find the            second side. The third              twice the smallest side.
        length of each side.                 side is feet longer than            The third side is feet
                                             the second side. Find the           more than the shortest
196. One side of a triangle is               length of each side.                side. The perimeter is
        three times the smallest                                                 feet. Find the lengths of
        side. The third side is                                                  all three sides.
        feet more than the
        shortest side. The
        perimeter is feet. Find
        the lengths of all three
        sides.

Use the Properties of Trapezoids

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of trapezoids.

197. The height of a trapezoid       198. The height of a trapezoid      199. Find the area of a
        is feet and the bases                is yards and the bases              trapezoid with a height of
        are and feet. What is                are and yards. What                     meters and bases of
        the area?                            is the area?                            and meters.

200. Find the area of a              201. The height of a trapezoid      202. The height of a trapezoid
        trapezoid with a height of
            inches and bases of      is centimeters and the              is feet and the bases
        and inches.
                                     bases are     and                   are      and       feet.

                                     centimeters. What is the            What is the area?

                                     area?

203. Find the area of a              204. Find the area of a             205. Laurel is making a banner
        trapezoid with a height of                                               shaped like a trapezoid.
             meters and bases of     trapezoid with a height of                  The height of the banner
             and meters.                                                         is feet and the bases are
                                     centimeters and                               and feet. What is the
                                                                                 area of the banner?
                                     bases of      and

                                     centimeters.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        9.4 · Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids 723

206. Niko wants to tile the         207. Theresa needs a new top        208. Elena is knitting a scarf.
        floor of his bathroom. The          for her kitchen counter.
        floor is shaped like a              The counter is shaped like  The scarf will be shaped
        trapezoid with width                a trapezoid with width
        feet and lengths feet                      inches and lengths   like a trapezoid with width
        and feet. What is the                   and inches. What is
        area of the floor?                  the area of the counter?    inches and lengths

                                                                        inches and             inches.

                                                                        What is the area of the

                                                                        scarf?

Everyday Math

209. Fence Jose just removed the children's playset            210. Gardening Lupita wants to fence in her tomato
        from his back yard to make room for a                          garden. The garden is rectangular and the length
        rectangular garden. He wants to put a fence                    is twice the width. It will take feet of fencing
        around the garden to keep out the dog. He has a                to enclose the garden. Find the length and width
            foot roll of fence in his garage that he plans to          of her garden.
        use. To fit in the backyard, the width of the
        garden must be feet. How long can he make              212. Painting Caleb wants to paint one wall of his
        the other side if he wants to use the entire roll of
        fence?                                                 attic. The wall is shaped like a trapezoid with

211. Fence Christa wants to put a fence around her             height feet and bases feet and feet. The
        triangular flowerbed. The sides of the flowerbed
        are feet, feet, and feet. The fence costs              cost of the painting one square foot of wall is
              per foot. How much will it cost for Christa to
        fence in her flowerbed?                                about    About how much will it cost for

                                                               Caleb to paint the attic wall?

Writing Exercises                                              214. If you need to put a fence around your backyard,
                                                                       do you need to know the perimeter or the area
213. If you need to put tile on your kitchen floor, do                 of the backyard? Explain your reasoning.
        you need to know the perimeter or the area of
        the kitchen? Explain your reasoning.                   216. The length of a rectangle is feet more than the
                                                                       width. The area is square feet. Find the length
215. Look at the two figures.                                          and the width.

     Which figure looks like it has the larger area?                Write the equation you would use to solve

        Which looks like it has the larger perimeter?                  the problem.

     Now calculate the area and perimeter of                        Why can't you solve this equation with the

        each figure. Which has the larger area? Which                  methods you learned in the previous chapter?
        has the larger perimeter?
724 9 · Math Models and Geometry

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

9.5 Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the properties of circles
           Find the area of irregular figures

       BE PREPARED 9.13 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Evaluate when
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.15.

BE PREPARED 9.14                 Using     for approximate the (a) circumference and (b) the area of a circle with

                                 radius inches.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.39.

BE PREPARED 9.15                 Simplify        and round to the nearest thousandth.

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.36.

In this section, we'll continue working with geometry applications. We will add several new formulas to our collection of
formulas. To help you as you do the examples and exercises in this section, we will show the Problem Solving Strategy for
Geometry Applications here.

Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications

Step 1.  Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw the figure and label it with the
         given information.
Step 2.  Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3.  Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4.  Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the given
         information.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Use the Properties of Circles

Do you remember the properties of circles from Decimals and Fractions Together? We'll show them here again to refer to
as we use them to solve applications.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 725

Properties of Circles

· is the length of the radius
· is the length of the diameter
·
· Circumference is the perimeter of a circle. The formula for circumference is

· The formula for area of a circle is

Remember, that we approximate with  or depending on whether the radius of the circle is given as a decimal or

a fraction. If you use the key on your calculator to do the calculations in this section, your answers will be slightly
different from the answers shown. That is because the key uses more than two decimal places.

EXAMPLE 9.41

A circular sandbox has a radius of  feet. Find the  circumference and  area of the sandbox.
     Solution



Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                          the circumference of
                                                                                    the circle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.
                                                                                    Let c = circumference
Step 4. Translate.                                                                  of the circle
Write the appropriate formula
Substitute

Step 5. Solve the equation.
726 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check. Does this answer make sense?
         Yes. If we draw a square around the circle, its sides would be 5 ft (twice the radius), so its
         perimeter would be 20 ft. This is slightly more than the circle's circumference, 15.7 ft.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                                                             The circumference of
                                                                                                         the sandbox is 15.7
                                                                                                         feet.



Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                                               the area of the
                                                                                                         circle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                                                         Let A = the area of
                                                                                                         the circle
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula                                                                            The area of the
Substitute                                                                                               circle is 19.625
                                                                                                         square feet.
Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check.

Yes. If we draw a square around the circle, its sides would be 5 ft, as shown in part  . So

the area of the square would be 25 sq. ft. This is slightly more than the circle's area, 19.625
sq. ft.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.81  A circular mirror has radius of inches. Find the  circumference and  area of the mirror.
TRY IT 9.82  A circular spa has radius of feet. Find the  circumference and  area of the spa.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                   9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 727

We usually see the formula for circumference in terms of the radius of the circle:
But since the diameter of a circle is two times the radius, we could write the formula for the circumference in terms

We will use this form of the circumference when we're given the length of the diameter instead of the radius.
  EXAMPLE 9.42

A circular table has a diameter of four feet. What is the circumference of the table?
     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given
  information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.        the circumference of the table

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.  Let c = the circumference of the
                                                  table
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula for the situation.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation, using 3.14 for
728 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         Step 6. Check: If we put a square around the circle, its side would be 4.
         The perimeter would be 16. It makes sense that the circumference of the circle,
         12.56, is a little less than 16.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                                              The diameter of the table is 12.56
                                                                                          square feet.

TRY IT 9.83 Find the circumference of a circular fire pit whose diameter is feet.
TRY IT 9.84 If the diameter of a circular trampoline is feet, what is its circumference?

  EXAMPLE 9.43                                         centimeters.
Find the diameter of a circle with a circumference of

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the
given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                           the diameter of the circle
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                     Let d = the diameter of the circle
Step 4. Translate.

Write the formula.
Substitute, using 3.14 to approximate .

Access for free at openstax.org
                              9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 729

Step 5. Solve.
Step 6. Check:

Step 7. Answer the question.  The diameter of the circle is approximately 15
                              centimeters.

TRY IT 9.85     Find the diameter of a circle with circumference of  centimeters.

TRY IT 9.86 Find the diameter of a circle with circumference of      feet.

Find the Area of Irregular Figures

So far, we have found area for rectangles, triangles, trapezoids, and circles. An irregular figure is a figure that is not a
standard geometric shape. Its area cannot be calculated using any of the standard area formulas. But some irregular
figures are made up of two or more standard geometric shapes. To find the area of one of these irregular figures, we can
split it into figures whose formulas we know and then add the areas of the figures.

  EXAMPLE 9.44

Find the area of the shaded region.

     Solution
The given figure is irregular, but we can break it into two rectangles. The area of the shaded region will be the sum of the
areas of both rectangles.

The blue rectangle has a width of and a length of The red rectangle has a width of but its length is not labeled.
The right side of the figure is the length of the red rectangle plus the length of the blue rectangle. Since the right side of
the blue rectangle is units long, the length of the red rectangle must be units.
730 9 · Math Models and Geometry

The area of the figure is square units.
Is there another way to split this figure into two rectangles? Try it, and make sure you get the same area.

       TRY IT 9.87 Find the area of each shaded region:

       TRY IT 9.88 Find the area of each shaded region:

  EXAMPLE 9.45
Find the area of the shaded region.

     Solution
We can break this irregular figure into a triangle and rectangle. The area of the figure will be the sum of the areas of
triangle and rectangle.

The rectangle has a length of units and a width of units.

We need to find the base and height of the triangle.

Since both sides of the rectangle are the vertical side of the triangle is , which is  .

The length of the rectangle is so the base of the triangle will be , which is  .

Now we can add the areas to find the area of the irregular figure.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 731

The area of the figure is      square units.

TRY IT 9.89 Find the area of each shaded region.

TRY IT 9.90 Find the area of each shaded region.

  EXAMPLE 9.46

A high school track is shaped like a rectangle with a semi-circle (half a circle) on each end. The rectangle has length
meters and width meters. Find the area enclosed by the track. Round your answer to the nearest hundredth.

     Solution
We will break the figure into a rectangle and two semi-circles. The area of the figure will be the sum of the areas of the
rectangle and the semicircles.

The rectangle has a length of  m and a width of m. The semi-circles have a diameter of m, so each has a radius
of m.

TRY IT 9.91 Find the area:
732 9 · Math Models and Geometry

              TRY IT 9.92 Find the area:

MEDIA

ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Circumference of a Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24circumcircle)
Area of a Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areacircle)
Area of an L-shaped polygon (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areaLpoly)
Area of an L-shaped polygon with Decimals (http://www.openstax.org/l/24areaLpolyd)
Perimeter Involving a Rectangle and Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24perirectcirc)
Area Involving a Rectangle and Circle (http://www.openstax.org/l/24arearectcirc)

        SECTION 9.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Properties of Circles

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of circles.

217. The lid of a paint bucket is  218. An extra-large pizza is a      219. A farm sprinkler spreads
        a circle with radius               circle with radius inches.          water in a circle with
                                                                               radius of feet. Find the
    inches. Find the                   Find the 
    circumference and                  circumference and                    circumference and
                                                                            area of the watered
        area of the lid.                   area of the pizza.
                                                                               circle.
220. A circular rug has radius     221. A reflecting pool is in the
                                           shape of a circle with      222. A turntable is a circle with
    of feet. Find the                      diameter of feet. What              diameter of inches.
    circumference and                      is the circumference of             What is the circumference
                                           the pool?                           of the turntable?
        area of the rug.
                                   224. A round coin has a             225. A barbecue grill is a circle
223. A circular saw has a                  diameter of                         with a diameter of
        diameter of inches.                centimeters. What is the            feet. What is the
        What is the circumference          circumference of the                circumference of the grill?
        of the saw?                        coin?
                                                                       228. A circle has a
226. The top of a pie tin is a     227. A circle has a                         circumference of
        circle with a diameter of          circumference of                    feet. Find the diameter.
             inches. What is the           inches. Find the diameter.
        circumference of the top?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 733

229. A circle has a                 230. A circle has a
        circumference of                    circumference of
        meters. Find the diameter.          centimeters. Find the
                                            diameter.

In the following exercises, find the radius of the circle with given circumference.

231. A circle has a                 232. A circle has a            233. A circle has a
        circumference of                    circumference of               circumference of
        feet.                               centimeters.                   miles.

234. A circle has a
        circumference of
        inches.

Find the Area of Irregular Figures

In the following exercises, find the area of the irregular figure. Round your answers to the nearest hundredth.

235.                                236.                           237.

238.                                239.                           240.

241.                                242.                           243.
734 9 · Math Models and Geometry  245.        246.

       244.

247.                              248.  249.

250.                              251.  252.

253.                              254.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             9.5 · Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures 735

In the following exercises, solve.   256. A gift box will be made from  257. Perry needs to put in a new
                                             a rectangular piece of             lawn. His lot is a rectangle with
255. A city park covers one                  cardboard measuring                a length of feet and a
        block plus parts of four             inches by inches, with             width of feet. The house is
        more blocks, as shown.               squares cut out of the             rectangular and measures
        The block is a square with           corners of the sides, as           feet by feet. His driveway is
        sides feet long, and                 shown. The sides of the            rectangular and measures
        the triangles are isosceles          squares are inches. Find           feet by feet, as shown. Find
        right triangles. Find the            the area of the cardboard          the area of Perry's lawn.
        area of the park.                    after the corners are cut
                                             out.

258. Denise is planning to put a

deck in her back yard. The

deck will be a  by

rectangle with a semicircle

of diameter feet, as shown

below. Find the area of the

deck.

Everyday Math                                                260. Painting Leora wants to paint the nursery in her

259. Area of a Tabletop Yuki bought a drop-leaf              house. The nursery is an by          rectangle,
        kitchen table. The rectangular part of the table is
        a by rectangle with a semicircle at each             and the ceiling is feet tall. There is a by

    end, as shown.  Find the area of the table                          door on one wall, a by    closet
    with one leaf up.  Find the area of the table
                                                             door on another wall, and one by
        with both leaves up.
                                                             window on the third wall. The fourth wall has no

                                                             doors or windows. If she will only paint the four

                                                             walls, and not the ceiling or doors, how many

                                                             square feet will she need to paint?
736 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Writing Exercises                                     262. A circle has a diameter of feet. Find the area

261. Describe two different ways to find the area of      of the circle  using for  using for
        this figure, and then show your work to make         Which calculation to do prefer? Why?
        sure both ways give the same area.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

9.6 Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find volume and surface area of rectangular solids
           Find volume and surface area of spheres
           Find volume and surface area of cylinders
           Find volume of cones

       BE PREPARED 9.16 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Evaluate when
                                             If you missed this problem, review Example 2.15.

BE PREPARED 9.17                  Evaluate when
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.16.

BE PREPARED 9.18                  Find the area of a circle with radius
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 5.39.

In this section, we will finish our study of geometry applications. We find the volume and surface area of some three-
dimensional figures. Since we will be solving applications, we will once again show our Problem-Solving Strategy for
Geometry Applications.

Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications
Step 1. Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw the figure and label it with the

           given information.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the given

           information.
Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 737

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Find Volume and Surface Area of Rectangular Solids

A cheerleading coach is having the squad paint wooden crates with the school colors to stand on at the games. (See
Figure 9.28). The amount of paint needed to cover the outside of each box is the surface area, a square measure of the
total area of all the sides. The amount of space inside the crate is the volume, a cubic measure.

                                     Figure 9.28 This wooden crate is in the shape of a rectangular solid.

Each crate is in the shape of a rectangular solid. Its dimensions are the length, width, and height. The rectangular solid
shown in Figure 9.29 has length units, width units, and height units. Can you tell how many cubic units there are
altogether? Let's look layer by layer.

Figure 9.29 Breaking a rectangular solid into layers makes it easier to visualize the number of cubic units it contains. This
  by by rectangular solid has cubic units.

Altogether there are cubic units. Notice that is the

The volume, of any rectangular solid is the product of the length, width, and height.

We could also write the formula for volume of a rectangular solid in terms of the area of the base. The area of the base,
    is equal to

We can substitute for  in the volume formula to get another form of the volume formula.

We now have another version of the volume formula for rectangular solids. Let's see how this works with the
rectangular solid we started with. See Figure 9.29.

                                                                             Figure 9.30

To find the surface area of a rectangular solid, think about finding the area of each of its faces. How many faces does the
rectangular solid above have? You can see three of them.
738 9 · Math Models and Geometry

       Notice for each of the three faces you see, there is an identical opposite face that does not show.

       The surface area of the rectangular solid shown in Figure 9.30 is square units.
       In general, to find the surface area of a rectangular solid, remember that each face is a rectangle, so its area is the
       product of its two dimensions, either length and width, length and height, or width and height (see Figure 9.31). Find the
       area of each face that you see and then multiply each area by two to account for the face on the opposite side.

Figure 9.31 For each face of the rectangular solid facing you, there is another face on the opposite side. There are
faces in all.

  Volume and Surface Area of a Rectangular Solid

  For a rectangular solid with length width and height

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Painted Cube" will help you develop a better understanding of volume
and surface area.

  EXAMPLE 9.47                       cm, height  cm, and width cm, find the  volume and  surface area.
For a rectangular solid with length

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 739

     Solution                 and   , so we will show it just once.

Step 1 is the same for both 

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and
label it with the given information.

                                                the volume of the rectangular solid

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. Let = volume

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check
We leave it to you to check your calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.                    The volume is        cubic centimeters.

                                                the surface area of the solid

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. Let = surface area

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: Double-check with a calculator.

Step 7. Answer the question.                    The surface area is 1,034 square centimeters.

TRY IT 9.93  Find the  volume and  surface area of rectangular solid with the: length feet, width

             feet, and height feet.

TRY IT 9.94  Find the  volume and  surface area of rectangular solid with the: length          feet, width

                 feet, and height feet.
740 9 · Math Models and Geometry

EXAMPLE 9.48

A rectangular crate has a length of  inches, width of  inches, and height of  inches. Find its  volume and 
surface area.

     Solution                     and   , so we will show it just once.

Step 1 is the same for both 

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and
label it with the given information.

                                               the volume of the crate

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let = volume

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: Double check your math.

Step 7. Answer the question.                   The volume is 15,000 cubic inches.

                                               the surface area of the crate

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let = surface area

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: Check it yourself!

Step 7. Answer the question.                   The surface area is 3,700 square inches.

TRY IT 9.95   A rectangular box has length             feet, width  feet, and height  feet. Find its   volume and

               surface area.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 741

TRY IT 9.96  A rectangular suitcase has length               inches, width  inches, and height inches. Find its 

             volume and  surface area.

Volume and Surface Area of a Cube

A cube is a rectangular solid whose length, width, and height are equal. See Volume and Surface Area of a Cube, below.
Substituting, s for the length, width and height into the formulas for volume and surface area of a rectangular solid, we
get:

So for a cube, the formulas for volume and surface area are      and

Volume and Surface Area of a Cube

For any cube with sides of length

  EXAMPLE 9.49

A cube is inches on each side. Find its  volume and  surface area.

     Solution

Step 1 is the same for both  and  , so we will show it just once.

  Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and
  label it with the given information.

                                            the volume of the cube

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let V = volume

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Step 5. Solve. Substitute and solve.
742 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 6. Check: Check your work.                   The volume is 15.625 cubic inches.
Step 7. Answer the question.

                                                  the surface area of the cube

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let S = surface area

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Step 5. Solve. Substitute and solve.

Step 6. Check: The check is left to you.          The surface area is 37.5 square inches.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.97   For a cube with side 4.5 meters, find the  volume and  surface area of the cube.
TRY IT 9.98   For a cube with side 7.3 yards, find the  volume and  surface area of the cube.

EXAMPLE 9.50

A notepad cube measures           inches on each side. Find its   volume and   surface area.
     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and
label it with the given information.

                                                  the volume of the cube
                                                  let V = volume
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 743

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: Check that you did the calculations
correctly.

Step 7. Answer the question.                        The volume is 8 cubic inches.

                                                    the surface area of the cube

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let S = surface area

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check: The check is left to you.            The surface area is 24 square inches.
Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.99   A packing box is a cube measuring feet on each side. Find its  volume and  surface

              area.

TRY IT 9.100              A wall is made up of cube-shaped bricks. Each cube is   inches on each side. Find the 

                          volume and  surface area of each cube.

Find the Volume and Surface Area of Spheres

A sphere is the shape of a basketball, like a three-dimensional circle. Just like a circle, the size of a sphere is determined
by its radius, which is the distance from the center of the sphere to any point on its surface. The formulas for the volume
and surface area of a sphere are given below.

Showing where these formulas come from, like we did for a rectangular solid, is beyond the scope of this course. We will
approximate with

Volume and Surface Area of a Sphere

For a sphere with radius
744 9 · Math Models and Geometry

         EXAMPLE 9.51

    A sphere has a radius inches. Find its  volume and  surface area.

            Solution

    Step 1 is the same for both  and  , so we will show it just once.

         Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label
         it with the given information.

                                                        the volume of the sphere
                                                        let V = volume
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: Double-check your math on a calculator.

Step 7. Answer the question.                            The volume is approximately 904.32 cubic inches.

                                                        the surface area of the sphere
                                                        let S = surface area
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: Double-check your math on a calculator

Step 7. Answer the question.                            The surface area is approximately 452.16 square inches.

TRY IT 9.101    Find the  volume and  surface area of a sphere with radius 3 centimeters.
TRY IT 9.102    Find the  volume and  surface area of each sphere with a radius of foot

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 745

  EXAMPLE 9.52                                            inches. Find its  volume and  surface area. Round the

A globe of Earth is in the shape of a sphere with radius
answer to the nearest hundredth.

     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw a figure with the
given information and label it.

                                                               the volume of the sphere
                                                               let V = volume
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                   The volume is approximately 11,488.21 cubic inches.

                                                               the surface area of the sphere
                                                               let S = surface area
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
                                                               The surface area is approximately 2461.76 square
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.               inches.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your
calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.103 A beach ball is in the shape of a sphere with radius of inches. Find its  volume and 
746 9 · Math Models and Geometry

              surface area.

TRY IT 9.104  A Roman statue depicts Atlas holding a globe with radius of  feet. Find the  volume and

               surface area of the globe.

Find the Volume and Surface Area of a Cylinder

If you have ever seen a can of soda, you know what a cylinder looks like. A cylinder is a solid figure with two parallel
circles of the same size at the top and bottom. The top and bottom of a cylinder are called the bases. The height of a
cylinder is the distance between the two bases. For all the cylinders we will work with here, the sides and the height, ,
will be perpendicular to the bases.

Figure 9.32 A cylinder has two circular bases of equal size. The height is the distance between the bases.

Rectangular solids and cylinders are somewhat similar because they both have two bases and a height. The formula for

the volume of a rectangular solid,  , can also be used to find the volume of a cylinder.

For the rectangular solid, the area of the base, , is the area of the rectangular base, length × width. For a cylinder, the

area of the base, is the area of its circular base,  Figure 9.33 compares how the formula  is used for

rectangular solids and cylinders.

Figure 9.33 Seeing how a cylinder is similar to a rectangular solid may make it easier to understand the formula for the
volume of a cylinder.
To understand the formula for the surface area of a cylinder, think of a can of vegetables. It has three surfaces: the top,
the bottom, and the piece that forms the sides of the can. If you carefully cut the label off the side of the can and unroll
it, you will see that it is a rectangle. See Figure 9.34.

Figure 9.34 By cutting and unrolling the label of a can of vegetables, we can see that the surface of a cylinder is a
rectangle. The length of the rectangle is the circumference of the cylinder's base, and the width is the height of the
cylinder.
The distance around the edge of the can is the circumference of the cylinder's base it is also the length of the
rectangular label. The height of the cylinder is the width of the rectangular label. So the area of the label can be
represented as

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                       9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 747

To find the total surface area of the cylinder, we add the areas of the two circles to the area of the rectangle.

The surface area of a cylinder with radius and height is

  Volume and Surface Area of a Cylinder
  For a cylinder with radius and height

EXAMPLE 9.53

A cylinder has height  inches and radius  inches. Find the   volume and   surface area.
     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label
it with the given information.

                                                             the volume of the cylinder
                                                             let V = volume
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )
748 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.                                   The volume is approximately 141.3 cubic inches.

                                                               the surface area of the cylinder
                                                               let S = surface area
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
                                                               The surface area is approximately 150.72 square
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.               inches.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your
calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.105    Find the  volume and  surface area of the cylinder with radius 4 cm and height 7cm.
TRY IT 9.106    Find the  volume and  surface area of the cylinder with given radius 2 ft and height 8 ft.

  EXAMPLE 9.54

Find the  volume and  surface area of a can of soda. The radius of the base is centimeters and the height is

centimeters. Assume the can is shaped exactly like a cylinder.
     Solution

Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and
label it with the given information.

                                                  the volume of the cylinder

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                 9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 749

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. let V = volume

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check.

Step 7. Answer the question.                      The volume is approximately 653.12 cubic centimeters.

                                                  the surface area of the cylinder
                                                  let S = surface area
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
                                                  The surface area is approximately 427.04 square
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.  centimeters.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your
calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.107    Find the  volume and  surface area of a can of paint with radius 8 centimeters and

                height 19 centimeters. Assume the can is shaped exactly like a cylinder.

TRY IT 9.108    Find the  volume and  surface area of a cylindrical drum with radius 2.7 feet and height

                4 feet. Assume the drum is shaped exactly like a cylinder.

Find the Volume of Cones

The first image that many of us have when we hear the word `cone' is an ice cream cone. There are many other
applications of cones (but most are not as tasty as ice cream cones). In this section, we will see how to find the volume of
a cone.

In geometry, a cone is a solid figure with one circular base and a vertex. The height of a cone is the distance between its
base and the vertex.The cones that we will look at in this section will always have the height perpendicular to the base.
See Figure 9.35.
750 9 · Math Models and Geometry

Figure 9.35 The height of a cone is the distance between its base and the vertex.

Earlier in this section, we saw that the volume of a cylinder is  We can think of a cone as part of a cylinder.

Figure 9.36 shows a cone placed inside a cylinder with the same height and same base. If we compare the volume of the

cone and the cylinder, we can see that the volume of the cone is less than that of the cylinder.

             Figure 9.36 The volume of a cone is less than the volume of a cylinder with the same base and height.

In fact, the volume of a cone is exactly one-third of the volume of a cylinder with the same base and height. The volume
of a cone is

Since the base of a cone is a circle, we can substitute the formula of area of a circle,  , for to get the formula for
volume of a cone.

In this book, we will only find the volume of a cone, and not its surface area.
  Volume of a Cone
  For a cone with radius and height .

  EXAMPLE 9.55
Find the volume of a cone with height inches and radius of its base inches.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it
  with the given information.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.  the volume of the cone

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                  9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 751

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.  let V = volume
                                                  The volume is approximately 25.12 cubic inches.
Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute. (Use 3.14 for )

Step 5. Solve.

Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your
calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.

       TRY IT 9.109 Find the volume of a cone with height inches and radius inches

       TRY IT 9.110 Find the volume of a cone with height centimeters and radius centimeters

  EXAMPLE 9.56
Marty's favorite gastro pub serves french fries in a paper wrap shaped like a cone. What is the volume of a conic wrap
that is inches tall and inches in diameter? Round the answer to the nearest hundredth.

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem. Draw the figure and label it with the given information.
  Notice here that the base is the circle at the top of the cone.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                                            the volume of the cone
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.                                      let V = volume

Step 4. Translate. Write the appropriate formula. Substitute. (Use 3.14 for , and     The volume of the wrap is
notice that we were given the distance across the circle, which is its diameter. The  approximately 52.33 cubic
radius is 2.5 inches.)                                                                inches.

Step 5. Solve.
Step 6. Check: We leave it to you to check your calculations.

Step 7. Answer the question.

TRY IT 9.111 How many cubic inches of candy will fit in a cone-shaped piñata that is inches long and
752 9 · Math Models and Geometry

              inches across its base? Round the answer to the nearest hundredth.

TRY IT 9.112  What is the volume of a cone-shaped party hat that is          inches tall and inches across at the
              base? Round the answer to the nearest hundredth.

Summary of Geometry Formulas

The following charts summarize all of the formulas covered in this chapter.

       MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Volume of a Cone (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24volcone)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      9.6 · Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area 753

        SECTION 9.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find Volume and Surface Area of Rectangular Solids

In the following exercises, find  the volume and  the surface area of the rectangular solid with the given dimensions.

263. length meters, width            264. length feet, width feet,    265. length yards, width
        meters, height meters                height feet                           yards, height

                                                                              yards

266. length      centimeters,
        width   centimeters,
        height   centimeters

In the following exercises, solve.   268. Gift box A rectangular      269. Carton A rectangular
                                             gift box has length
267. Moving van A                            inches, width inches,          carton has length
        rectangular moving van               and height inches. Find
        has length feet, width                                              cm, width  cm, and
          feet, and height feet.         its  volume and 
                                                                            height cm. Find its 
    Find its  volume and                     surface area.                  volume and  surface
     surface area.
                                                                            area.
270. Shipping container A
        rectangular shipping
        container has length
        feet, width feet, and
        height feet. Find its

     volume and 

        surface area.

In the following exercises, find  the volume and  the surface area of the cube with the given side length.

271. centimeters                     272. inches                      273.  feet

274.  meters

In the following exercises, solve.   276. Museum A cube-shaped        277. Base of statue The base
                                             museum has sides                 of a statue is a cube with
275. Science center Each side                                                 sides meters long.
        of the cube at the               meters long. Find its 
        Discovery Science Center         volume and  surface              Find its  volume and
        in Santa Ana is feet                                               surface area.
                                             area.
    long. Find its  volume
    and  surface area.

278. Tissue box A box of
        tissues is a cube with
        sides 4.5 inches long. Find

    its  volume and 

        surface area.

Find the Volume and Surface Area of Spheres

In the following exercises, find  the volume and  the surface area of the sphere with the given radius. Round answers
to the nearest hundredth.

279. centimeters                     280. inches                      281. feet

282. yards
754 9 · Math Models and Geometry

In the following exercises, solve. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

283. Exercise ball An exercise    284. Balloon ride The Great          285. Golf ball A golf ball has a
        ball has a radius of              Park Balloon is a big                radius of centimeters.
                                          orange sphere with a
    inches. Find its                      radius of feet . Find its        Find its  volume and
    volume and  surface                                                     surface area.
                                       volume and 
        area.
                                          surface area.

286. Baseball A baseball has a
        radius of inches. Find

    its  volume and 

        surface area.

Find the Volume and Surface Area of a Cylinder

In the following exercises, find  the volume and  the surface area of the cylinder with the given radius and height.
Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

287. radius feet, height          288. radius centimeters,             289. radius meters, height
        feet                              height centimeters                        meters

290. radius yards, height
             yards

In the following exercises, solve. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

291. Coffee can A can of          292. Snack pack A snack pack         293. Barber shop pole A
        coffee has a radius of            of cookies is shaped like a          cylindrical barber shop
        cm and a height of cm.            cylinder with radius cm              pole has a diameter of
                                          and height cm. Find its              inches and height of
    Find its  volume and
     surface area.                     volume and                          inches. Find its 
                                                                           volume and  surface
                                          surface area.
                                                                               area.

294. Architecture A cylindrical
        column has a diameter of
          feet and a height of

    feet. Find its  volume
    and  surface area.

Find the Volume of Cones

In the following exercises, find the volume of the cone with the given dimensions. Round answers to the nearest
hundredth.

295. height feet and radius       296. height inches and               297. height  centimeters
        feet                              radius inches
                                                                            and radius cm

298. height  meters and

radius meters

In the following exercises, solve. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

299. Teepee What is the           300. Popcorn cup What is the         301. Silo What is the volume of
        volume of a cone-shaped           volume of a cone-shaped              a cone-shaped silo that is
        teepee tent that is feet          popcorn cup that is                      feet tall and feet
        tall and feet across at           inches tall and inches               across at the base?
        the base?                         across at the base?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 755

302. Sand pile What is the                                 304. Ice cream cones A regular ice cream cone is 4
        volume of a cone-shaped                                    inches tall and has a diameter of inches. A
        pile of sand that is                                       waffle cone is inches tall and has a diameter of
        meters tall and meters                                            inches. To the nearest hundredth,
        across at the base?                                         find the volume of the regular ice cream cone.

Everyday Math                                                       find the volume of the waffle cone.

303. Street light post The post of a street light is                how much more ice cream fits in the waffle
        shaped like a truncated cone, as shown in the              cone compared to the regular cone?
        picture below. It is a large cone minus a smaller
        top cone. The large cone is feet tall with base
        radius foot. The smaller cone is feet tall with
        base radius of feet. To the nearest tenth,
         find the volume of the large cone.

         find the volume of the small cone.

         find the volume of the post by subtracting the
        volume of the small cone from the volume of the
        large cone.

Writing Exercises

305. The formulas for the volume of a cylinder and a       306. Which has a larger volume, a cube of sides of
        cone are similar. Explain how you can remember             feet or a sphere with a diameter of feet?
        which formula goes with which shape.                       Explain your reasoning.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

9.7 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the distance, rate, and time formula
           Solve a formula for a specific variable

       BE PREPARED 9.19 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
756 9 · Math Models and Geometry

                                  Write miles per gallon as a unit rate.
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 5.65.

BE PREPARED 9.20                  Solve
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 8.20.

BE PREPARED 9.21                  Find the simple interest earned after years on    at an interest rate of
                                  If you missed this problem, review Example 6.33.

Use the Distance, Rate, and Time Formula

One formula you'll use often in algebra and in everyday life is the formula for distance traveled by an object moving at a
constant speed. The basic idea is probably already familiar to you. Do you know what distance you travel if you drove at a
steady rate of miles per hour for hours? (This might happen if you use your car's cruise control while driving on the
Interstate.) If you said miles, you already know how to use this formula!

The math to calculate the distance might look like this:

In general, the formula relating distance, rate, and time is

Distance, Rate and Time
For an object moving in at a uniform (constant) rate, the distance traveled, the elapsed time, and the rate are related
by the formula

where distance, rate, and time.

Notice that the units we used above for the rate were miles per hour, which we can write as a ratio  Then when we
multiplied by the time, in hours, the common units `hour' divided out. The answer was in miles.

EXAMPLE 9.57

Jamal rides his bike at a uniform rate of miles per hour for  hours. How much distance has he traveled?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  You may want to create a mini-chart to summarize the
  information in the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.                    distance traveled

Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it.              let d = distance

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula for the situation.
Substitute in the given information.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 757

Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check: Does 42 miles make sense?

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence. Jamal rode 42 miles.

TRY IT 9.113 Lindsay drove for hours at miles per hour. How much distance did she travel?
TRY IT 9.114 Trinh walked for hours at miles per hour. How far did she walk?

  EXAMPLE 9.58                                                                                              miles. If

Rey is planning to drive from his house in San Diego to visit his grandmother in Sacramento, a distance of
he can drive at a steady rate of miles per hour, how many hours will the trip take?

     Solution

  Step 1. Read the problem.
  Summarize the information in the problem.

Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.             how many hours (time)

Step 3. Name:                                          let t = time
Choose a variable to represent it.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.

Step 5. Solve the equation.

Step 6. Check:
Substitute the numbers into the formula and make sure
the result is a true statement.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.  Rey's trip will take 8 hours.
We know the units of time will be hours because
we divided miles by miles per hour.
758 9 · Math Models and Geometry

TRY IT 9.115            Lee wants to drive from Phoenix to his brother's apartment in San Francisco, a distance of
                        miles. If he drives at a steady rate of miles per hour, how many hours will the trip take?

TRY IT 9.116            Yesenia is miles from Chicago. If she needs to be in Chicago in hours, at what rate does
                        she need to drive?

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

In this chapter, you became familiar with some formulas used in geometry. Formulas are also very useful in the sciences
and social sciences--fields such as chemistry, physics, biology, psychology, sociology, and criminal justice. Healthcare
workers use formulas, too, even for something as routine as dispensing medicine. The widely used spreadsheet program
Microsoft ExcelTM relies on formulas to do its calculations. Many teachers use spreadsheets to apply formulas to
compute student grades. It is important to be familiar with formulas and be able to manipulate them easily.

In Example 9.57 and Example 9.58, we used the formula  This formula gives the value of when you substitute in

the values of and But in Example 9.58, we had to find the value of We substituted in values of and and then

used algebra to solve to If you had to do this often, you might wonder why there isn't a formula that gives the value of

when you substitute in the values of and We can get a formula like this by solving the formula     for

To solve a formula for a specific variable means to get that variable by itself with a coefficient of on one side of the
equation and all the other variables and constants on the other side. We will call this solving an equation for a specific
variable in general. This process is also called solving a literal equation. The result is another formula, made up only of
variables. The formula contains letters, or literals.

Let's try a few examples, starting with the distance, rate, and time formula we used above.

EXAMPLE 9.59

Solve the formula       for

 when              and             in general.

Solution

We'll write the solutions side-by-side so you can see that solving a formula in general uses the same steps as when we

have numbers to substitute.

                                   when d = 520 and r = 65  in general

Write the forumla.

Substitute any given values.

Divide to isolate t.

Simplify.

Notice that the solution for  is the same as that in Example 9.58. We say the formula        is solved for  We can use

this version of the formula anytime we are given the distance and rate and need to find the time.

TRY IT 9.117            Solve the formula       for

                         when              and          in general

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 759

TRY IT 9.118            Solve the formula       for

                         when              and         in general

                        We used the formula          in Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids to

                        find the area of a triangle when we were given the base and height. In the next example, we

                        will solve this formula for the height.

EXAMPLE 9.60

The formula for area of a triangle is        Solve this formula for

 when              and         in general

Solution

                               when A = 90 and b = 15  in general

Write the forumla.

Substitute any given values.

Clear the fractions.
Simplify.
Solve for h.

We can now find the height of a triangle, if we know the area and the base, by using the formula

TRY IT 9.119 Use the formula                    to solve for

                         when              and               in general

TRY IT 9.120            Use the formula         to solve for

                         when              and               in general

In Solve Simple Interest Applications, we used the formula       to calculate simple interest, where is interest, is
principal, is rate as a decimal, and is time in years.

EXAMPLE 9.61

Solve the formula       to find the principal,

 when                                   in general
760 9 · Math Models and Geometry

  Solution                        I = $5600, r = 4%, t = 7 years in general
Write the forumla.

Substitute any given values.

Multiply r  t.

Divide to isolate P.

Simplify.

State the answer.                 The principal is $20,000.

TRY IT 9.121           Use the formula

                       Find  when                                             in general

TRY IT 9.122           Use the formula

                       Find  when                                             in general

Later in this class, and in future algebra classes, you'll encounter equations that relate two variables, usually and You
might be given an equation that is solved for and need to solve it for or vice versa. In the following example, we're
given an equation with both and on the same side and we'll solve it for To do this, we will follow the same steps
that we used to solve a formula for a specific variable.

EXAMPLE 9.62

Solve the formula                 for

 when               in general

     Solution

                                  when x = 4                 in general

Write the equation.

Substitute any given values.

Simplify if possible.

Subtract to isolate the y-term.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                           9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 761

Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.

     TRY IT 9.123 Solve the formula             for

                      when                     in general

     TRY IT 9.124 Solve the formula             for

                      when                     in general

In the previous examples, we used the numbers in part (a) as a guide to solving in general in part (b). Do you think you're
ready to solve a formula in general without using numbers as a guide?

EXAMPLE 9.63

Solve the formula    for

     Solution
We will isolate on one side of the equation.

We will isolate a on one side of the equation.

Write the equation.

Subtract b and c from both sides to isolate a.

Simplify.

So,

     TRY IT 9.125 Solve the formula             for

     TRY IT 9.126 Solve the formula             for

EXAMPLE 9.64

Solve the equation   for

     Solution
We will isolate on one side of the equation.
762 9 · Math Models and Geometry

We will isolate y on one side of the equation.
Write the equation.
Subtract 3x from both sides to isolate y.
Simplify.

TRY IT 9.127 Solve the formula                  for

TRY IT 9.128 Solve the formula                  for

EXAMPLE 9.65

Solve the equation                for

     Solution
We will isolate on one side of the equation.

We will isolate y on one side of the equation.

Write the equation.

Subtract to isolate the term with y.

Simplify.

Divide 5 to make the coefficient 1.

Simplify.

TRY IT 9.129 Solve the formula                  for

TRY IT 9.130 Solve the formula                  for

        LINKS TO LITERACY

The Links to Literacy activity What's Faster than a Speeding Cheetah? will provide you with another view of the topics
covered in this section.

     MEDIA
    ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES

                                        (http://www.openstax.org/l/24distratextime)
    Distance, Rate, Time (http://www.openstax.org/l/24distratetime)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 763

Simple Interest (http://www.openstax.org/l/24simpinterest)
Solving a Formula for a Specific Variable (http://www.openstax.org/l/24solvespvari)
Solving a Formula for a Specific Variable (http://www.openstax.org/l/24solvespecivar)

        SECTION 9.7 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Distance, Rate, and Time Formula

In the following exercises, solve.

307. Steve drove for hours          308. Socorro drove for                 309. Yuki walked for hours
                                                                                   at miles per hour. How
        at miles per hour. How              hours at miles per                     far did she walk?
        much distance did he                hour. How much distance
        travel?                             did she travel?                312. Megan is taking the bus
                                                                                   from New York City to
310. Francie rode her bike for      311. Connor wants to drive                     Montreal. The distance is
             hours at miles per             from Tucson to the Grand                     miles and the bus
                                            Canyon, a distance of                  travels at a steady rate of
        hour. How far did she               miles. If he drives at a                   miles per hour. How
        ride?                               steady rate of miles                   long will the bus ride be?
                                            per hour, how many
                                            hours will the trip take?      315. Javier is driving to Bangor,
                                                                                   Maine, which is miles
313. Aurelia is driving from        314. Kareem wants to ride his                  away from his current
        Miami to Orlando at a               bike from St. Louis,                   location. If he needs to be
        rate of miles per hour.             Missouri to Champaign,                 in Bangor in hours, at
        The distance is miles.              Illinois. The distance is              what rate does he need to
        To the nearest tenth of an                miles. If he rides at a          drive?
        hour, how long will the             steady rate of miles
        trip take?                          per hour, how many             318. Philip got a ride with a
                                            hours will the trip take?              friend from Denver to Las
                                                                                   Vegas, a distance of
316. Alejandra is driving to        317. Aisha took the train from                 miles. If the trip took
        Cincinnati, Ohio,                   Spokane to Seattle. The                hours, how fast was the
        miles away. If she wants            distance is miles, and                 friend driving?
        to be there in hours, at            the trip took hours.
        what rate does she need             What was the speed of
        to drive?                           the train?

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

In the following exercises, use the formula.

319. Solve for                      320. Solve for                         321. Solve for

 when           and                       when         and                  when           and

 in general                               in general                        in general

322. Solve for                      323. Solve for                         324. Solve for

 when           and                       when         and                  when           and

 in general                               in general                        in general

325. Solve for                      326. Solve for

 when           and                       when         and

 in general                               in general.
764 9 · Math Models and Geometry

In the following exercises, use the formula

327. Solve for                         328. Solve for                            329. Solve for

 when                          and      when                             and      when                             and

 in general                             in general                                in general

330. Solve for

 when                          and

 in general

In the following exercises, use the formula

331. Solve for the principal,          332. Solve for the principal,             333. Solve for the time, for:

for:                                   for:                                                           ,

                      ,             ,                  ,                      ,                  ,

 in general                             in general                                in general

334. Solve for the time, for:

                   ,

                ,

 in general

In the following exercises, solve.

335. Solve the formula                 336. Solve the formula                    337. Solve the formula

                   for                                 for                                       for

 when                                   when                                      when
 in general                             in general                                in general

338. Solve the formula                 339. Solve           for                  340. Solve              for

                for

 when
 in general

341. Solve                          for 342. Solve                       for     343. Solve the formula
                                                                                                           for
344. Solve the formula                 345. Solve the formula
                          for                                       for          346. Solve the formula
                                                                                                              for
347. Solve the formula                 348. Solve the formula
                          for                                      for           349. Solve the formula
                                                                                                          for
350. Solve the formula                 351. Solve the formula
                         for                                        for          352. Solve the formula
                                                                                                              for
353. Solve the formula                 354. Solve the formula
        for                                    for                               355. Solve the formula
                                                                                                          for
356. Solve the formula
                         for

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                   9.7 · Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable 765

Everyday Math

357. Converting temperature While on a tour in            358. Converting temperature Yon was visiting the
        Greece, Tatyana saw that the temperature was              United States and he saw that the temperature
             Celsius. Solve for in the formula                    in Seattle was Fahrenheit. Solve for in the
                              to find the temperature in
                                                          formula                  to find the temperature in
        Fahrenheit.
                                                          Celsius.

Writing Exercises

359. Solve the equation  for                              360. Solve the equation  for

 when                     in general                       when      in general
 Which solution is easier for you? Explain why.            Which solution is easier for you? Explain why.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?
766 9 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

angle An angle is formed by two rays that share a common endpoint. Each ray is called a side of the angle.
area The area is a measure of the surface covered by a figure.
complementary angles If the sum of the measures of two angles is , then they are called complementary angles.
cone A cone is a solid figure with one circular base and a vertex.
cube A cube is a rectangular solid whose length, width, and height are equal.
cylinder A cylinder is a solid figure with two parallel circles of the same size at the top and bottom.
equilateral triangle A triangle with all three sides of equal length is called an equilateral triangle.
hypotenuse The side of the triangle opposite the 90° angle is called the hypotenuse.
irregular figure An irregular figure is a figure that is not a standard geometric shape. Its area cannot be calculated

    using any of the standard area formulas.
isosceles triangle A triangle with two sides of equal length is called an isosceles triangle.
legs of a right triangle The sides of a right triangle adjacent to the right angle are called the legs.
perimeter The perimeter is a measure of the distance around a figure.
rectangle A rectangle is a geometric figure that has four sides and four right angles.
right triangle A right triangle is a triangle that has one angle.
similar figures In geometry, if two figures have exactly the same shape but different sizes, we say they are similar

    figures.
supplementary angles If the sum of the measures of two angles is , then they are called supplementary angles.
trapezoid A trapezoid is four-sided figure, a quadrilateral, with two sides that are parallel and two sides that are not.
triangle A triangle is a geometric figure with three sides and three angles.
vertex of an angle When two rays meet to form an angle, the common endpoint is called the vertex of the angle.

Key Concepts

9.1 Use a Problem Solving Strategy

  · Problem Solving Strategy
      Step 1. Read the word problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas. You may need to read the
                  problem two or more times. If there are words you don't understand, look them up in a dictionary or on the
                  internet.
      Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation. It may be helpful to first restate the problem in one sentence before translating.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem. Make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

9.2 Solve Money Applications

  · Finding the Total Value for Coins of the Same Type
       For coins of the same type, the total value can be found as follows:

where number is the number of coins, value is the value of each coin, and total value is the total value of all the
coins.

· Solve a Coin Word Problem
    Step 1. Read the problem. Make sure you understand all the words and ideas, and create a table to organize the
               information.
    Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
    Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
                  Use variable expressions to represent the number of each type of coin and write them in the table.
                  Multiply the number times the value to get the total value of each type of coin.

Step 4.  Translate into an equation. Write the equation by adding the total values of all the types of coins.
Step 5.  Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
Step 6.  Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
Step 7.  Answer the question with a complete sentence.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 9 · Chapter Review 767

                                                     Type
·

9.3 Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem

· Supplementary and Complementary Angles

 If the sum of the measures of two angles is 180°, then the angles are supplementary.

 If and are supplementary, then                               .

 If the sum of the measures of two angles is 90°, then the angles are complementary.

 If and are complementary, then                            .

· Solve Geometry Applications
    Step 1. Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw a figure and label it with
               the given information.
    Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
    Step 3. Name what you are looking for and choose a variable to represent it.
    Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
               given information.
    Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
    Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
    Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

· Sum of the Measures of the Angles of a Triangle

 For any  the sum of the measures is 180°



· Right Triangle
    A right triangle is a triangle that has one 90° angle, which is often marked with a symbol.

· Properties of Similar Triangles
    If two triangles are similar, then their corresponding angle measures are equal and their corresponding side

        lengths have the same ratio.

9.4 Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids

  · Properties of Rectangles
       Rectangles have four sides and four right (90°) angles.
       The lengths of opposite sides are equal.
       The perimeter, , of a rectangle is the sum of twice the length and twice the width.
      

       The area, , of a rectangle is the length times the width.
      

· Triangle Properties  , the sum of the measures of the angles is 180°.
    For any triangle
   

 The perimeter of a triangle is the sum of the lengths of the sides.


 The area of a triangle is one-half the base, b, times the height, h.
768 9 · Chapter Review

      

9.5 Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures

  · Problem Solving Strategy for Geometry Applications
      Step 1. Read the problem and make sure you understand all the words and ideas. Draw the figure and label it with
                  the given information.
      Step 2. Identify what you are looking for.
      Step 3. Name what you are looking for. Choose a variable to represent that quantity.
      Step 4. Translate into an equation by writing the appropriate formula or model for the situation. Substitute in the
                  given information.
      Step 5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
      Step 6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
      Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.

  · Properties of Circles



 Circumference:                  or

 Area:

9.6 Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area

  · Volume and Surface Area of a Rectangular Solid
      

      

· Volume and Surface Area of a Cube
   
   

· Volume and Surface Area of a Sphere
   

   

· Volume and Surface Area of a Cylinder
   
   

· Volume of a Cone
    For a cone with radius and height :

        Volume:

9.7 Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

  · Distance, Rate, and Time

      

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           9 · Exercises 769

Exercises

Review Exercises

Use a Problem Solving Strategy

Approach Word Problems with a Positive Attitude

In the following exercises, solve.

361. How has your attitude           362. Did the Problem Solving
        towards solving word                 Strategy help you solve
        problems changed as a                word problems in this
        result of working through            chapter? Explain.
        this chapter? Explain.

Use a Problem Solving Strategy for Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve using the problem-solving strategy for word problems. Remember to write a complete
sentence to answer each question.

363. Three-fourths of the            364. There are saxophone          365. Reza was very sick and
        people at a concert are              players in the band. The
        children. If there are               number of saxophone       lost  of his original
        children, what is the total          players is one less than
        number of people at the              twice the number of tuba  weight. He lost
        concert?                             players. Find the number
                                             of tuba players.          pounds. What was his

                                                                       original weight?

366. Dolores bought a crib on

sale for          The sale

price was         of the

original price. What was

the original price of the

crib?

Solve Number Problems

In the following exercises, solve each number word problem.

367. The sum of a number and         368. Twice the difference of a    369. One number is nine less
        three is forty-one. Find             number and ten is fifty-          than another. Their sum is
        the number.                          four. Find the number.            twenty-seven. Find the
                                                                               numbers.

370. The sum of two
        consecutive integers is
                 Find the numbers.

Solve Money Applications

Solve Coin Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each coin word problem.

371. Francie has  in                 372. Scott has        in pennies  373. Paulette has  in

dimes and quarters. The              and nickels. The number           and bills. The number

number of dimes is                   of pennies is times the           of bills is one less

more than the number of              number of nickels. How            than twice the number of

quarters. How many of                many of each coin does            bills. How many of

each coin does she have?             he have?                          each does she have?
770 9 · Exercises

374. Lenny has     in

pennies, dimes, and

quarters. The number of

pennies is more than

the number of dimes. The

number of quarters is

twice the number of

dimes. How many of each

coin does he have?

Solve Ticket and Stamp Word Problems

In the following exercises, solve each ticket or stamp word problem.

375. A church luncheon made         376. Tickets for a basketball     377. Ana spent  buying
                Adult tickets cost          game cost for students
                                            and for adults. The       stamps. The number of
              each and children's           number of students was
        tickets cost each. The              less than times the       stamps she bought
        number of children was              number of adults. The
                                            total amount of money     was more than the
            more than twice the             from ticket sales was
        number of adults. How                       How many of each  number of       stamps.
        many of each ticket were            ticket were sold?
        sold?                                                         How many of each did

                                                                      she buy?

378. Yumi spent        buying

stamps. The number of

stamps she bought

was less than times

the number of

stamps. How many of

each did she buy?

Use Properties of Angles, Triangles, and the Pythagorean Theorem

Use Properties of Angles

In the following exercises, solve using properties of angles.

379. What is the supplement         380. What is the complement       381. Two angles are
        of a angle?                         of a angle?                       complementary. The
                                                                              smaller angle is less
                                                                              than the larger angle.
                                                                              Find the measures of both
                                                                              angles.

382. Two angles are
        supplementary. The
        larger angle is more
        than the smaller angle.
        Find the measures of both
        angles.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     9 · Exercises 771

Use Properties of Triangles

In the following exercises, solve using properties of triangles.

383. The measures of two           384. One angle of a right      385. One angle of a triangle is
        angles of a triangle are           triangle measures                   more than the
        and degrees. Find the              degrees. What is the
        measure of the third               measure of the other           smallest angle. The
        angle.                             small angle?                   largest angle is the sum
                                                                          of the other angles. Find
                                                                          the measures of all three
                                                                          angles.

386. One angle of a triangle is
        twice the measure of the
        smallest angle. The third
        angle is more than
        the measure of the
        smallest angle. Find the
        measures of all three
        angles.

In the following exercises,        is similar to  Find the length of the indicated side.

387. side                          388. side

Use the Pythagorean Theorem

In the following exercises, use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the missing side. Round to the nearest
tenth, if necessary.

389.                               390.                           391.

392.                               393.                           394.
772 9 · Exercises

In the following exercises, solve. Approximate to the nearest tenth, if necessary.

395. Sergio needs to attach a      396. Seong is building shelving
        wire to hold the antenna           in his garage. The shelves
        to the roof of his house,          are inches wide and
        as shown in the figure.            inches tall. He wants to
        The antenna is feet tall           put a diagonal brace
        and Sergio has feet of             across the back to
        wire. How far from the             stabilize the shelves, as
        base of the antenna can            shown. How long should
        he attach the wire?                the brace be?

Use Properties of Rectangles, Triangles, and Trapezoids

Understand Linear, Square, Cubic Measure

In the following exercises, would you measure each item using linear, square, or cubic measure?

397. amount of sand in a           398. height of a tree               399. size of a patio
        sandbag

400. length of a highway

In the following exercises, find

 the perimeter  the area of each figure 401.

402.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              9 · Exercises 773

Use Properties of Rectangles

In the following exercises, find the  perimeter  area of each rectangle

403. The length of a rectangle       404. The length of a rectangle      405. A sidewalk in front of
        is meters and the                    is feet and the width is            Kathy's house is in the
        width is meters.                         feet.                           shape of a rectangle
                                                                                 feet wide by feet long.

406. A rectangular room is
        feet wide by feet long.

In the following exercises, solve.

407. Find the length of a            408. Find the width of a            409. The area of a rectangle is
        rectangle with perimeter             rectangle with perimeter                    square meters. The
        of centimeters and                       and length
        width of centimeters.                                                    length is meters. What
                                     411. The length of a rectangle              is the width?
410. The width of a rectangle is             is centimeters more
                                             than the width. The         412. The width of a rectangle is
    centimeters. The area                    perimeter is                          more than twice the
                                             centimeters. Find the
is       square                              length and the width.               length. The perimeter is
                                                                                     inches. Find the length
centimeters. What is the
                                                                                 and the width.
length?

Use Properties of Triangles

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of triangles.

413. Find the area of a triangle     414. Find the area of a triangle    415. A triangular road sign has
        with base inches and                 with base centimeters               base inches and height
        height inches.                       and height                              inches. What is its
                                             centimeters.                        area?

416. If a triangular courtyard       417. A tile in the shape of an      418. Find the length of each
        has sides feet and                   isosceles triangle has a            side of an equilateral
        feet and the perimeter is            base of inches. If the              triangle with perimeter of
            feet, how long is the            perimeter is inches,                    yards.
        third side?                          find the length of each of
                                             the other sides.

419. The perimeter of a              420. One side of a triangle is
        triangle is feet. One                three times the smallest
        side of the triangle is              side. The third side is
        feet longer than the                 feet more than the
        shortest side. The third             shortest side. The
        side is feet longer than             perimeter is feet. Find
        the shortest side. Find the          the lengths of all three
        length of each side.                 sides.

Use Properties of Trapezoids

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of trapezoids.

421. The height of a trapezoid       422. The height of a trapezoid      423. Find the area of the
        is feet and the bases are            is yards and the bases
            and feet. What is                are and yards. What         trapezoid with height
        the area?                            is the area?
                                                                         meters and bases

                                                                         and  meters.
774 9 · Exercises

424. A flag is shaped like a

      trapezoid with height

      centimeters and the

      bases are    and

      centimeters. What is the

      area of the flag?

Solve Geometry Applications: Circles and Irregular Figures

Use Properties of Circles

In the following exercises, solve using the properties of circles. Round answers to the nearest hundredth.

425. A circular mosaic has          426. A circular fountain has   427. Find the diameter of a
        radius meters. Find the             radius feet. Find the          circle with circumference
                                                                                     inches.
     circumference                       circumference
     area of the mosaic                  area of the fountain

428. Find the radius of a circle
        with circumference
        centimeters

Find the Area of Irregular Figures

In the following exercises, find the area of each shaded region.

429.                                430.                           431.

432.                                433.                           434.

Solve Geometry Applications: Volume and Surface Area        435. a rectangular solid with
Find Volume and Surface Area of Rectangular Solids                  length centimeters,
In the following exercises, find the                                width centimeters,
                                                                    and height
 volume  surface area of the rectangular solid                      centimeters

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                            9 · Exercises 775

436. a cube with sides that are       437. a cube of tofu with sides    438. a rectangular carton with
          feet long                                inches                       length inches, width
                                                                                inches, and height
                                                                                inches

Find Volume and Surface Area of Spheres

In the following exercises, find the

 volume  surface area of the sphere.       439. a sphere with radius               440. a sphere with radius
                                                   yards                                   meters

441. a baseball with radius           442. a soccer ball with radius
               inches                             centimeters

Find Volume and Surface Area of Cylinders

In the following exercises, find the

 volume  surface area of the cylinder      443. a cylinder with radius
                                                   yards and height yards

444. a cylinder with diameter         445. a juice can with diameter    446. a cylindrical pylon with
            inches and height                   centimeters and height          diameter feet and
                                                  centimeters                   height feet
        inches

Find Volume of Cones

In the following exercises, find the volume of the cone.

447. a cone with height               448. a cone with height feet 449. a cone-shaped water cup
        meters and radius
        meter                            and radius feet                with diameter inches

                                                                        and height inches

450. a cone-shaped pile of
        gravel with diameter
        yards and height yards

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

Use the Distance, Rate, and Time Formula

In the following exercises, solve using the formula for distance, rate, and time.

451. A plane flew hours at            452. Gus rode his bike for        453. Jack is driving from
              miles per hour. What            hours at miles per hour.          Bangor to Portland at a
                                              How far did he ride?              rate of miles per hour.
        distance was covered?                                                   The distance is miles.
                                                                                To the nearest tenth of an
                                                                                hour, how long will the
                                                                                trip take?

454. Jasmine took the bus
        from Pittsburgh to
        Philadelphia. The distance
        is miles and the trip
        took hours. What was
        the speed of the bus?
776 9 · Exercises

Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable

In the following exercises, use the formula

455. Solve for                         456. Solve for

 when                             and     when                        and

 in general                               in general

In the following exercises, use the formula

457. Solve for                         458. Solve for

     when                         and     when                  and

 in general                               in general

In the following exercises, use the formula

459. Solve for the principal,          460. Solve for the time, for:

for:                                                         ,

                   ,              ,                       ,

 in general                               in general

In the following exercises, solve.

461. Solve the formula                 462. Solve the formula              463. Solve  for
                                                                 for
                   for
                                            when
 when                                       in general
 in general
                                       465. Solve the formula
464. Solve                        for                            for       466. Solve the formula
                                                                                                        for
467. Solve the formula                 468. Solve the formula
                             for                                for        469. Describe how you have
                                                                                   used two topics from this
Practice Test                          471. The sum of       and twice a           chapter in your life
                                               number is      Find the             outside of math class
470. Four-fifths of the people                 number.                             during the past month.
        on a hike are children. If
        there are children,                                                472. One number is less than
        what is the total number                                                   another number. Their
        of people on the hike?                                                     sum is Find the
                                                                                   numbers.
473. Bonita has         in dimes       474. At a concert,             in
                                                                           475. Find the complement of a
and quarters in her                      tickets were sold. Adult                       angle.

pocket. If she has more                  tickets were each and

dimes than quarters, how                 children's tickets were

many of each coin does                   each. If the number of

she have?                                adult tickets was fewer

                                         than twice the number of

                                         children's tickets, how

                                         many of each kind were

                                         sold?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              9 · Exercises 777

476. The measure of one angle        477. The perimeter of an             478.  is similar to
        of a triangle is twice the           equilateral triangle is
        measure of the smallest              feet. Find the length of           Find the length of side
        angle. The measure of the            each side.
        third angle is more                                               481. A baseball diamond is
        than the measure of the      480. Find the length of the                  shaped like a square with
        smallest angle. Find the             missing side. Round to               sides feet long. How far
        measures of all three                the nearest tenth, if                is it from home plate to
        angles.                              necessary.                           second base, as shown?

479. Find the length of the
        missing side. Round to
        the nearest tenth, if
        necessary.

482. The length of a rectangle       483. A triangular poster has         484. A trapezoid has height
        is feet more than five               base centimeters and                 inches and bases
        times the width. The                 height centimeters.                  inches and inches. Find
        perimeter is feet. Find              Find the area of the                 the area of the trapezoid.
        the dimensions of the                poster.
        rectangle.
                                     486. Find the area of the shaded     487. Find the volume of a
485. A circular pool has                     region. Round to the                 rectangular room with
        diameter inches. What                nearest tenth.                       width feet, length
        is its circumference?                                                     feet, and height feet.
        Round to the nearest
        tenth.

488. A coffee can is shaped like     489. A traffic cone has height       490. Leon drove from his
        a cylinder with height                   centimeters. The                 house in Cincinnati to his
        inches and radius                                                         sister's house in
        inches. Find (a) the                 radius of the base is                Cleveland. He drove at a
        surface area and (b) the             centimeters. Find the                uniform rate of miles
        volume of the can. Round             volume of the cone.                  per hour and the trip took
        to the nearest tenth.                Round to the nearest                   hours. What was the
                                             tenth.                               distance?

491. The Catalina Express            492. Use the formula                 493. Solve the formula
        takes hours to travel                to solve for the principal,
                                                 for:                                  for
        from Long Beach to
        Catalina Island, a distance                                              when             and
        of miles. To the
        nearest tenth, what is the           years                               in general
        speed of the boat?
                                          in general

494. Solve  for
778 9 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    10 · Introduction to Polynomials 779

10  POLYNOMIALS

Figure 10.1 The paths of rockets are calculated using polynomials. (credit: NASA, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline

  10.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials
  10.2 Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents
  10.3 Multiply Polynomials
  10.4 Divide Monomials
  10.5 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation
  10.6 Introduction to Factoring Polynomials

      Introduction to Polynomials

Expressions known as polynomials are used widely in algebra. Applications of these expressions are essential to many
careers, including economists, engineers, and scientists. In this chapter, we will find out what polynomials are and how
to manipulate them through basic mathematical operations.

10.1 Add and Subtract Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Identify polynomials, monomials, binomials, and trinomials
           Determine the degree of polynomials
           Add and subtract monomials
           Add and subtract polynomials
           Evaluate a polynomial for a given value

       BE PREPARED 10.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                            Simplify:
                                            If you missed this problem, review Example 2.22.

BE PREPARED 10.2  Subtract:
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 7.29.

BE PREPARED 10.3  Evaluate: when
                  If you missed this problem, review Example 2.18.
780 10 · Polynomials

Identify Polynomials, Monomials, Binomials, and Trinomials

In Evaluate, Simplify, and Translate Expressions, you learned that a term is a constant or the product of a constant and

one or more variables. When it is of the form     where is a constant and is a whole number, it is called a

monomial. A monomial, or a sum and/or difference of monomials, is called a polynomial.

Polynomials

polynomial--A monomial, or two or more monomials, combined by addition or subtraction
monomial--A polynomial with exactly one term
binomial-- A polynomial with exactly two terms
trinomial--A polynomial with exactly three terms

Notice the roots:
  · poly- means many
  · mono- means one
  · bi- means two
  · tri- means three

Here are some examples of polynomials:

                           Polynomial

                           Monomial

                           Binomial

                          Trinomial

Notice that every monomial, binomial, and trinomial is also a polynomial. They are special members of the family of
polynomials and so they have special names. We use the words `monomial', `binomial', and `trinomial' when referring to
these special polynomials and just call all the rest `polynomials'.

EXAMPLE 10.1

Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial:

 Solution                                                      

                      Polynomial  Number of terms  Type

                                               3   Trinomial

                                               1   Monomial

                                               5   Polynomial

                                               2   Binomial

                                               1   Monomial

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        10.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 781

TRY IT 10.1 Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial.

                                                                          

TRY IT 10.2 Determine whether each polynomial is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial.

                                                                            

Determine the Degree of Polynomials

In this section, we will work with polynomials that have only one variable in each term. The degree of a polynomial and
the degree of its terms are determined by the exponents of the variable.

A monomial that has no variable, just a constant, is a special case. The degree of a constant is --it has no variable.

Degree of a Polynomial

The degree of a term is the exponent of its variable.
The degree of a constant is
The degree of a polynomial is the highest degree of all its terms.

Let's see how this works by looking at several polynomials. We'll take it step by step, starting with monomials, and then
progressing to polynomials with more terms.

Remember: Any base written without an exponent has an implied exponent of

EXAMPLE 10.2

Find the degree of the following polynomials:

                                                                    
782 10 · Polynomials

  Solution                                 The degree is 1.



The exponent of is one.

                                           The degree is 3

The highest degree of all the terms is 3.

                                           The degree is 0.

The degree of a constant is 0.

                                           The degree is 2.

The highest degree of all the terms is 2.

                                           The degree is 1.

The highest degree of all the terms is 1.

TRY IT 10.3 Find the degree of the following polynomials:

                                                               

TRY IT 10.4 Find the degree of the following polynomials:

                                                               

Working with polynomials is easier when you list the terms in descending order of degrees. When a polynomial is written
this way, it is said to be in standard form. Look back at the polynomials in Example 10.2. Notice that they are all written
in standard form. Get in the habit of writing the term with the highest degree first.

Add and Subtract Monomials

In The Language of Algebra, you simplified expressions by combining like terms. Adding and subtracting monomials is
the same as combining like terms. Like terms must have the same variable with the same exponent. Recall that when
combining like terms only the coefficients are combined, never the exponents.

EXAMPLE 10.3

Add:
     Solution

Combine like terms.

TRY IT 10.5 Add:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                    10.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 783

       TRY IT 10.6 Add:
  EXAMPLE 10.4
Subtract:

     Solution

  Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 10.7 Subtract:
       TRY IT 10.8 Subtract:

  EXAMPLE 10.5
Simplify:

     Solution

Combine like terms.

Remember,  and are not like terms. The variables are not the same.

       TRY IT 10.9 Add:

       TRY IT 10.10 Add:

Add and Subtract Polynomials

Adding and subtracting polynomials can be thought of as just adding and subtracting like terms. Look for like
terms--those with the same variables with the same exponent. The Commutative Property allows us to rearrange the
terms to put like terms together. It may also be helpful to underline, circle, or box like terms.

  EXAMPLE 10.6
Find the sum:

     Solution

Identify like terms.
784 10 · Polynomials

Rearrange to get the like terms together.
Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 10.11 Find the sum:

       TRY IT 10.12 Find the sum:

Parentheses are grouping symbols. When we add polynomials as we did in Example 10.6, we can rewrite the expression
without parentheses and then combine like terms. But when we subtract polynomials, we must be very careful with the
signs.

  EXAMPLE 10.7
Find the difference:

     Solution

  Distribute and identify like terms.

  Rearrange the terms.
  Combine like terms.

TRY IT 10.13 Find the difference:
TRY IT 10.14 Find the difference:

  EXAMPLE 10.8        from
Subtract:

     Solution

Distribute and identify like terms.
Rearrange the terms.
Combine like terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   10.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 785

TRY IT 10.15 Subtract:                      from

TRY IT 10.16 Subtract:                      from

Evaluate a Polynomial for a Given Value

In The Language of Algebra we evaluated expressions. Since polynomials are expressions, we'll follow the same
procedures to evaluate polynomials--substitute the given value for the variable into the polynomial, and then simplify.

EXAMPLE 10.9

Evaluate             when

 Solution 
 

Substitute 3 for
Simplify the expression with the exponent.
Multiply.
Simplify.



Substitute -1 for
Simplify the expression with the exponent.
Multiply.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.17  Evaluate:               when
       TRY IT 10.18
                                
  EXAMPLE 10.10
The polynomial       Evaluate:             when

                                 

                           gives the height of an object seconds after it is dropped from a  foot tall bridge. Find
786 10 · Polynomials

the height after      seconds.
     Solution

    Substitute 3 for
    Simplify the expression with the exponent.
    Multiply.
    Simplify.

     TRY IT 10.19     The polynomial            gives the height, in feet, of a ball seconds after it is tossed into

                      the air, from an initial height of feet. Find the height after       seconds.

     TRY IT 10.20     The polynomial            gives the height, in feet, of a ball seconds after it is tossed

                      into the air, from an initial height of feet. Find the height after  seconds.

     MEDIA

     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Adding Polynomials (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24addpolynomi)
     Subtracting Polynomials (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24subtractpoly)

        SECTION 10.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Identify Polynomials, Monomials, Binomials and Trinomials

In the following exercises, determine if each of the polynomials is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other polynomial.

1.                               2.                                   3.

4.                               5.                                   6.

7.                               8.

Determine the Degree of Polynomials

In the following exercises, determine the degree of each polynomial.

9.                               10.                                  11.

12.                              13.                                  14.

Add and Subtract Monomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the monomials.

15.                              16.                                  17.

18.                              19.                                  20.

21. Add:                         22. Add:                             23.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             10.1 · Add and Subtract Polynomials 787

24.                               25. Subtract                        26. Subtract

Add and Subtract Polynomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the polynomials.

27.                                    28.

29.                                      30.                                     31.

32.                               33.                                      34.

35.                               36.                                      37.

38.                               39. Find the sum of            and

40. Find the sum of               and                       41. Subtract                from

42. Subtract                from                            43. Find the difference of                and

44. Find the difference of               and

Evaluate a Polynomial for a Given Value

In the following exercises, evaluate each polynomial for the given value.

45.                               46.                                 47.

                                                                           
                                                                           

48.                               49. A window washer drops a         50. A manufacturer of

                                       squeegee from a platform            microwave ovens has

                                            feet high. The                 found that the revenue

                                       polynomial                          received from selling

                                       gives the height of the             microwaves at a cost of p

                                       squeegee seconds after it           dollars each is given by the

                                       was dropped. Find the               polynomial

                                       height after      seconds.          Find the revenue received

                                                                           when         dollars.

Everyday Math

51. Fuel Efficiency The fuel efficiency (in miles per       52. Stopping Distance The number of feet it takes for
      gallon) of a bus going at a speed of miles per              a car traveling at miles per hour to stop on dry,
      hour is given by the polynomial                             level concrete is given by the polynomial
                                                                                        Find the stopping distance when
      Find the fuel efficiency when

Writing Exercises

53. Using your own words, explain the difference            54. Eloise thinks the sum         is         What is
      between a monomial, a binomial, and a trinomial.            wrong with her reasoning?
788 10 · Polynomials

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

10.2 Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions with exponents
           Simplify expressions using the Product Property of Exponents
           Simplify expressions using the Power Property of Exponents
           Simplify expressions using the Product to a Power Property
           Simplify expressions by applying several properties
           Multiply monomials

       BE PREPARED 10.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed the problem, review Example 4.25.

BE PREPARED 10.5          Simplify:
                          If you missed the problem, review Example 3.52.

Simplify Expressions with Exponents

Remember that an exponent indicates repeated multiplication of the same quantity. For example,  means to multiply

four factors of so means         This format is known as exponential notation.

Exponential Notation

  This is read to the power.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                       10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 789

In the expression the exponent tells us how many times we use the base as a factor.

Before we begin working with variable expressions containing exponents, let's simplify a few expressions involving only
numbers.

  EXAMPLE 10.11
Simplify:



     Solution

 

  Multiply 3 factors of 5.
  Simplify.

 

  Multiply 1 factor of 9.

  TRY IT 10.21  Simplify:
  TRY IT 10.22
                

                Simplify:

                

EXAMPLE 10.12

Simplify:

  Solution  


790 10 · Polynomials

Multiply two factors.
Simplify.



Multiply two factors.
Simplify.

TRY IT 10.23 Simplify:

                                 

TRY IT 10.24 Simplify:

                                 

EXAMPLE 10.13

Simplify:

 Solution 
 

Multiply four factors of -3.
Simplify.



  Multiply two factors.
  Simplify.

Notice the similarities and differences in parts  and  . Why are the answers different? In part  the parentheses
tell us to raise the (-3) to the 4th power. In part  we raise only the 3 to the 4th power and then find the opposite.

       TRY IT 10.25 Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 791

                        

TRY IT 10.26 Simplify:

                        

Simplify Expressions Using the Product Property of Exponents

You have seen that when you combine like terms by adding and subtracting, you need to have the same base with the
same exponent. But when you multiply and divide, the exponents may be different, and sometimes the bases may be
different, too. We'll derive the properties of exponents by looking for patterns in several examples. All the exponent
properties hold true for any real numbers, but right now we will only use whole number exponents.

First, we will look at an example that leads to the Product Property.

  What does this mean?
  How many factors altogether?
  So, we have
  Notice that 5 is the sum of the exponents, 2 and 3.

  We write:

The base stayed the same and we added the exponents. This leads to the Product Property for Exponents.
  Product Property of Exponents
  If is a real number and are counting numbers, then
  To multiply with like bases, add the exponents.

An example with numbers helps to verify this property.

  EXAMPLE 10.14
Simplify:
792 10 · Polynomials

            Solution

         Use the product property,
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.27 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.28 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 10.15
       Simplify:
            Solution

         Rewrite,
         Use the product property,
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.29 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.30 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 10.16
       Simplify:
            Solution

         Use the product property,
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.31 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.32 Simplify:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 793

  EXAMPLE 10.17
Simplify:

     Solution

  Notice, the bases are the same, so add the exponents.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.33 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.34 Simplify:
We can extend the Product Property of Exponents to more than two factors.
  EXAMPLE 10.18
Simplify:
     Solution

  Add the exponents, since the bases are the same.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.35 Simplify:

       TRY IT 10.36 Simplify:

Simplify Expressions Using the Power Property of Exponents

Now let's look at an exponential expression that contains a power raised to a power. See if you can discover a general
property.

What does this mean?
How many factors altogether?

So, we have
794 10 · Polynomials

         Notice that 6 is the product of the exponents, 2 and 3.
         We write:

       We multiplied the exponents. This leads to the Power Property for Exponents.
         Power Property of Exponents
         If is a real number and are whole numbers, then
         To raise a power to a power, multiply the exponents.

       An example with numbers helps to verify this property.

  EXAMPLE 10.19
Simplify:

 Solution 
 

Use the Power Property,
Simplify.



Use the Power Property,
Simplify.

TRY IT 10.37 Simplify:

                                 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                          10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 795

TRY IT 10.38 Simplify:

                                        

Simplify Expressions Using the Product to a Power Property

We will now look at an expression containing a product that is raised to a power. Look for a pattern.

  What does this mean?
  We group the like factors together.
  How many factors of 2 and of
  Notice that each factor was raised to the power.
  We write:

The exponent applies to each of the factors. This leads to the Product to a Power Property for Exponents.
  Product to a Power Property of Exponents
  If and are real numbers and is a whole number, then
  To raise a product to a power, raise each factor to that power.

An example with numbers helps to verify this property:

  EXAMPLE 10.20
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use the Power of a Product Property,
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.39 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.40 Simplify:
796 10 · Polynomials

         EXAMPLE 10.21
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Raise each factor to the third power.
         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.41 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.42 Simplify:

     Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties

       We now have three properties for multiplying expressions with exponents. Let's summarize them and then we'll do some
       examples that use more than one of the properties.

         Properties of Exponents
         If are real numbers and are whole numbers, then

         EXAMPLE 10.22
       Simplify:

            Solution

         Use the Power Property.
         Add the exponents.

              TRY IT 10.43 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.44 Simplify:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                         10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 797

  EXAMPLE 10.23
Simplify:

     Solution

  Take each factor to the second power.
  Use the Power Property.

       TRY IT 10.45 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.46 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 10.24
Simplify:

     Solution

  Raise to the second power.
  Simplify.
  Use the Commutative Property.
  Multiply the constants and add the exponents.
Notice that in the first monomial, the exponent was outside the parentheses and it applied to both factors inside. In the
second monomial, the exponent was inside the parentheses and so it only applied to the n.

       TRY IT 10.47 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.48 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 10.25
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use the Power of a Product Property.
798 10 · Polynomials

         Use the Power Property.
         Use the Commutative Property.
         Multiply the constants and add the exponents for
         each variable.

              TRY IT 10.49 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.50 Simplify:

     Multiply Monomials

       Since a monomial is an algebraic expression, we can use the properties for simplifying expressions with exponents to
       multiply the monomials.

         EXAMPLE 10.26
       Multiply:

            Solution

         Use the Commutative Property to rearrange the factors.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 10.51 Multiply:
              TRY IT 10.52 Multiply:
         EXAMPLE 10.27
       Multiply:
            Solution

         Use the Commutative Property to rearrange
         the factors.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 10.53 Multiply:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              10.2 · Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents 799

      TRY IT 10.54 Multiply:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Exponent Properties (http://www.openstax.org/l/24expproperties)
      Exponent Properties 2 (http://www.openstax.org/l/expproperties2)

        SECTION 10.2 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions with Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify each expression with exponents.

55.   56.                                                               57.

58.   59.                                                               60.

61.   62.                                                               63.

64.   65.                                                               66.

67.   68.                                                               69.

70.

Simplify Expressions Using the Product Property of Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product Property of Exponents.

71.   72.                                                               73.

74.   75.                                                               76.

77.   78.                                                               79.

80.   81.                                                               82.

Simplify Expressions Using the Power Property of Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Power Property of Exponents.

83.   84.                                                               85.

86.   87.                                                               88.

89.   90.                                                               91.

92.   93.                                                               94.

Simplify Expressions Using the Product to a Power Property

In the following exercises, simplify each expression using the Product to a Power Property.

95.   96.                                                               97.

98.   99.                                                               100.

101.  102.
800 10 · Polynomials

Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

103.                             104.                                105.

106.                             107.                                108.

109.                             110.                                111.

112.                             113.                                114.

115.                             116.                                117.

118.                             119.                                120.

121.                             122.                                123.

124.                             125.                                126.

Multiply Monomials

In the following exercises, multiply the following monomials.

127.                             128.                                129.

130.                             131.                                132.

133.                             134.                                135.

136.                             137.                                138.

Everyday Math                                                  140. Salary Raul's boss gives him a raise every

139. Email Janet emails a joke to six of her friends           year on his birthday. This means that each year,
        and tells them to forward it to six of their friends,
        who forward it to six of their friends, and so on.     Raul's salary is  times his last year's salary. If
        The number of people who receive the email on
        the second round is on the third round is              his original salary was  , his salary after
        as shown in the table. How many people will
        receive the email on the eighth round? Simplify        year was                 after years was
        the expression to show the number of people
        who receive the email.                                                   after years was

                                                                                 as shown in the table below.

                                                               What will Raul's salary be after years? Simplify

                                                               the expression, to show Raul's salary in dollars.

      Round Number of people                                   Year        Salary

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 801

Writing Exercises

141. Use the Product Property for Exponents to  142. Explain why             but
        explain why                             144. Explain why     is and not

143. Jorge thinks   is What is wrong with his
        reasoning?

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

10.3 Multiply Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Multiply a polynomial by a monomial
           Multiply a binomial by a binomial
           Multiply a trinomial by a binomial

       BE PREPARED 10.6 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Distribute:
                                             If you missed the problem, review Example 7.17.

BE PREPARED 10.7    Distribute:
                    If you missed the problem, review Example 7.26.

BE PREPARED 10.8    Combine like terms:
                    If you missed the problem, review Example 2.21.

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

In Distributive Property you learned to use the Distributive Property to simplify expressions such as            You

multiplied both terms in the parentheses,       by to get  With this chapter's new vocabulary, you can say

you were multiplying a binomial,  by a monomial, Multiplying a binomial by a monomial is nothing new for you!

EXAMPLE 10.28

Multiply:
802 10 · Polynomials

            Solution

         Distribute.

         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.55 Multiply:
              TRY IT 10.56 Multiply:
         EXAMPLE 10.29
       Multiply:
            Solution

         Distribute.

         Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.57 Multiply:
              TRY IT 10.58 Multiply:
         EXAMPLE 10.30
       Multiply:
            Solution

         Distribute.

         Simplify.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                   10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 803

       TRY IT 10.59 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.60 Multiply:
Multiplying a monomial by a trinomial works in much the same way.
  EXAMPLE 10.31
Multiply:
     Solution

  Distribute.

  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.61 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.62 Multiply:
  EXAMPLE 10.32
Multiply:
     Solution

  Distribute.

  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.63 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.64 Multiply:
Now we will have the monomial as the second factor.
804 10 · Polynomials

         EXAMPLE 10.33
       Multiply:

            Solution

          Distribute.

          Simplify.

              TRY IT 10.65 Multiply:
              TRY IT 10.66 Multiply:

     Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

       Just like there are different ways to represent multiplication of numbers, there are several methods that can be used to
       multiply a binomial times a binomial.

      Using the Distributive Property

       We will start by using the Distributive Property. Look again at Example 10.33.

We distributed the to get

What if we have      instead of ?

Distribute       .

Distribute again.
Combine like terms.

Notice that before combining like terms, we had four terms. We multiplied the two terms of the first binomial by the two
terms of the second binomial--four multiplications.

Be careful to distinguish between a sum and a product.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 805

  EXAMPLE 10.34
Multiply:

     Solution

Distribute         .

Distribute again.

Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.67 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.68 Multiply:
Now we'll see how to multiply binomials where the variable has a coefficient.
  EXAMPLE 10.35
Multiply:
     Solution

  Distribute.
  Distribute again.
  Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.69 Multiply:

       TRY IT 10.70 Multiply:

In the previous examples, the binomials were sums. When there are differences, we pay special attention to make sure
the signs of the product are correct.

  EXAMPLE 10.36
Multiply:
806 10 · Polynomials

            Solution

         Distribute.
         Distribute again.
         Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.71 Multiply:

       TRY IT 10.72 Multiply:

Up to this point, the product of two binomials has been a trinomial. This is not always the case.
  EXAMPLE 10.37

Multiply:
     Solution

Distribute.

Distribute again.

Simplify.                   There are no like terms to combine.

       TRY IT 10.73 Multiply:

       TRY IT 10.74 Multiply:

Using the FOIL Method

Remember that when you multiply a binomial by a binomial you get four terms. Sometimes you can combine like terms
to get a trinomial, but sometimes there are no like terms to combine. Let's look at the last example again and pay
particular attention to how we got the four terms.

Where did the first term,         come from?
It is the product of             the first terms in

The next term,              is the product of        the two outer terms.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 807

The third term,     is the product of  the two inner terms.

And the last term,  came from multiplying the two last terms.

We abbreviate "First, Outer, Inner, Last" as FOIL. The letters stand for `First, Outer, Inner, Last'. The word FOIL is easy to
remember and ensures we find all four products. We might say we use the FOIL method to multiply two binomials.

Let's look at       again. Now we will work through an example where we use the FOIL pattern to multiply two
binomials.

  EXAMPLE 10.38
Multiply using the FOIL method:

     Solution
  Step 1: Multiply the First terms.

  Step 2: Multiply the Outer terms.
  Step 3: Multiply the Inner terms.

  Step 4: Multiply the Last terms.
  Step 5: Combine like terms, when possible.

       TRY IT 10.75 Multiply using the FOIL method:
808 10 · Polynomials

TRY IT 10.76 Multiply using the FOIL method:

We summarize the steps of the FOIL method below. The FOIL method only applies to multiplying binomials, not other
polynomials!

             ...

                 HOW TO

Use the FOIL method for multiplying two binomials.

Step 1.  Multiply the First terms.
Step 2.  Multiply the Outer terms.
Step 3.  Multiply the Inner terms.
Step 4.  Multiply the Last terms.
Step 5.  Combine like terms, when possible.

  EXAMPLE 10.39
Multiply:

     Solution
  Step 1: Multiply the First terms.
  Step 2: Multiply the Outer terms.
  Step 3: Multiply the Inner terms.

  Step 4: Multiply the Last terms.
  Step 5: Combine like terms

       TRY IT 10.77 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.78 Multiply:

Access for free at openstax.org
                               10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 809

  EXAMPLE 10.40
Multiply:

     Solution

  Multiply the First terms.
  Multiply the Outer terms.
  Multiply the Inner terms.
  Multiply the Last terms.
  Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 10.79 Multiply:
       TRY IT 10.80 Multiply:
  EXAMPLE 10.41
Multiply:
     Solution

  Multiply the First terms.
  Multiply the Outer terms.
810 10 · Polynomials

         Multiply the Inner terms.

         Multiply the Last terms.

         Combine like terms. There are none.

              TRY IT 10.81 Multiply:
              TRY IT 10.82 Multiply:

     Using the Vertical Method

      The FOIL method is usually the quickest method for multiplying two binomials, but it works only for binomials. You can
       use the Distributive Property to find the product of any two polynomials. Another method that works for all polynomials
       is the Vertical Method. It is very much like the method you use to multiply whole numbers. Look carefully at this example
       of multiplying two-digit numbers.

       You start by multiplying by to get
       Then you multiply by lining up the partial product in the correct columns.
       Last, you add the partial products.
       Now we'll apply this same method to multiply two binomials.

         EXAMPLE 10.42
       Multiply using the vertical method:

            Solution
       It does not matter which binomial goes on the top. Line up the columns when you multiply as we did when we multiplied

Multiply         by .

Multiply         by .

Add like terms.

Notice the partial products are the same as the terms in the FOIL method.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                      10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 811

       TRY IT 10.83 Multiply using the vertical method:
       TRY IT 10.84 Multiply using the vertical method:
We have now used three methods for multiplying binomials. Be sure to practice each method, and try to decide which
one you prefer. The three methods are listed here to help you remember them.
  Multiplying Two Binomials
  To multiply binomials, use the:
    · Distributive Property
    · FOIL Method
    · Vertical Method
  Remember, FOIL only works when multiplying two binomials.

Multiply a Trinomial by a Binomial

We have multiplied monomials by monomials, monomials by polynomials, and binomials by binomials. Now we're ready
to multiply a trinomial by a binomial. Remember, the FOIL method will not work in this case, but we can use either the
Distributive Property or the Vertical Method. We first look at an example using the Distributive Property.

  EXAMPLE 10.43
Multiply using the Distributive Property:

     Solution

  Distribute.
  Multiply.
  Combine like terms.

       TRY IT 10.85 Multiply using the Distributive Property:
       TRY IT 10.86 Multiply using the Distributive Property:
Now let's do this same multiplication using the Vertical Method.
812 10 · Polynomials

         EXAMPLE 10.44
      Multiply using the Vertical Method:

            Solution
      It is easier to put the polynomial with fewer terms on the bottom because we get fewer partial products this way.

Multiply         by 3.
Multiply         by .
Add like terms.

      TRY IT 10.87 Multiply using the Vertical Method:

      TRY IT 10.88 Multiply using the Vertical Method:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Multiply Monomials (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multmonomials)
      Multiply Polynomials (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpolyns)
      Multiply Polynomials (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpolyns2)
      Multiply Polynomials Review (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpolynsrev)
      Multiply Polynomials Using the Distributive Property (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multpolynsdis)
      Multiply Binomials (http://www.openstax.org/l/24multbinomials)

        SECTION 10.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

In the following exercises, multiply.

145.                                   146.  147.

148.                                   149.  150.

151.                                   152.  153.

154.                                   155.  156.

157.                                   158.  159.

160.                                   161.  162.

163.                                   164.  165.

166.                                   167.  168.

169.                                   170.  171.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 10.3 · Multiply Polynomials 813

172.               173.                                   174.

175.               176.                                   177.

178.

Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply the following binomials using:  the Distributive Property  the FOIL method  the
Vertical method

179.               180.                                   181.

182.

In the following exercises, multiply the following binomials. Use any method.

183.               184.                                   185.

186.               187.                                   188.

189.               190.                                   191.

192.               193.                                   194.

195.               196.                                   197.

198.               199.                                   200.

201.               202.                                   203.

204.               205.                                   206.

Multiply a Trinomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply using  the Distributive Property and  the Vertical Method.

207.               208.                                   209.

210.

In the following exercises, multiply. Use either method.

211.               212.                                   213.

214.

Everyday Math

215. Mental math You can use binomial                     216. Mental math You can use binomial

      multiplication to multiply numbers without a        multiplication to multiply numbers without a

      calculator. Say you need to multiply times          calculator. Say you need to multiply times

      Think of as  and as                                 Think of as          and as

       Multiply    by the FOIL                             Multiply            by the FOIL

      method.                                             method.

       Multiply    without using a calculator.             Multiply            without using a calculator.

       Which way is easier for you? Why?                   Which way is easier for you? Why?

Writing Exercises

217. Which method do you prefer to use when               218. Which method do you prefer to use when
        multiplying two binomials--the Distributive               multiplying a trinomial by a binomial--the
        Property, the FOIL method, or the Vertical                Distributive Property or the Vertical Method?
        Method? Why?                                              Why?
814 10 · Polynomials

     Self Check

       After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

10.4 Divide Monomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Simplify expressions using the Quotient Property of Exponents
           Simplify expressions with zero exponents
           Simplify expressions using the Quotient to a Power Property
           Simplify expressions by applying several properties
           Divide monomials

       BE PREPARED 10.9 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                             Simplify:
                                             If you missed the problem, review Example 4.19.

    BE PREPARED 10.10            Simplify:
                                 If you missed the problem, review Example 10.23.

    BE PREPARED 10.11            Simplify:
                                 If you missed the problem, review Example 4.23.

Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient Property of Exponents

Earlier in this chapter, we developed the properties of exponents for multiplication. We summarize these properties here.

Summary of Exponent Properties for Multiplication

If are real numbers and          are whole numbers, then

Now we will look at the exponent properties for division. A quick memory refresher may help before we get started. In
Fractions you learned that fractions may be simplified by dividing out common factors from the numerator and
denominator using the Equivalent Fractions Property. This property will also help us work with algebraic
fractions--which are also quotients.

Equivalent Fractions Property

If  are whole numbers where      then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          10.4 · Divide Monomials 815

As before, we'll try to discover a property by looking at some examples.

Notice that in each case the bases were the same and we subtracted the exponents.

  · When the larger exponent was in the numerator, we were left with factors in the numerator and in the
      denominator, which we simplified.

  · When the larger exponent was in the denominator, we were left with factors in the denominator, and in the
      numerator, which could not be simplified.

We write:

Quotient Property of Exponents

If is a real number,  and       are whole numbers, then

A couple of examples with numbers may help to verify this property.

When we work with numbers and the exponent is less than or equal to       we will apply the exponent. When the
exponent is greater than , we leave the answer in exponential form.

EXAMPLE 10.45

Simplify:

           

  Solution

To simplify an expression with a quotient, we need to first compare the exponents in the numerator and denominator.



Since 10 > 8, there are more factors of in the numerator.

Use the quotient property with  .

Simplify.
816 10 · Polynomials

 

  Since 9 > 2, there are more factors of 2 in the numerator.
  Use the quotient property with
  Simplify.
Notice that when the larger exponent is in the numerator, we are left with factors in the numerator.

  TRY IT 10.89        Simplify:
  TRY IT 10.90
                                 

                      Simplify:

                                 

EXAMPLE 10.46

Simplify:

           

  Solution

To simplify an expression with a quotient, we need to first compare the exponents in the numerator and denominator.



Since 15 > 10, there are more factors of in the denominator.

Use the quotient property with

Simplify.



Since 5 > 3, there are more factors of 3 in the denominator.
Use the quotient property with
Simplify.
Apply the exponent.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                 10.4 · Divide Monomials 817

Notice that when the larger exponent is in the denominator, we are left with factors in the denominator and in the
numerator.

TRY IT 10.91  Simplify:
TRY IT 10.92
                               

              Simplify:

                               

  EXAMPLE 10.47

Simplify:



     Solution

 

  Since 9 > 5, there are more 's in the denominator and so we will end up with factors in the denominator.

Use the Quotient Property for

Simplify.



Notice there are more factors of in the numerator, since 11 > 7. So we will end up with factors in the
numerator.

Use the Quotient Property for

Simplify.

TRY IT 10.93 Simplify:

                               

TRY IT 10.94 Simplify:

                               

Simplify Expressions with Zero Exponents

A special case of the Quotient Property is when the exponents of the numerator and denominator are equal, such as an
expression like From earlier work with fractions, we know that
818 10 · Polynomials

In words, a number divided by itself is So      for any (    ), since any number divided by itself is

The Quotient Property of Exponents shows us how to simplify  when                  and when  by subtracting

exponents. What if    ?

Now we will simplify in two ways to lead us to the definition of the zero exponent.

Consider first which we know is

Write 8 as .
Subtract exponents.
Simplify.

We see simplifies to a and to . So          .

Zero Exponent

If is a non-zero number, then
Any nonzero number raised to the zero power is

In this text, we assume any variable that we raise to the zero power is not zero.

EXAMPLE 10.48

Simplify:

           
  Solution

The definition says any non-zero number raised to the zero power is



Use the definition of the zero exponent. 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             10.4 · Divide Monomials 819



Use the definition of the zero exponent. 1

  TRY IT 10.95 Simplify:

                                  

  TRY IT 10.96 Simplify:

                 

Now that we have defined the zero exponent, we can expand all the Properties of Exponents to include whole number
exponents.

What about raising an expression to the zero power? Let's look at  We can use the product to a power rule to
rewrite this expression.

Use the Product to a Power Rule.

Use the Zero Exponent Property.

Simplify.                         1

This tells us that any non-zero expression raised to the zero power is one.
  EXAMPLE 10.49

Simplify:
     Solution

Use the definition of the zero exponent. 1

  TRY IT 10.97 Simplify:
  TRY IT 10.98 Simplify:

EXAMPLE 10.50

Simplify:

               
820 10 · Polynomials

            Solution

     

         The product is raised to the zero power.
         Use the definition of the zero exponent.

     

         Notice that only the variable is being raised to the zero power.
         Use the definition of the zero exponent.
         Simplify.

TRY IT 10.99 Simplify:

                                   

TRY IT 10.100 Simplify:

                                   

Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient to a Power Property

Now we will look at an example that will lead us to the Quotient to a Power Property.

This means
Multiply the fractions.
Write with exponents.

Notice that the exponent applies to both the numerator and the denominator.

We see that  is

This leads to the Quotient to a Power Property for Exponents.

Quotient to a Power Property of Exponents

If and are real numbers,           and is a counting number, then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      10.4 · Divide Monomials 821

  To raise a fraction to a power, raise the numerator and denominator to that power.
An example with numbers may help you understand this property:

EXAMPLE 10.51

Simplify:

  Solution     



Use the Quotient to a Power Property,  .

Simplify.



Use the Quotient to a Power Property,  .

Simplify.



Raise the numerator and denominator to the third power.
    TRY IT 10.101 Simplify:
822 10 · Polynomials

                                                      

TRY IT 10.102 Simplify:

                                                      

Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties

We'll now summarize all the properties of exponents so they are all together to refer to as we simplify expressions using
several properties. Notice that they are now defined for whole number exponents.

Summary of Exponent Properties

If are real numbers and are whole numbers, then

  EXAMPLE 10.52
Simplify:

     Solution

  Multiply the exponents in the numerator, using the
  Power Property.
  Subtract the exponents.

       TRY IT 10.103 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.104 Simplify:
  EXAMPLE 10.53
Simplify:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         10.4 · Divide Monomials 823

     Solution

  Multiply the exponents in the numerator, using the
  Power Property.
  Subtract the exponents.
  Zero power property

       TRY IT 10.105 Simplify:

       TRY IT 10.106 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 10.54
Simplify:

     Solution

  Remember parentheses come before exponents, and the
  bases are the same so we can simplify inside the
  parentheses. Subtract the exponents.
  Simplify.
  Multiply the exponents.

       TRY IT 10.107 Simplify:

       TRY IT 10.108 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 10.55
Simplify:

     Solution
Here we cannot simplify inside the parentheses first, since the bases are not the same.
824 10 · Polynomials

         Raise the numerator and denominator to the third power
         using the Quotient to a Power Property,
         Use the Power Property,

              TRY IT 10.109 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.110 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 10.56
       Simplify:
            Solution

         Raise the numerator and denominator to the fourth
         power using the Quotient to a Power Property.
         Raise each factor to the fourth power, using the Power
         to a Power Property.
         Use the Power Property and simplify.

              TRY IT 10.111 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.112 Simplify:
         EXAMPLE 10.57
       Simplify:

        Access for free at openstax.org
          10.4 · Divide Monomials 825

Solution

  Use the Power Property.

  Add the exponents in the numerator, using the Product Property.
  Use the Quotient Property.

       TRY IT 10.113 Simplify:

       TRY IT 10.114 Simplify:

Divide Monomials

We have now seen all the properties of exponents. We'll use them to divide monomials. Later, you'll use them to divide
polynomials.

  EXAMPLE 10.58
Find the quotient:

     Solution

  Rewrite as a fraction.
  Use fraction multiplication to separate the number
  part from the variable part.
  Use the Quotient Property.

       TRY IT 10.115 Find the quotient:
       TRY IT 10.116 Find the quotient:
When we divide monomials with more than one variable, we write one fraction for each variable.
826 10 · Polynomials

         EXAMPLE 10.59
       Find the quotient:

            Solution

         Use fraction multiplication.
         Simplify and use the Quotient Property.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 10.117 Find the quotient:
              TRY IT 10.118 Find the quotient:
         EXAMPLE 10.60
       Find the quotient:
            Solution

         Use fraction multiplication.
         Simplify and use the Quotient Property.
         Multiply.

              TRY IT 10.119 Find the quotient:
              TRY IT 10.120 Find the quotient:
       Once you become familiar with the process and have practiced it step by step several times, you may be able to simplify
       a fraction in one step.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       10.4 · Divide Monomials 827

  EXAMPLE 10.61
Find the quotient:

     Solution

Simplify and use the Quotient Property.

Be very careful to simplify  by dividing out a common factor, and to simplify the variables by subtracting their
exponents.

       TRY IT 10.121 Find the quotient:

       TRY IT 10.122 Find the quotient:

In all examples so far, there was no work to do in the numerator or denominator before simplifying the fraction. In the
next example, we'll first find the product of two monomials in the numerator before we simplify the fraction.

  EXAMPLE 10.62
Find the quotient:

     Solution
Remember, the fraction bar is a grouping symbol. We will simplify the numerator first.

Simplify the numerator.

Simplify, using the Quotient Rule.

    TRY IT 10.123 Find the quotient:

    TRY IT 10.124 Find the quotient:

    MEDIA
   ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
   Simplify a Quotient (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24simpquot)
   Zero Exponent (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/zeroexponent)
   Quotient Rule (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24quotientrule)
   Polynomial Division (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24polyndivision)
828 10 · Polynomials

      Polynomial Division (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24polydivision2)

        SECTION 10.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient Property of Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify.

219.                                   220.                    221.

222.                                   223.                    224.

225.                                   226.                    227.

228.                                   229.                    230.

Simplify Expressions with Zero Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify.

231.                                   232.                    233.

234.                                   235.                    236.

237.                                   238.                    239. 
                                                                   

240.                                   241.                    242.       
    
                                       244.
243.

Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient to a Power Property
In the following exercises, simplify.

245.                                   246.                    247.

248.                                   249.                    250.

251.                                   252.

Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties
In the following exercises, simplify.

253.                                   254.                    255.

256.                                   257.                    258.

259.                                   260.                    261.

262.                                   263.                    264.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             10.4 · Divide Monomials 829

265.              266.                               267.

268.              269.                               270.

271.              272.                               273.

274.              275.                               276.

Divide Monomials

In the following exercises, divide the monomials.

277.              278.                               279.

280.              281.                               282.

283.              284.                               285.

286.              287.                               288.

289.              290.                               291.

292.              293.                               294.

295.

Mixed Practice    297.                               298.  
                      
296.                                                 301.  
                      
                                                     304.
                  300.                               307.

299.              303.

302.              306.

305.

308.              309.

Everyday Math                                        311. Memory One megabyte is approximately

310. Memory One megabyte is approximately            bytes. One terabyte is approximately       bytes.
        bytes. One gigabyte is approximately bytes.
        How many megabytes are in one gigabyte?      How many megabytes are in one terabyte?
830 10 · Polynomials

Writing Exercises

312. Vic thinks the quotient simplifies to           313. Mai simplifies the quotient by writing
        What is wrong with his reasoning?                                  What is wrong with her reasoning?

314. When Dimple simplified and             she got  315. Roxie thinks simplifies to What would you
                                                             say to convince Roxie she is wrong?
the same answer. Explain how using the Order of

Operations correctly gives different answers.

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?

10.5 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Use the definition of a negative exponent
           Simplify expressions with integer exponents
           Convert from decimal notation to scientific notation
           Convert scientific notation to decimal form
           Multiply and divide using scientific notation

       BE PREPARED 10.12 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                              What is the place value of the in the number
                                              If you missed this problem, review Example 1.3.

BE PREPARED 10.13                Name the decimal
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 5.1.

BE PREPARED 10.14                Subtract:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.37.

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

The Quotient Property of Exponents, introduced in Divide Monomials, had two forms depending on whether the
exponent in the numerator or denominator was larger.

Quotient Property of Exponents

If is a real number,             and  are whole numbers, then

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                      10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 831

What if we just subtract exponents, regardless of which is larger? Let's consider
We subtract the exponent in the denominator from the exponent in the numerator.

We can also simplify by dividing out common factors:

This implies that  and it leads us to the definition of a negative exponent.

Negative Exponent             then
If is a positive integer and

The negative exponent tells us to re-write the expression by taking the reciprocal of the base and then changing the sign
of the exponent. Any expression that has negative exponents is not considered to be in simplest form. We will use the
definition of a negative exponent and other properties of exponents to write an expression with only positive exponents.

EXAMPLE 10.63

Simplify:

  Solution 



Use the definition of a negative exponent,
Simplify.


832 10 · Polynomials

Use the definition of a negative exponent,
Simplify.

  TRY IT 10.125 Simplify:

                                   

  TRY IT 10.126 Simplify:

                                   

When simplifying any expression with exponents, we must be careful to correctly identify the base that is raised to each
exponent.

EXAMPLE 10.64

Simplify:

 Solution 

The negative in the exponent does not affect the sign of the base.



The exponent applies to the base, .

Take the reciprocal of the base and change the sign of the exponent.

Simplify.



The expression        means "find the opposite of ".

The exponent applies only to the base, 3.

Rewrite as a product with -1.

Take the reciprocal of the base and change the sign of the exponent.

Simplify.

  TRY IT 10.127 Simplify:

                                     

  TRY IT 10.128 Simplify:

                                     

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 833

We must be careful to follow the order of operations. In the next example, parts  and  look similar, but we get different
results.

  EXAMPLE 10.65
Simplify:

 Solution 

Remember to always follow the order of operations.

 

  Do exponents before multiplication.
  Use

  Simplify.

 

  Simplify inside the parentheses first.
  Use

  Simplify.

TRY IT 10.129 Simplify:

                         

TRY IT 10.130 Simplify:

                         

When a variable is raised to a negative exponent, we apply the definition the same way we did with numbers.

EXAMPLE 10.66

Simplify:
     Solution

Use the definition of a negative exponent,

TRY IT 10.131 Simplify:
TRY IT 10.132 Simplify:
834 10 · Polynomials

       When there is a product and an exponent we have to be careful to apply the exponent to the correct quantity. According
       to the order of operations, expressions in parentheses are simplified before exponents are applied. We'll see how this
       works in the next example.

         EXAMPLE 10.67
       Simplify:

     Solution  
     

         Notice the exponent applies to just the base .
         Take the reciprocal of and change the sign of the exponent.
         Simplify.

     

         Here the parentheses make the exponent apply to the base .
         Take the reciprocal of and change the sign of the exponent.
         Simplify.

     

         The base is . Take the reciprocal of and change the sign of the exponent.
         Simplify.
         Use

TRY IT 10.133 Simplify:

                                     

TRY IT 10.134 Simplify:

                                     

Now that we have defined negative exponents, the Quotient Property of Exponents needs only one form,

where  and m and n are integers.

When the exponent in the denominator is larger than the exponent in the numerator, the exponent of the quotient will

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 835

be negative. If the result gives us a negative exponent, we will rewrite it by using the definition of negative exponents,

Simplify Expressions with Integer Exponents

All the exponent properties we developed earlier in this chapter with whole number exponents apply to integer
exponents, too. We restate them here for reference.

  Summary of Exponent Properties
  If are real numbers and are integers, then

  EXAMPLE 10.68
Simplify:

 Solution  
 

  Use the Product Property,
  Simplify.

 

  The bases are the same, so add the exponents.
  Simplify.
  Use the definition of a negative exponent,

 
836 10 · Polynomials

         The bases are the same, so add the exponents.
         Simplify.
         Use the definition of a negative exponent,

TRY IT 10.135 Simplify:

                                                        

TRY IT 10.136 Simplify:

                                                        

In the next two examples, we'll start by using the Commutative Property to group the same variables together. This
makes it easier to identify the like bases before using the Product Property of Exponents.

EXAMPLE 10.69

Simplify:
     Solution

Use the Commutative Property to get like bases together.
Add the exponents for each base.
Take reciprocals and change the signs of the exponents.
Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.137 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.138 Simplify:
If the monomials have numerical coefficients, we multiply the coefficients, just as we did in Integer Exponents and
Scientific Notation.
  EXAMPLE 10.70
Simplify:
     Solution

  Rewrite with the like bases together.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                    10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 837

Simplify.
Use the definition of a negative exponent,
Simplify.

       TRY IT 10.139 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.140 Simplify:
In the next two examples, we'll use the Power Property and the Product to a Power Property.
  EXAMPLE 10.71
Simplify:
     Solution

  Use the Product to a Power Property,
  Simplify.
  Rewrite with a positive exponent.

       TRY IT 10.141 Simplify:
       TRY IT 10.142 Simplify:

  EXAMPLE 10.72
Simplify:

     Solution

  Use the Product to a Power Property,
  Simplify and multiply the exponents of using the
  Power Property,
838 10 · Polynomials

         Rewrite by using the definition of a negative
         exponent,
         Simplify

              TRY IT 10.143 Simplify:
              TRY IT 10.144 Simplify:
       To simplify a fraction, we use the Quotient Property.
         EXAMPLE 10.73
       Simplify:
            Solution

Use the Quotient Property,  .

Simplify.

TRY IT 10.145 Simplify:

TRY IT 10.146 Simplify:

Convert from Decimal Notation to Scientific Notation

Remember working with place value for whole numbers and decimals? Our number system is based on powers of
We use tens, hundreds, thousands, and so on. Our decimal numbers are also based on powers of tens--tenths,
hundredths, thousandths, and so on.

Consider the numbers  and   We know that                      means  and          means  If we write the

as a power of ten in exponential form, we can rewrite these numbers in this way:

When a number is written as a product of two numbers, where the first factor is a number greater than or equal to one
but less than and the second factor is a power of written in exponential form, it is said to be in scientific notation.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 839

Scientific Notation
A number is expressed in scientific notation when it is of the form

where     and   and is an integer.

It is customary in scientific notation to use  as the multiplication sign, even though we avoid using this sign elsewhere
in algebra.

Scientific notation is a useful way of writing very large or very small numbers. It is used often in the sciences to make
calculations easier.

If we look at what happened to the decimal point, we can see a method to easily convert from decimal notation to
scientific notation.

In both cases, the decimal was moved places to get the first factor,  by itself.

· The power of  is positive when the number is larger than
· The power of  is negative when the number is between and

EXAMPLE 10.74

Write     in scientific notation.

Solution

Step 1: Move the decimal point so that the first factor is greater than or
equal to 1 but less than 10.

Step 2: Count the number of decimal places, , that the decimal point was          3.70000
moved.                                                                            4 places

Step 3: Write the number as a product with a power of 10.

    If the original number is:
· greater than 1, the power of 10 will be .
· between 0 and 1, the power of 10 will be

Step 4: Check.
      is 10,000 and 10,000 times 3.7 will be 37,000.

TRY IT 10.147 Write in scientific notation:
TRY IT 10.148 Write in scientific notation:
840 10 · Polynomials

...

     HOW TO

Convert from decimal notation to scientific notation.

Step 1.  Move the decimal point so that the first factor is greater than or equal to but less than
Step 2.
Step 3.  Count the number of decimal places, that the decimal point was moved.

         Write the number as a product with a power of
           If the original number is:
           greater than the power of will be
           between and the power of will be

Step 4. Check.

  EXAMPLE 10.75                                                   0.0052
Write in scientific notation:                                    3 places

     Solution

  Move the decimal point to get 5.2, a number between 1 and 10.
  Count the number of decimal places the point was moved.
  Write as a product with a power of 10.
  Check your answer:

       TRY IT 10.149 Write in scientific notation:
       TRY IT 10.150 Write in scientific notation:

Convert Scientific Notation to Decimal Form

How can we convert from scientific notation to decimal form? Let's look at two numbers written in scientific notation and
see.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                          10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 841

If we look at the location of the decimal point, we can see an easy method to convert a number from scientific notation
to decimal form.

In both cases the decimal point moved 4 places. When the exponent was positive, the decimal moved to the right. When
the exponent was negative, the decimal point moved to the left.

  EXAMPLE 10.76

Convert to decimal form:
     Solution

  Step 1: Determine the exponent, , on the factor 10.

Step 2: Move the decimal point places, adding zeros if needed.

· If the exponent is positive, move the decimal point places to the right.  6,200
· If the exponent is negative, move the decimal point places to the left.

Step 3: Check to see if your answer makes sense.
      is 1000 and 1000 times 6.2 will be 6,200.

TRY IT 10.151 Convert to decimal form:

TRY IT 10.152 Convert to decimal form:

...

     HOW TO

Convert scientific notation to decimal form.

Step 1.  Determine the exponent, on the factor
Step 2.
         Move the decimal places, adding zeros if needed.
           If the exponent is positive, move the decimal point  places to the right.
           If the exponent is negative, move the decimal point     places to the left.

Step 3. Check.

  EXAMPLE 10.77
Convert to decimal form:

     Solution

Determine the exponent , on the factor 10. The exponent is -2.
842 10 · Polynomials

Move the decimal point 2 places to the left.

Add zeros as needed for placeholders.         0.089

The Check is left to you.

       TRY IT 10.153 Convert to decimal form:

       TRY IT 10.154 Convert to decimal form:

Multiply and Divide Using Scientific Notation

We use the Properties of Exponents to multiply and divide numbers in scientific notation.
  EXAMPLE 10.78

Multiply. Write answers in decimal form:
     Solution

Use the Commutative Property to rearrange the factors.

Multiply 4 by 2 and use the Product Property to multiply by    .

Change to decimal form by moving the decimal two places left.

       TRY IT 10.155 Multiply. Write answers in decimal form:
       TRY IT 10.156 Multiply. Write answers in decimal form:

  EXAMPLE 10.79
Divide. Write answers in decimal form:

     Solution

Separate the factors.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10.5 · Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation 843

Divide 9 by 3 and use the Quotient Property to divide by         .

Change to decimal form by moving the decimal five places right.

      TRY IT 10.157 Divide. Write answers in decimal form:

      TRY IT 10.158 Divide. Write answers in decimal form:

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Negative Exponents (http://www.openstax.org/l/24negexponents)
      Examples of Simplifying Expressions with Negative Exponents (http://www.openstax.org/l/24simpexprnegex)
      Scientific Notation (http://www.openstax.org/l/24scnotation)

        SECTION 10.5 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

In the following exercises, simplify.

316.                                   317.                         318.
                                                                    321.
319.                                   320.                         324.
                                                                    327.
322.                                   323.
                                                                    330. 
325.                                   326.                         333. 

328.                                   329.                                  
                                       332.                                
331.                                                                336.   

334.                                   335.                         339.
    
                                       338.                         342. 
337.

340.                                   341. 
                                           

343.    
      

Simplify Expressions with Integer Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify.

344.                                   345.                         346.
                                                                    349.
347.                                   348.                         352.

350.                                   351.
844 10 · Polynomials

353.                               354.                                355.

356.                               357.                                358.

359.                               360.                                361.

362.                               363.                                364.

365.                               366.                                367.

368.                               369.                                370.

371.                               372.                                373.

374.                               375.                                376.

377.                               378.                                379.

380.                               381.                                382.

383.

Convert from Decimal Notation to Scientific Notation

In the following exercises, write each number in scientific notation.

384. 45,000                        385. 280,000                        386. 8,750,000

387. 1,290,000                     388. 0.036                          389. 0.041

390. 0.00000924                    391. 0.0000103                      392. The population of the
                                                                               United States on July 4,
                                                                               2010 was almost

393. The population of the         394. The average width of a         395. The probability of winning
        world on July 4, 2010 was          human hair is
        more than                          centimeters.                      the  Megamillions

                                                                             lottery is about

Convert Scientific Notation to Decimal Form

In the following exercises, convert each number to decimal form.

396.                               397.                                398.

399.                               400.                                401.

402.                               403.                                404. In 2010, the number of
                                                                               Facebook users each day
405. At the start of 2012, the     406. The concentration of                   who changed their status
        US federal budget had a            carbon dioxide in the               to `engaged' was
        deficit of more than               atmosphere is
                                                                       407. The width of a proton is
                                                                                              of the width of

                                                                               an atom.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 845

Multiply and Divide Using Scientific Notation

In the following exercises, multiply or divide and write your answer in decimal form.

408.                           409.                      410.

411.                           412.                              413.

414.                           415.

Everyday Math

416. Calories In May 2010 the Food and Beverage          417. Length of a year The difference between the
                                                                 calendar year and the astronomical year is
      Manufacturers pledged to reduce their products                           day.

      by trillion calories by the end of 2015.                Write this number in scientific notation.
                                                              How many years does it take for the
       Write   trillion in decimal notation.
       Write   trillion in scientific notation.                  difference to become 1 day?

418. Calculator display Many calculators                 419. Calculator display Many calculators

      automatically show answers in scientific notation  automatically show answers in scientific notation

      if there are more digits than can fit in the       if there are more digits than can fit in the

      calculator's display. To find the probability of   calculator's display. To find the number of ways

      getting a particular 5-card hand from a deck of    Barbara could make a collage with of her

      cards, Mario divided by        and saw the         favorite photographs, she multiplied

      answer             Write the number in                                           Her calculator gave the

      decimal notation.                                  answer                        Write the number in

                                                         decimal notation.

Writing Exercises

420.  Explain the meaning of the exponent in the         421. When you convert a number from decimal
                                                                 notation to scientific notation, how do you know
        expression                                               if the exponent will be positive or negative?

     Explain the meaning of the exponent in the

        expression

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After looking at the checklist, do you think you are well prepared for the next section? Why or why not?

10.6 Introduction to Factoring Polynomials

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Find the greatest common factor of two or more expressions
           Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial

       BE PREPARED 10.15 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
846 10 · Polynomials

                                 Factor into primes.
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 2.48.

BE PREPARED 10.16                Multiply:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 7.25.

BE PREPARED 10.17                Multiply:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 10.32.

Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

Earlier we multiplied factors together to get a product. Now, we will be reversing this process; we will start with a
product and then break it down into its factors. Splitting a product into factors is called factoring.

In The Language of Algebra we factored numbers to find the least common multiple (LCM) of two or more numbers.
Now we will factor expressions and find the greatest common factor of two or more expressions. The method we use is
similar to what we used to find the LCM.

  Greatest Common Factor

  The greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more expressions is the largest expression that is a factor of all the
  expressions.

First we will find the greatest common factor of two numbers.
  EXAMPLE 10.80

Find the greatest common factor of and
     Solution

Step 1: Factor each coefficient     Factor 24 and 36.
into primes. Write all variables
with exponents in expanded form.

Step 2: List all factors--matching
common factors in a column.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 847

In each column, circle the           Circle the 2, 2, and
common factors.                      3 that are shared
                                     by both numbers.

Step 3: Bring down the common        Bring down the 2,
factors that all expressions share.  2, 3 and then
                                     multiply.
Step 4: Multiply the factors.
                                                           The GCF of 24 and 36 is 12.

Notice that since the GCF is a factor of both numbers, and can be written as multiples of

TRY IT 10.159 Find the greatest common factor:

TRY IT 10.160 Find the greatest common factor:

In the previous example, we found the greatest common factor of constants. The greatest common factor of an
algebraic expression can contain variables raised to powers along with coefficients. We summarize the steps we use to
find the greatest common factor.

             ...

                 HOW TO

Find the greatest common factor.

Step 1.  Factor each coefficient into primes. Write all variables with exponents in expanded form.
Step 2.  List all factors--matching common factors in a column. In each column, circle the common factors.
Step 3.  Bring down the common factors that all expressions share.
Step 4.  Multiply the factors.

  EXAMPLE 10.81

Find the greatest common factor of
     Solution

  Factor each number into primes.
  Circle the common factors in each column.
  Bring down the common factors.

                                                                    The GCF of 5x and 15 is 5.

TRY IT 10.161 Find the greatest common factor:
848 10 · Polynomials

TRY IT 10.162 Find the greatest common factor:

In the examples so far, the greatest common factor was a constant. In the next two examples we will get variables in the
greatest common factor.

EXAMPLE 10.82

Find the greatest common factor of        and

Solution

Factor each coefficient into primes and write
the variables with exponents in expanded form.
Circle the common factors in each column.
Bring down the common factors.
Multiply the factors.

       TRY IT 10.163 Find the greatest common factor:

       TRY IT 10.164 Find the greatest common factor:

  EXAMPLE 10.83

Find the greatest common factor of
     Solution

  Factor each coefficient into primes and write
  the variables with exponents in expanded form.
  Circle the common factors in each column.
  Bring down the common factors.
  Multiply the factors.

       TRY IT 10.165 Find the greatest common factor:

       TRY IT 10.166 Find the greatest common factor:

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

Just like in arithmetic, where it is sometimes useful to represent a number in factored form (for example, as
                   in algebra it can be useful to represent a polynomial in factored form. One way to do this is by finding the

greatest common factor of all the terms. Remember that you can multiply a polynomial by a monomial as follows:

Here, we will start with a product, like       and end with its factors,  To do this we apply the Distributive
Property "in reverse".

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 849

Distributive Property

If       are real numbers, then

The form on the left is used to multiply. The form on the right is used to factor.
So how do we use the Distributive Property to factor a polynomial? We find the GCF of all the terms and write the
polynomial as a product!

  EXAMPLE 10.84

Factor:
     Solution

Step 1: Find the GCF of all the terms of the polynomial.      Find the GCF of 2x and 14.

Step 2: Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.         Rewrite 2x and 14 as products of
                                                              their GCF, 2.

Step 3: Use the Distributive Property 'in reverse' to factor                                    Check:
the expression.

Step 4: Check by multiplying the factors.

       TRY IT 10.167 Factor:
       TRY IT 10.168 Factor:
Notice that in Example 10.84, we used the word factor as both a noun and a verb:

    ...

         HOW TO

Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial.

Step 1.  Find the GCF of all the terms of the polynomial.
Step 2.  Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
Step 3.  Use the Distributive Property `in reverse' to factor the expression.
Step 4.  Check by multiplying the factors.
850 10 · Polynomials

         EXAMPLE 10.85
       Factor:

            Solution

         Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
         Use the Distributive Property 'in reverse' to factor the GCF.
         Check by multiplying the factors to get the original polynomial.

              TRY IT 10.169 Factor:
              TRY IT 10.170 Factor:
       The expressions in the next example have several factors in common. Remember to write the GCF as the product of all
       the common factors.
         EXAMPLE 10.86
       Factor:
            Solution

         Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
         Factor the GCF.
         Check by multiplying the factors.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                               10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 851

       TRY IT 10.171 Factor:
       TRY IT 10.172 Factor:
Now we'll factor the greatest common factor from a trinomial. We start by finding the GCF of all three terms.
  EXAMPLE 10.87
Factor:
     Solution

  Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
  Factor the GCF.
  Check by multiplying.

       TRY IT 10.173 Factor:
       TRY IT 10.174 Factor:
In the next example, we factor a variable from a binomial.
  EXAMPLE 10.88
Factor:
     Solution

  Find the GCF of and and the math that goes with it.
  Rewrite each term as a product.
  Factor the GCF.
852 10 · Polynomials

         Check by multiplying.

              TRY IT 10.175 Factor:
              TRY IT 10.176 Factor:
       When there are several common factors, as we'll see in the next two examples, good organization and neat work helps!
         EXAMPLE 10.89
       Factor:
            Solution

         Rewrite each term.
         Factor the GCF.
         Check.

              TRY IT 10.177 Factor:
              TRY IT 10.178 Factor:
         EXAMPLE 10.90
       Factor:

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                               10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 853

Solution

Find the GCF of  and

  Rewrite each term.                    to be
  Factor the GCF.

       TRY IT 10.179 Factor:
       TRY IT 10.180 Factor:
  EXAMPLE 10.91
Factor:
     Solution
Previously, we found the GCF of

  Rewrite each term using the GCF, 2x.
  Factor the GCF.

       TRY IT 10.181 Factor:
       TRY IT 10.182 Factor:
When the leading coefficient, the coefficient of the first term, is negative, we factor the negative out as part of the GCF.
  EXAMPLE 10.92
Factor:
854 10 · Polynomials

            Solution
         When the leading coefficient is negative, the GCF will be negative. Ignoring the signs of the
         terms, we first find the GCF of 9y and 27 is 9.
         Since the expression -9y-27 has a negative leading coefficient, we use -9 as the GCF.

         Rewrite each term using the GCF.
         Factor the GCF.

              TRY IT 10.183 Factor:
              TRY IT 10.184 Factor:
       Pay close attention to the signs of the terms in the next example.
         EXAMPLE 10.93
       Factor:
            Solution
         The leading coefficient is negative, so the GCF will be negative.

         Since the leading coefficient is negative, the GCF is negative, -4a.

         Rewrite each term.
         Factor the GCF.
         Check on your own by multiplying.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     10.6 · Introduction to Factoring Polynomials 855

      TRY IT 10.185 Factor:

      TRY IT 10.186 Factor:

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Factor GCF (http://www.openstax.org/l/24factorgcf)
      Factor a Binomial (http://www.openstax.org/l/24factorbinomi)
      Identify GCF (http://www.openstax.org/l/24identifygcf)

        SECTION 10.6 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

In the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

422.  423.                                                          424.

425.  426.                                                          427.

428.  429.                                                          430.

431.  432.                                                          433.

434.  435.                                                          436.

437.  438.                                                          439.

440.  441.

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

In the following exercises, factor the greatest common factor from each polynomial.

442.  443.                                                          444.

445.  446.                                                          447.

448.  449.                                                          450.

451.  452.                                                          453.

454.  455.                                                          456.

457.  458.                                                          459.

460.  461.                                                          462.

463.  464.                                                          465.

466.  467.                                                          468.

469.  470.                                                          471.

472.  473.                                                          474.

475.  476.                                                          477.

478.  479.                                                          480.

481.  482.                                                          483.

484.  485.                                                          486.
856 10 · Polynomials

487.                             488.                   489.

Everyday Math

490. Revenue A manufacturer of microwave ovens          491. Height of a baseball The height of a baseball hit

      has found that the revenue received from selling  with velocity feet/second at feet above

      microwaves a cost of dollars each is given by     ground level is  with the

      the polynomial             Factor the greatest    number of seconds since it was hit. Factor the

      common factor from this polynomial.               greatest common factor from this polynomial.

Writing Exercises

492. The greatest common factor of and is               493. What is the GCF of , , and ? Write a
        Explain what this means.                                general rule that tells how to find the GCF of ,
                                                                   , and .

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 Overall, after looking at the checklist, do you think you are well-prepared for the next Chapter? Why or why not?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            10 · Chapter Review 857

Chapter Review

Key Terms

binomial A binomial is a polynomial with exactly two terms.

degree of a constant The degree of a constant is .

degree of a polynomial The degree of a polynomial is the highest degree of all its terms.

degree of a term The degree of a term of a polynomial is the exponent of its variable.

greatest common factor The greatest common factor (GCF) of two or more expressions is the largest expression that

is a factor of all the expressions.

monomial A term of the form , where is a constant and is a whole number, is called a monomial.

negative exponent If is a positive integer and      , then       .

polynomial A polynomial is a monomial, or two or more monomials, combined by addition or subtraction.

scientific notation A number expressed in scientific notation when it is of the form        where        and

and is an integer.

trinomial A trinomial is a polynomial with exactly three terms.

zero exponent If is a non-zero number, then         . Any nonzero number raised to the zero power is 1.

Key Concepts
10.2 Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents

  · Exponential Notation
      This is read to the power.

  · Product Property of Exponents
       If is a real number and are counting numbers, then

       To multiply with like bases, add the exponents.
  · Power Property for Exponents

       If is a real number and are counting numbers, then

  · Product to a Power Property for Exponents
       If and are real numbers and is a whole number, then

10.3 Multiply Polynomials

  · Use the FOIL method for multiplying two binomials.
         Step 1. Multiply the First terms.

         Step 2. Multiply the Outer terms.

         Step 3. Multiply the Inner terms.

         Step 4. Multiply the Last terms.

         Step 5. Combine like terms, when possible.

  · Multiplying Two Binomials: To multiply binomials, use the:
       Distributive Property
       FOIL Method
       Vertical Method

  · Multiplying a Trinomial by a Binomial: To multiply a trinomial by a binomial, use the:
       Distributive Property
858 10 · Chapter Review

 Vertical Method

10.4 Divide Monomials

· Equivalent Fractions Property

 If  are whole numbers where                        then

· Zero Exponent
    If is a non-zero number, then
    Any nonzero number raised to the zero power is

· Quotient Property for Exponents

 If is a real number,    and       are whole numbers, then

· Quotient to a Power Property for Exponents

 If and are real numbers,          and is a counting number, then

       To raise a fraction to a power, raise the numerator and denominator to that power.

10.5 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

  · Summary of Exponent Properties
       If are real numbers and are integers, then

  · Convert from Decimal Notation to Scientific Notation: To convert a decimal to scientific notation:
      Step 1. Move the decimal point so that the first factor is greater than or equal to 1 but less than 10.
      Step 2. Count the number of decimal places, , that the decimal point was moved.
      Step 3. Write the number as a product with a power of 10.
                     If the original number is greater than 1, the power of 10 will be .
                     If the original number is between 0 and 1, the power of 10 will be .

      Step 4. Check.

  · Convert Scientific Notation to Decimal Form: To convert scientific notation to decimal form:
      Step 1. Determine the exponent, , on the factor 10.
      Step 2. Move the decimal places, adding zeros if needed.
                     If the exponent is positive, move the decimal point places to the right.
                     If the exponent is negative, move the decimal point places to the left.

      Step 3. Check.

10.6 Introduction to Factoring Polynomials

  · Find the greatest common factor.
      Step 1. Factor each coefficient into primes. Write all variables with exponents in expanded form.
      Step 2. List all factors--matching common factors in a column. In each column, circle the common factors.
      Step 3. Bring down the common factors that all expressions share.
      Step 4. Multiply the factors.

  · Distributive Property
       If , , are real numbers, then
                                     and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                 10 · Exercises 859

  · Factor the greatest common factor from a polynomial.
      Step 1. Find the GCF of all the terms of the polynomial.
      Step 2. Rewrite each term as a product using the GCF.
      Step 3. Use the Distributive Property `in reverse' to factor the expression.
      Step 4. Check by multiplying the factors.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Add and Subtract Polynomials

Identify Polynomials, Monomials, Binomials and Trinomials

In the following exercises, determine if each of the following polynomials is a monomial, binomial, trinomial, or other
polynomial.

494.                           495.                                   496.

497.

Determine the Degree of Polynomials

In the following exercises, determine the degree of each polynomial.

498.                           499.                                   500.

501.

Add and Subtract Monomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the monomials.

502.                           503.                                   504. Add

505. Subtract  from

Add and Subtract Polynomials

In the following exercises, add or subtract the polynomials.

506.                                 507.

508.                           509.                                        510. Find the sum of
                                                                                   and

511. Find the difference of
                          and

Evaluate a Polynomial for a Given Value of the Variable

In the following exercises, evaluate each polynomial for the given value.

512.           when            513.        when                       514.          when
                                                                                       when
515.           when            516.        when                       517.
860 10 · Exercises

518. A pair of glasses is          519. The fuel efficiency (in
        dropped off a bridge               miles per gallon) of a bus
        feet above a river. The            going at a speed of
        polynomial                         miles per hour is given by
        gives the height of the            the polynomial
        glasses seconds after                                    Find the
        they were dropped. Find
        the height of the glasses          fuel efficiency when
        when                                         mph.

Use Multiplication Properties of Exponents
Simplify Expressions with Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify.

520.                               521.                                    522.

523.

Simplify Expressions Using the Product Property of Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

524.                               525.                                    526.

527.

Simplify Expressions Using the Power Property of Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

528.                               529.                                    530.

531.

Simplify Expressions Using the Product to a Power Property

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

532.                               533.                                    534.

535.

Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties
In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

536.                               537.                                    538.

539.

Multiply Monomials

In the following exercises, multiply the monomials.

540.                               541.                                    542.

543.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           10 · Exercises 861

Multiply Polynomials

Multiply a Polynomial by a Monomial

In the following exercises, multiply.

544.                                   545.                    546.

547.

Multiply a Binomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply the binomials using various methods.

548.                                   549.                    550.

551.                                   552.                    553.

554.                                   555.                    556.

557.                                   558.                    559.

Multiply a Trinomial by a Binomial

In the following exercises, multiply using any method.

560.                                   561.                    562.

563.

Divide Monomials
Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient Property of Exponents
In the following exercises, simplify.

564.                                   565.                    566.

567.

Simplify Expressions with Zero Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify.

568.                                   569.                    570.

571.

Simplify Expressions Using the Quotient to a Power Property
In the following exercises, simplify.

572.                                   573.                    574.

575.

Simplify Expressions by Applying Several Properties
In the following exercises, simplify.

576.                                   577.                    578.

579.                                   580.                    581.
862 10 · Exercises

Divide Monomials
In the following exercises, divide the monomials.

582.                                   583.                            584.

585.                                   586.                            587.

588.                                   589.

Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

Use the Definition of a Negative Exponent

In the following exercises, simplify.

590.                                   591.                            592.

593.

Simplify Expressions with Integer Exponents

In the following exercises, simplify.

594.                                   595.                            596.

597.                                   598.                            599.

600.                                   601.

Convert from Decimal Notation to Scientific Notation

In the following exercises, write each number in scientific notation.

602.                                   603.                            604. The thickness of a piece
                                                                               of paper is about
                                                                               millimeter.

605. According to
        www.cleanair.com, U.S.
        businesses use about
                        tons of paper
        per year.

Convert Scientific Notation to Decimal Form

In the following exercises, convert each number to decimal form.

606.                                   607.                            608.

609.

Multiply and Divide Using Scientific Notation
In the following exercises, multiply and write your answer in decimal form.

610.                                   611.                            612.

613.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      10 · Exercises 863

Introduction to Factoring Polynomials

Find the Greatest Common Factor of Two or More Expressions

In the following exercises, find the greatest common factor.

614.                         615.                             616.

617.

Factor the Greatest Common Factor from a Polynomial

In the following exercises, factor the greatest common factor from each polynomial.

618.                         619.                             620.

621.                         622.                             623.

624.                         625.

Practice Test

626. For the polynomial

     Is it a monomial,

        binomial, or trinomial?

     What is its degree?

In the following exercises, simplify each expression.

627.                                   628.                         629.

630.                         631.                             632.

633.                         634.                             635.

636.                         637.                             638.

639.                         640.                             641.

642.                         643.                             644.

645.                         646.                             647.

648.

In the following exercises, factor the greatest common factor from each polynomial.

649.                         650.                             651. According to

                                                                    www.cleanair.org, the

                                                                    amount of trash

                                                                    generated in the US in

                                                                    one year averages out to

                                                                                     pounds of trash

                                                                    per person. Write this

                                                                    number in scientific

                                                                    notation.

652. Convert             to

      decimal form.
864 10 · Exercises

In the following exercises, simplify, and write your answer in decimal form.

653.                             654.  655. A hiker drops a pebble

                                                                              from a bridge feet

                                                                              above a canyon. The

                                                                              polynomial

                                                                              gives the height of the

                                                                              pebble seconds a after it

                                                                              was dropped. Find the

                                                                              height when

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11 · Graphs 865

11  GRAPHS

Figure 11.1 Cyclists speed toward the finish line. (credit: ewan traveler, Flickr)

Chapter Outline

  11.1 Use the Rectangular Coordinate System
  11.2 Graphing Linear Equations
  11.3 Graphing with Intercepts
  11.4 Understand Slope of a Line

      Graphs

Which cyclist will win the race? What will the winning time be? How many seconds will separate the winner from the
runner-up? One way to summarize the information from the race is by creating a graph. In this chapter, we will discuss
the basic concepts of graphing. The applications of graphing go far beyond races. They are used to present information
in almost every field, including healthcare, business, and entertainment.

11.1 Use the Rectangular Coordinate System

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Plot points on a rectangular coordinate system
           Identify points on a graph
           Verify solutions to an equation in two variables
           Complete a table of solutions to a linear equation
           Find solutions to linear equations in two variables

    BE PREPARED 11.1 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                      Evaluate:  when

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 3.23.

    BE PREPARED 11.2  Evaluate:  when

                      If you missed this problem, review Example 3.56.

    BE PREPARED 11.3  Solve for
                      If you missed this problem, review Example 8.20.
866 11 · Graphs

Plot Points on a Rectangular Coordinate System

Many maps, such as the Campus Map shown in Figure 11.2, use a grid system to identify locations. Do you see the

numbers          and across the top and bottom of the map and the letters A, B, C, and D along the sides? Every

location on the map can be identified by a number and a letter.

For example, the Student Center is in section 2B. It is located in the grid section above the number and next to the
letter B. In which grid section is the Stadium? The Stadium is in section 4D.

                                                      Figure 11.2

EXAMPLE 11.1

Use the map in Figure 11.2.

 Find the grid section of the Residence Halls.   What is located in grid section 4C?

     Solution

 Read the number below the Residence Halls,     and the letter to the side, A. So the Residence Halls are in grid

section 4A.

 Find across the bottom of the map and C along the side. Look below the and next to the C. Tiger Field is in

grid section 4C.

       TRY IT 11.1 Use the map in Figure 11.2.

                    Find the grid section of Taylor Hall.  What is located in section 3B?

       TRY IT 11.2 Use the map in Figure 11.2.

                    Find the grid section of the Parking Garage.  What is located in section 2C?

Just as maps use a grid system to identify locations, a grid system is used in algebra to show a relationship between two
variables in a rectangular coordinate system. To create a rectangular coordinate system, start with a horizontal number
line. Show both positive and negative numbers as you did before, using a convenient scale unit. This horizontal number
line is called the x-axis.

Now, make a vertical number line passing through the         at Put the positive numbers above and the negative

numbers below See Figure 11.3. This vertical line is called the y-axis.

Vertical grid lines pass through the integers marked on the        Horizontal grid lines pass through the integers

marked on the    The resulting grid is the rectangular coordinate system.

The rectangular coordinate system is also called the plane, the coordinate plane, or the Cartesian coordinate system

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 867

(since it was developed by a mathematician named René Descartes.)

                                    Figure 11.3 The rectangular coordinate system.

The  and the      form the rectangular coordinate system. These axes divide a plane into four areas, called

quadrants. The quadrants are identified by Roman numerals, beginning on the upper right and proceeding

counterclockwise. See Figure 11.4.

                                    Figure 11.4 The four quadrants of the rectangular coordinate system
In the rectangular coordinate system, every point is represented by an ordered pair. The first number in the ordered
pair is the x-coordinate of the point, and the second number is the y-coordinate of the point.

  Ordered Pair

An ordered pair,  gives the coordinates of a point in a rectangular coordinate system.

So how do the coordinates of a point help you locate a point on the plane?

Let's try locating the point  . In this ordered pair, the -coordinate is and the -coordinate is .

We start by locating the value,     on the  Then we lightly sketch a vertical line through         as shown in Figure
11.5.
868 11 · Graphs

                                                       Figure 11.5

Now we locate the value, on the -axis and sketch a horizontal line through       . The point where these two lines

meet is the point with coordinates  We plot the point there, as shown in Figure 11.6.

                                                       Figure 11.6

EXAMPLE 11.2

Plot             and  in the same rectangular coordinate system.

     Solution

The coordinate values are the same for both points, but the and values are reversed. Let's begin with point           The
                                                                                                                   on the
                 is so find on the  and sketch a vertical line through      The                     is so we find

      and sketch a horizontal line through             Where the two lines meet, we plot the point

To plot the point     we start by locating on the      and sketch a vertical line through           Then we find on

the              and sketch a horizontal line through  Where the two lines meet, we plot the point

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                       11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 869

Notice that the order of the coordinates does matter, so,  is not the same point as

  TRY IT 11.3 Plot each point on the same rectangular coordinate system:
  TRY IT 11.4 Plot each point on the same rectangular coordinate system:

EXAMPLE 11.3

Plot each point in the rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point is located:

  Solution                                      

The first number of the coordinate pair is the             and the second number is the

 Since         the point      is in Quadrant II.

 Since           the point                      is in Quadrant III.

 Since         the point      is in Quadrant lV.

 Since         the point    is in Quadrant I. It may be helpful to write as the mixed number, or

decimal, Then we know that the point is halfway between and on the

  TRY IT 11.5  Plot each point on a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point
               is located.

                                                                     
870 11 · Graphs

TRY IT 11.6       Plot each point on a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the point
                  is located.

                                                       

How do the signs affect the location of the points?

EXAMPLE 11.4

Plot each point:                            

 Solution                        and the             we must be careful with the signs.

As we locate the

TRY IT 11.7 Plot each point:

                                                       

TRY IT 11.8 Plot each point:

                                                       

You may have noticed some patterns as you graphed the points in the two previous examples.

For each point in Quadrant IV, what do you notice about the signs of the coordinates?

What about the signs of the coordinates of the points in the third quadrant? The second quadrant? The first quadrant?

Can you tell just by looking at the coordinates in which quadrant the point (-2, 5) is located? In which quadrant is (2, -5)
located?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 871

We can summarize sign patterns of the quadrants as follows. Also see Figure 11.7.

                          Quadrant I Quadrant II Quadrant III Quadrant IV

                          (x,y)                (x,y)  (x,y)                 (x,y)

                          (+,+)                (-,+)  (-,-)                 (+,-)

                          Table 11.1

What if one coordinate is zero? Where is the point    Figure 11.7                   located? The point  is on
                                                       located? Where is the point

the y-axis and the point  is on the x-axis.

Points on the Axes

Points with a             equal to are on the         and have coordinates

Points with an            equal to are on the         and have coordinates

What is the ordered pair of the point where the axes cross? At that point both coordinates are zero, so its ordered pair
872 11 · Graphs

is  . The point has a special name. It is called the origin.

The Origin       is called the origin. It is the point where the x-axis and y-axis intersect.
The point

EXAMPLE 11.5

Plot each point on a coordinate grid:

 Solution                                         

 Since           the point whose coordinates are    is on the
 Since
 Since           the point whose coordinates are    is on the
 Since
                 the point whose coordinates are    is on the

                 and             the point whose coordinates are  is the origin.

 Since           the point whose coordinates are    is on the

    TRY IT 11.9 Plot each point on a coordinate grid:

                                                                                  

    TRY IT 11.10 Plot each point on a coordinate grid:

                                                                                    

Identify Points on a Graph

In algebra, being able to identify the coordinates of a point shown on a graph is just as important as being able to plot
points. To identify the x-coordinate of a point on a graph, read the number on the x-axis directly above or below the
point. To identify the y-coordinate of a point, read the number on the y-axis directly to the left or right of the point.
Remember, to write the ordered pair using the correct order

EXAMPLE 11.6

Name the ordered pair of each point shown:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 873

     Solution                      so the   of the point is          The point is to the left of on the      so the
Point A is above on the                                                                                        so
                                   The coordinates of the point are
                  of the point is                                                                          so the
                                                                                                                so
Point B is below on the            so the   of the point is          The point is to the left of on the

the  of the point is               The coordinates of the point are

Point C is above on the            so the   of the point is          The point is to the right of on the
                  of the point is
                                   The coordinates of the point are

Point D is below on the            so the   of the point is          The point is to the right of  on the

the  of the point is               The coordinates of the point are

     TRY IT 11.11 Name the ordered pair of each point shown:

     TRY IT 11.12 Name the ordered pair of each point shown:

  EXAMPLE 11.7
Name the ordered pair of each point shown:
874 11 · Graphs

  Solution                       . The coordinates of point A are              .
Point A is on the x-axis at
Point B is on the y-axis at      The coordinates of point B are                .
Point C is on the x-axis at
Point D is on the y-axis at      . The coordinates of point C are  .

                                 . The coordinates of point D are  .

TRY IT 11.13 Name the ordered pair of each point shown:

TRY IT 11.14 Name the ordered pair of each point shown:

Verify Solutions to an Equation in Two Variables

All the equations we solved so far have been equations with one variable. In almost every case, when we solved the

equation we got exactly one solution. The process of solving an equation ended with a statement such as  Then we

checked the solution by substituting back into the equation.

Here's an example of a linear equation in one variable, and its one solution.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 875

But equations can have more than one variable. Equations with two variables can be written in the general form
                     An equation of this form is called a linear equation in two variables.

Linear Equation

An equation of the form      where              are not both zero, is called a linear equation in two variables.

Notice that the word "line" is in linear.
Here is an example of a linear equation in two variables, and

Is            a linear equation? It does not appear to be in the form    But we could rewrite it in this form.

    Add to both sides.
    Simplify.
    Use the Commutative Property to put it in

By rewriting             as  we can see that it is a linear equation in two variables because it can be written
in the form

Linear equations in two variables have infinitely many solutions. For every number that is substituted for there is a
corresponding value. This pair of values is a solution to the linear equation and is represented by the ordered pair

         When we substitute these values of and into the equation, the result is a true statement because the value on
the left side is equal to the value on the right side.

Solution to a Linear Equation in Two Variables

An ordered pair  is a solution to the linear equation                    if the equation is a true statement when the

    and          of the ordered pair are substituted into the equation.

EXAMPLE 11.8

Determine which ordered pairs are solutions of the equation

 Solution                    

Substitute the                  from each ordered pair into the equation and determine if the result is a true statement.
876 11 · Graphs

                                                       

  is a solution.                   is not a solution.    is a solution.

  TRY IT 11.15                   Determine which ordered pairs are solutions to the given equation:
  TRY IT 11.16
                                                       

                                 Determine which ordered pairs are solutions to the given equation:

                                                       

EXAMPLE 11.9

Determine which ordered pairs are solutions of the equation.

 Solution                          

Substitute the and                    from each ordered pair into the equation and determine if it results in a true statement.

                                                   

                 is a solution.    is a solution.        is not a solution.

  TRY IT 11.17 Determine which ordered pairs are solutions of the given equation:

                                                       

  TRY IT 11.18 Determine which ordered pairs are solutions of the given equation:

                                                       

Complete a Table of Solutions to a Linear Equation

In the previous examples, we substituted the                  of a given ordered pair to determine whether or not it was

a solution to a linear equation. But how do we find the ordered pairs if they are not given? One way is to choose a value

for and then solve the equation for Or, choose a value for and then solve for

Access for free at openstax.org
We'll start by looking at the solutions to the equation                                 11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 877
information in a table of solutions.
                                                         we found in Example 11.9. We can summarize this

To find a third solution, we'll let  and solve for

The ordered pair is a solution to           Multiply.
                                            Simplify.
                                     . We will add it to the table.

We can find more solutions to the equation by substituting any value of or any value of and solving the resulting
equation to get another ordered pair that is a solution. There are an infinite number of solutions for this equation.

  EXAMPLE 11.10

Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation
878 11 · Graphs       and  into

            Solution
       Substitute

The results are summarized in the table.
       TRY IT 11.19 Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation:
       TRY IT 11.20 Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                             11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 879

  EXAMPLE 11.11
Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation

     Solution
The results are summarized in the table.

       TRY IT 11.21 Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation:
880 11 · Graphs

TRY IT 11.22 Complete the table to find three solutions to the equation:

Find Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables

To find a solution to a linear equation, we can choose any number we want to substitute into the equation for either or

We could choose                  or any other value we want. But it's a good idea to choose a number that's easy to work

with. We'll usually choose as one of our values.

EXAMPLE 11.12

Find a solution to the equation                                            We can substitute any value we want for
     Solution
                                                                           or any value for
  Step 1: Choose any value for one of the
  variables in the equation.                                               Let's pick

                                                                           What is the value of if  ?

Step 2: Substitute that value into the            Substitute for
equation.                                         Simplify.
Solve for the other variable.
                                                  Divide both sides by 2.

Access for free at openstax.org
Step 3: Write the solution as an ordered   So, when                       11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 881
pair.
                                                                 This solution is represented by the
                                                                 ordered pair

Step 4: Check.                             Is the result a true
                                           equation?
                                           Yes!

TRY IT 11.23 Find a solution to the equation:

TRY IT 11.24 Find a solution to the equation:

We said that linear equations in two variables have infinitely many solutions, and we've just found one of them. Let's find
some other solutions to the equation

EXAMPLE 11.13

Find three more solutions to the equation

     Solution               choose a value for or    Remember, we can choose any value we want for or  Here
To find solutions to       for
we chose for and and

Substitute it into the equation.

Simplify.
Solve.

  Write the ordered pair.
Check your answers.
882 11 · Graphs

So               and             are all solutions to the equation    In the previous example, we found that

is a solution, too. We can list these solutions in a table.

       TRY IT 11.25 Find three solutions to the equation:

       TRY IT 11.26 Find three solutions to the equation:

Let's find some solutions to another equation now.
  EXAMPLE 11.14

Find three solutions to the equation
     Solution

Choose a value for or
Substitute it into the equation.

Solve.

Write the ordered pair.

So               and             are three solutions to the equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 883

Remember, there are an infinite number of solutions to each linear equation. Any point you find is a solution if it makes
the equation true.

     TRY IT 11.27 Find three solutions to the equation:

     TRY IT 11.28 Find three solutions to the equation:

     MEDIA
     ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
     Plotting Points (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24plotpoints)
     Identifying Quadrants (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24quadrants)
     Verifying Solution to Linear Equation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/24verlineq)

        SECTION 11.1 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Plot Points on a Rectangular Coordinate System

In the following exercises, plot each point on a coordinate grid.

1.                          2.                                          3.

4.                          5.                                          6.

7.

In the following exercises, plot each point on a coordinate grid and identify the quadrant in which the point is located.

8.                          9.                                          10.           
                                                                                      

In the following exercises, plot each point on a coordinate grid.

11.                         12.                                         13. 1. 
                                                                               2. 
                                                                               3. 
                                                                               4. 

Identify Points on a Graph

In the following exercises, name the ordered pair of each point shown.

14.                         15.                                             16.
884 11 · Graphs

17.                              18.                 19.

20.

Verify Solutions to an Equation in Two Variables

In the following exercises, determine which ordered pairs are solutions to the given equation.

21.                              22.                 23.

                                                          
                                                          

24.                              25.                 26.

                                                                                           
                                                          

27.                              28.

                                                  
                                      

Find Solutions to Linear Equations in Two Variables

In the following exercises, complete the table to find solutions to each linear equation.

29.                              30.                 31.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                             11.1 · Use the Rectangular Coordinate System 885

32.  33.                                                34.

Everyday Math                                           36. Weight of a child Latresha recorded her son's
                                                              height and weight every year. His height, in
35. Weight of a baby Mackenzie recorded her baby's            inches, and weight, in pounds, are listed in the
      weight every two months. The baby's age, in             table, and shown as an ordered pair in the third
      months, and weight, in pounds, are listed in the        column.
      table, and shown as an ordered pair in the third
      column.                                               Plot the points on a coordinate grid.

    Plot the points on a coordinate grid.

    Why is only Quadrant I needed?                          Why is only Quadrant I needed?

Writing Exercises                                       38. How do you determine if an ordered pair is a
                                                              solution to a given equation?
37. Have you ever used a map with a rectangular
      coordinate system? Describe the map and how
      you used it.
886 11 · Graphs

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 If most of your checks were:

...confidently. Congratulations! You have achieved the objectives in this section. Reflect on the study skills you used so
that you can continue to use them. What did you do to become confident of your ability to do these things? Be specific.

...with some help. This must be addressed quickly because topics you do not master become potholes in your road to
success. In math, every topic builds upon previous work. It is important to make sure you have a strong foundation
before you move on. Whom can you ask for help? Your fellow classmates and instructor are good resources. Is there a
place on campus where math tutors are available? Can your study skills be improved?

...no--I don't get it! This is a warning sign and you must not ignore it. You should get help right away or you will quickly
be overwhelmed. See your instructor as soon as you can to discuss your situation. Together you can come up with a plan
to get you the help you need.

11.2 Graphing Linear Equations

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Recognize the relation between the solutions of an equation and its graph
           Graph a linear equation by plotting points
           Graph vertical and horizontal lines

BE PREPARED 11.4 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Evaluate:     when

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 3.56.

BE PREPARED 11.5                 Solve the formula:     for

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 9.62.

BE PREPARED 11.6                 Simplify:
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 4.28.

Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Equation and its Graph

In Use the Rectangular Coordinate System, we found a few solutions to the equation         . They are listed in the

table below. So, the ordered pairs  ,       ,        ,  , are some solutions to the equation                            . We can

plot these solutions in the rectangular coordinate system as shown on the graph at right.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 887

Notice how the points line up perfectly? We connect the points with a straight line to get the graph of the equation
                 . Notice the arrows on the ends of each side of the line. These arrows indicate the line continues.

Every point on the line is a solution of the equation. Also, every solution of this equation is a point on this line. Points not
on the line are not solutions!

Notice that the point whose coordinates are     is on the line shown in Figure 11.8. If you substitute  and

    into the equation, you find that it is a solution to the equation.

                                                Figure 11.8

So  is not a solution to the equation           . Therefore the point   is not on the line.

This is an example of the saying," A picture is worth a thousand words." The line shows you all the solutions to the

equation. Every point on the line is a solution of the equation. And, every solution of this equation is on this line. This line

is called the graph of the equation          .
888 11 · Graphs

Graph of a Linear Equation

The graph of a linear equation            is a straight line.

     · Every point on the line is a solution of the equation.

     · Every solution of this equation is a point on this line.

  EXAMPLE 11.15          is shown below.
The graph of

For each ordered pair decide

 Is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?  Is the point on the line? (a)    (b)

(c)              (d)

     Solution

Substitute the - and -values into the equation to check if the ordered pair is a solution to the equation.



 Plot the points A:              B:  C:   and D:                 .
                                                                  , and the point
The points            ,  , and       are on the line                               is not on the line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 889

The points which are solutions to       are on the line, but the point which is not a solution is not on the line.

TRY IT 11.29              The graph of  is shown.

                          For each ordered pair, decide

                           is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?   is the point on the line?

                          1.
                          2.
                          3.
                          4.

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

There are several methods that can be used to graph a linear equation. The method we used at the start of this section
to graph is called plotting points, or the Point-Plotting Method.

Let's graph the equation           by plotting points.

We start by finding three points that are solutions to the equation. We can choose any value for or  and then solve
for the other variable.

Since is isolated on the left side of the equation, it is easier to choose values for  We will use   and for for this
example. We substitute each value of into the equation and solve for
890 11 · Graphs

       We can organize the solutions in a table. See Table 11.2.

                                                                           Table 11.2
       Now we plot the points on a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they did not line up, it would
       mean we made a mistake and should double-check all our work. See Figure 11.9.

                                                                                     Figure 11.9
       Draw the line through the three points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the line. The line is
       the graph of

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 891

                                             Figure 11.10

...

     HOW TO

Graph a linear equation by plotting points.

Step 1.  Find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation. Organize them in a table.
Step 2.  Plot the points on a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they do not, carefully
         check your work.
Step 3.  Draw the line through the points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the line.

It is true that it only takes two points to determine a line, but it is a good habit to use three points. If you plot only two
points and one of them is incorrect, you can still draw a line but it will not represent the solutions to the equation. It will
be the wrong line. If you use three points, and one is incorrect, the points will not line up. This tells you something is
wrong and you need to check your work. See Figure 11.11.

Figure 11.11 Look at the difference between (a) and (b). All three points in (a) line up so we can draw one line through
them. The three points in (b) do not line up. We cannot draw a single straight line through all three points.

EXAMPLE 11.16

Graph the equation                                                                      and solve for  Do you see why?

     Solution
Find three points that are solutions to the equation. It's easier to choose values for

List the points in a table.
892 11 · Graphs

       Plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line as shown.

TRY IT 11.30 Graph the equation by plotting points:

TRY IT 11.31 Graph the equation by plotting points:

When an equation includes a fraction as the coefficient of we can substitute any numbers for But the math is easier
if we make `good' choices for the values of This way we will avoid fraction answers, which are hard to graph precisely.

EXAMPLE 11.17

Graph the equation                                                                                              we will

     Solution
Find three points that are solutions to the equation. Since this equation has the fraction as a coefficient of
choose values of carefully. We will use zero as one choice and multiples of for the other choices.

The points are shown in the table.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 893

Plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line as shown.

TRY IT 11.32 Graph the equation:

TRY IT 11.33 Graph the equation:

So far, all the equations we graphed had given in terms of  Now we'll graph an equation with and on the same
side.

EXAMPLE 11.18

Graph the equation

     Solution
Find three points that are solutions to the equation. Remember, you can start with any value of or

We list the points in a table.
894 11 · Graphs

       Then plot the points, check that they line up, and draw the line.

TRY IT 11.34 Graph the equation:

TRY IT 11.35 Graph the equation:

In the previous example, the three points we found were easy to graph. But this is not always the case. Let's see what

happens in the equation          If is what is the value of

The solution is the point        This point has a fraction for the -coordinate. While we could graph this point, it is hard

to be precise graphing fractions. Remember in the example                 we carefully chose values for so as not to

graph fractions at all. If we solve the equation  for it will be easier to find three solutions to the equation.

Now we can choose values for that will give coordinates that are integers. The solutions for  and

are shown.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 895

  EXAMPLE 11.19
Graph the equation

     Solution
Find three points that are solutions to the equation.
First, solve the equation for
We'll let be and to find three points. The ordered pairs are shown in the table. Plot the points, check that they
line up, and draw the line.
896 11 · Graphs

If you can choose any three points to graph a line, how will you know if your graph matches the one shown in the
answers in the book? If the points where the graphs cross the and -axes are the same, the graphs match.

TRY IT 11.36 Graph each equation:

TRY IT 11.37 Graph each equation:

Graph Vertical and Horizontal Lines                    and no  or just without an  How will we make a table of

Can we graph an equation with only one variable? Just
values to get the points to plot?

Let's consider the equation      The equation says that is always equal to  so its value does not depend on

No matter what is, the value of is always

To make a table of solutions, we write for all the values. Then choose any values for Since does not depend on
   you can chose any numbers you like. But to fit the size of our coordinate graph, we'll use and for the

 -coordinates as shown in the table.

Then plot the points and connect them with a straight line. Notice in Figure 11.12 that the graph is a vertical line.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                             11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 897

                                               Figure 11.12

Vertical Line

A vertical line is the graph of an equation that can be written in the form

The line passes through the -axis at        .

EXAMPLE 11.20

Graph the equation  What type of line does it form?

     Solution                    and is always equal to  We make a table where is always and we put in any
The equation has only variable,
values for

Plot the points and connect them as shown.
898 11 · Graphs

The graph is a vertical line passing through the -axis at

TRY IT 11.38 Graph the equation:

TRY IT 11.39 Graph the equation:

What if the equation has but no ? Let's graph the equation  This time the -value is a constant, so in this
equation does not depend on

To make a table of solutions, write for all the values and then choose any values for

We'll use and for the -values.

Plot the points and connect them, as shown in Figure 11.13. This graph is a horizontal line passing through the  at

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 899

                                         Figure 11.13

Horizontal Line

A horizontal line is the graph of an equation that can be written in the form

The line passes through the  at

EXAMPLE 11.21

Graph the equation

     Solution        has only variable,  The value of is constant. All the ordered pairs in the table have the same
The equation   . We choose and           as values for

 -coordinate,

The graph is a horizontal line passing through the -axis at as shown.
900 11 · Graphs

TRY IT 11.40 Graph the equation:

TRY IT 11.41 Graph the equation:

The equations for vertical and horizontal lines look very similar to equations like  What is the difference between

the equations         and

The equation          has both and The value of depends on the value of The              changes according to
the value of

The equation          has only one variable. The value of is constant. The           is always It does not depend on
the value of

The graph shows both equations.

Notice that the equation         gives a slanted line whereas  gives a horizontal line.

EXAMPLE 11.22

Graph            and             in the same rectangular coordinate system.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 901

     Solution                                                                            while the second does not.
Find three solutions for each equation. Notice that the first equation has the variable
Solutions for both equations are listed.

The graph shows both equations.

TRY IT 11.42 Graph the equations in the same rectangular coordinate system:                  and
                                                                                         and
TRY IT 11.43 Graph the equations in the same rectangular coordinate system:

MEDIA
ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
Use a Table of Values (http://www.openstax.org/l/24tabofval)
Graph a Linear Equation Involving Fractions (http://www.openstax.org/l/24graphlineq)
Graph Horizontal and Vertical Lines (http://www.openstax.org/l/24graphhorvert)

           SECTION 11.2 EXERCISES

    Practice Makes Perfect

     Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Equation and its Graph
     In each of the following exercises, an equation and its graph is shown. For each ordered pair, decide
1.  is the ordered pair a solution to the equation?
2.  is the point on the line?
902 11 · Graphs

39.                                   40.                   41.

     1.                                    1.                    1.

     2.                                    2.                    2.

     3.                                    3.                    3.

     4.                                    4.                    4.

42.

     1.
     2.
     3.
     4.

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

In the following exercises, graph by plotting points.

43.                              44.                   45.

46.                              47.                   48.

49.                              50.                   51.

52.                              53.                   54.

55.                              56.                   57.

58.                              59.                   60.

61.                              62.                   63.

64.                              65.                   66.

67.                              68.                   69.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  11.2 · Graphing Linear Equations 903

70.                                 71.                               72.

73.                                 74.                               75.

76.                                 77.                               78.

79.                                 80.                               81.

82.

Graph Vertical and Horizontal lines

In the following exercises, graph the vertical and horizontal lines.

83.                                 84.                               85.

86.                                 87.                               88.

89.                                 90.                               91.

92.

In the following exercises, graph each pair of equations in the same rectangular coordinate system.

93.         and                     94.           and                 95.   and

96.         and

Mixed Practice
In the following exercises, graph each equation.

97.                                 98.                               99.

100.                                101.                              102.

103.                                104.                              105.

106.                                107.                              108.

109.                                110.                              111.

112.

Everyday Math

113. Motor home cost The Robinsons rented a motor      114. Weekly earning At the art gallery where he

      home for one week to go on vacation. It cost     works, Salvador gets paid  per week plus

      them       plus  per mile to rent the motor                     of the sales he makes, so the equation

      home, so the linear equation                                          gives the amount he earns for

      gives the cost, for driving miles. Calculate     selling dollars of artwork. Calculate the

      the rental cost for driving                      amount Salvador earns for selling

      miles, and then graph the line.                                             and then graph the

                                                       line.

Writing Exercises

115. Explain how you would choose three             to 116. What is the difference between the equations of
        make a table to graph the line                               a vertical and a horizontal line?
904 11 · Graphs

      Self Check

        After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 After reviewing this checklist, what will you do to become confident for all objectives?

11.3 Graphing with Intercepts

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:
           Identify the intercepts on a graph
           Find the intercepts from an equation of a line
           Graph a line using the intercepts
           Choose the most convenient method to graph a line

BE PREPARED 11.7 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                 Solve:         for when

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 9.62.

BE PREPARED 11.8                 Is the point   on the       or

                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 11.5.

BE PREPARED 11.9                 Which ordered pairs are solutions to the equation

                                                
                                 If you missed this problem, review Example 11.8.

Identify the Intercepts on a Graph

Every linear equation has a unique line that represents all the solutions of the equation. When graphing a line by plotting
points, each person who graphs the line can choose any three points, so two people graphing the line might use
different sets of points.

At first glance, their two lines might appear different since they would have different points labeled. But if all the work
was done correctly, the lines will be exactly the same line. One way to recognize that they are indeed the same line is to
focus on where the line crosses the axes. Each of these points is called an intercept of the line.

Intercepts of a Line

Each of the points at which a line crosses the  and the          is called an intercept of the line.

Let's look at the graph of the lines shown in Figure 11.14.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 905

                                                                            Figure 11.14
First, notice where each of these lines crosses the x- axis:

Figure: The line crosses the x-axis at: Ordered pair of this point

42                     3  (3,0)

43                     4  (4,0)

44                     5  (5,0)

45                     0  (0,0)

Do you see a pattern?

For each row, the y- coordinate of the point where the line crosses the x- axis is zero. The point where the line crosses the

x- axis has the form   ; and is called the x-intercept of the line. The x- intercept occurs when y is zero.

Now, let's look at the points where these lines cross the y-axis.
906 11 · Graphs

Figure: The line crosses the y-axis at: Ordered pair for this point

42                               6              (0,6)

43                               -3             (0,-3)

44                               -5             (0,-5)

45                               0              (0,0)

x- intercept and y- intercept of a line

The              is the point,       where the graph crosses the  The  occurs when is zero.

The              is the point,       where the graph crosses the

The              occurs when is zero.

  EXAMPLE 11.23                  of each line:
Find the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 907




908 11 · Graphs

  Solution                                          The x-intercept is (4, 0).



The graph crosses the x-axis at the point (4, 0).

The graph crosses the y-axis at the point (0, 2). The y-intercept is (0, 2).

                                                    The x-intercept is (2, 0)

The graph crosses the x-axis at the point (2, 0).

The graph crosses the y-axis at the point (0, -6). The y-intercept is (0, -6).

                                                    The x-intercept is (-5, 0).

The graph crosses the x-axis at the point (-5, 0).

The graph crosses the y-axis at the point (0, -5). The y-intercept is (0, -5).

TRY IT 11.44 Find the and                           of the graph:

TRY IT 11.45 Find the and                           of the graph:

Find the Intercepts from an Equation of a Line

Recognizing that the             occurs when is zero and that the                occurs when is zero gives us a method

to find the intercepts of a line from its equation. To find the    let           and solve for To find the

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                            11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 909

let        and solve for

Find the x and y from the Equation of a Line

Use the equation to find:             and solve for x.
                                      and solve for y.
  · the x-intercept of the line, let
  · the y-intercept of the line, let

     xy

        0

     0

  EXAMPLE 11.24

Find the intercepts of
     Solution

We'll fill in Figure 11.15.

                                              Figure 11.15

To find the x- intercept, let  :

Substitute 0 for y.
Add.
Divide by 2.
The x-intercept is (3, 0).

To find the y- intercept, let  :

Substitute 0 for x.
Multiply.
910 11 · Graphs

         Add.
         The y-intercept is (0, 6).

                                             Figure 11.16

The intercepts are the points        and  .

     TRY IT 11.46 Find the intercepts:
     TRY IT 11.47 Find the intercepts:

EXAMPLE 11.25

Find the intercepts of

Solution

To find the             let

Substitute 0 for
Multiply.
Subtract.
Divide by 4.

The          is

To find the             let

Substitute 0 for
Multiply.
Simplify.
Divide by -3.

The          is

The intercepts are the points        and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 911

                                                    x  y

     TRY IT 11.48 Find the intercepts of the line:

     TRY IT 11.49 Find the intercepts of the line:

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

To graph a linear equation by plotting points, you can use the intercepts as two of your three points. Find the two
intercepts, and then a third point to ensure accuracy, and draw the line. This method is often the quickest way to graph a
line.

EXAMPLE 11.26

Graph                using intercepts.
                             Let
     Solution
First, find the

The              is

Now find the         Let

The              is

Find a third point. We'll use
912 11 · Graphs

       A third solution to the equation is
       Summarize the three points in a table and then plot them on a graph.

                                                                               x y (x,y)

Do the points line up? Yes, so draw line through the points.

TRY IT 11.50 Graph the line using the intercepts:

TRY IT 11.51 Graph the line using the intercepts:

...

     HOW TO

Graph a line using the intercepts.

Step 1. Find the   and              of the line.
              Let
              Let  and solve for

                   and solve for

Step 2. Find a third solution to the equation.
Step 3. Plot the three points and then check that they line up.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                   11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 913

Step 4. Draw the line.

EXAMPLE 11.27

Graph          using intercepts.

     Solution
Find the intercepts and a third point.

We list the points and show the graph.

TRY IT 11.52 Graph the line using the intercepts:
TRY IT 11.53 Graph the line using the intercepts:

EXAMPLE 11.28

Graph  using the intercepts.
914 11 · Graphs

            Solution

       This line has only one intercept! It is the point
       To ensure accuracy, we need to plot three points. Since the intercepts are the same point, we need two more points to
       graph the line. As always, we can choose any values for so we'll let be and

       Organize the points in a table.

       Plot the three points, check that they line up, and draw the line.

              TRY IT 11.54 Graph using the intercepts:
              TRY IT 11.55 Graph using the intercepts:

    Choose the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

       While we could graph any linear equation by plotting points, it may not always be the most convenient method. This
       table shows six of equations we've graphed in this chapter, and the methods we used to graph them.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 915

                                            Equation               Method

                                        #1                     Plotting points

                                        #2                     Plotting points

                                        #3                     Vertical line

                                        #4                     Horizontal line

                                        #5                         Intercepts

                                        #6                         Intercepts

What is it about the form of equation that can help us choose the most convenient method to graph its line?

Notice that in equations #1 and #2, y is isolated on one side of the equation, and its coefficient is 1. We found points by
substituting values for x on the right side of the equation and then simplifying to get the corresponding y- values.

Equations #3 and #4 each have just one variable. Remember, in this kind of equation the value of that one variable is
constant; it does not depend on the value of the other variable. Equations of this form have graphs that are vertical or
horizontal lines.

In equations #5 and #6, both x and y are on the same side of the equation. These two equations are of the form

            . We substituted  and           to find the x- and y- intercepts, and then found a third point by choosing

a value for x or y.

This leads to the following strategy for choosing the most convenient method to graph a line.

  ...

       HOW TO

Choose the most convenient method to graph a line.

Step 1. If the equation has only one variable. It is a vertical or horizontal line.

                     is a vertical line passing through the    at

                     is a horizontal line passing through the      at

Step 2. If is isolated on one side of the equation. Graph by plotting points.        values.
              Choose any three values for and then solve for the corresponding

Step 3. If the equation is of the form              find the intercepts.

   Find the and intercepts and then a third point.

EXAMPLE 11.29

Identify the most convenient method to graph each line:

  Solution                                  



This equation has only one variable, Its graph is a horizontal line crossing the     at

                                        Find the intercepts and one more point.

This equation is of the form
916 11 · Graphs



There is only one variable, The graph is a vertical line crossing the  at

       is isolated on the left side of the equation, it will be easiest to graph this line by plotting three points.

Since

      TRY IT 11.56 Identify the most convenient method to graph each line:

                                                                             

      TRY IT 11.57 Identify the most convenient method to graph each line:

                                                                       

      MEDIA

      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Graph by Finding Intercepts (http://www.openstax.org/l/24findinter)
      Use Intercepts to Graph (http://www.openstax.org/l/24useintercept)
      State the Intercepts from a Graph (http://www.openstax.org/l/24statintercept)

        SECTION 11.3 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Identify the Intercepts on a Graph

In the following exercises, find the and intercepts.

117.                                118.                               119.

120.                                121.                               122.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               11.3 · Graphing with Intercepts 917

123.                               124.                  125.
126.

Find the and Intercepts from an Equation of a Line

In the following exercises, find the intercepts.

127.  128.                                               129.
                                                         132.
130.  131.                                               135.
                                                         138.
133.  134.                                               141.
                                                         144.
136.  137.                                               147.
                                                         150.
139.  140.                                               153.

142.  143.                                               157.
                                                         160.
145.  146.                                               163.
                                                         166.
148.  149.                                               169.
                                                         172.
151.  152.                                               175.
                                                         178.
154.

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

In the following exercises, graph using the intercepts.

155.  156.

158.  159.

161.  162.

164.  165.

167.  168.

170.  171.

173.  174.

176.  177.
918 11 · Graphs

179.                                  180.

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

In the following exercises, identify the most convenient method to graph each line.

181.                                  182.                   183.

184.                                  185.                   186.

187.                                  188.                   189.

190.                                  191.                   192.

193.                                  194.                   195.

196.

Everyday Math

197. Road trip Damien is driving from Chicago to             198. Road trip Ozzie filled up the gas tank of his truck

      Denver, a distance of      miles. The       on         and went on a road trip. The  on the graph

      the graph below shows the time in hours since          shows the number of miles Ozzie drove since

      Damien left Chicago. The        represents the         filling up. The           represents the number of

      distance he has left to drive.                         gallons of gas in the truck's gas tank.

       Find the and              intercepts
       Explain what the            and intercepts mean

      for Damien.

                                                              Find the and             intercepts.
                                                              Explain what the           and intercepts mean

                                                             for Ozzie.

Writing Exercises                     of the graph of        200. How do you find the      of the graph of

199. How do you find the

201. Do you prefer to graph the equation                     202. Do you prefer to graph the equation
                          by plotting points or intercepts?          by plotting points or intercepts? Why?

        Why?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 919

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?

11.4 Understand Slope of a Line

       BE PREPARED 11.10 Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.

                                              Simplify:
                                              If you missed this problem, review Example 4.49.

BE PREPARED 11.11  Divide:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 7.37.

BE PREPARED 11.12  Simplify:
                   If you missed this problem, review Example 4.47.

As we've been graphing linear equations, we've seen that some lines slant up as they go from left to right and some lines
slant down. Some lines are very steep and some lines are flatter. What determines whether a line slants up or down, and
if its slant is steep or flat?

The steepness of the slant of a line is called the slope of the line. The concept of slope has many applications in the real
world. The pitch of a roof and the grade of a highway or wheelchair ramp are just some examples in which you literally
see slopes. And when you ride a bicycle, you feel the slope as you pump uphill or coast downhill.

Use Geoboards to Model Slope

In this section, we will explore the concepts of slope.

Using rubber bands on a geoboard gives a concrete way to model lines on a coordinate grid. By stretching a rubber
band between two pegs on a geoboard, we can discover how to find the slope of a line. And when you ride a bicycle, you
feel the slope as you pump uphill or coast downhill.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Exploring Slope" will help you develop a better understanding of the
  slope of a line.

We'll start by stretching a rubber band between two pegs to make a line as shown in Figure 11.17.
920 11 · Graphs

                                                                                    Figure 11.17
       Does it look like a line?
       Now we stretch one part of the rubber band straight up from the left peg and around a third peg to make the sides of a
       right triangle as shown in Figure 11.18. We carefully make a angle around the third peg, so that one side is vertical
       and the other is horizontal.

                                                                                    Figure 11.18
       To find the slope of the line, we measure the distance along the vertical and horizontal legs of the triangle. The vertical
       distance is called the rise and the horizontal distance is called the run, as shown in Figure 11.19.

                                                                                    Figure 11.19
       To help remember the terms, it may help to think of the images shown in Figure 11.20.

                                                                                    Figure 11.20
       On our geoboard, the rise is units because the rubber band goes up spaces on the vertical leg. See Figure 11.21.
       What is the run? Be sure to count the spaces between the pegs rather than the pegs themselves! The rubber band goes
       across spaces on the horizontal leg, so the run is units.

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 921

                                                                            Figure 11.21  In mathematics, the slope is always

The slope of a line is the ratio of the rise to the run. So the slope of our line is
represented by the letter

Slope of a line

The slope of a line is
The rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the horizontal change.

What is the slope of the line on the geoboard in Figure 11.21?

When we work with geoboards, it is a good idea to get in the habit of starting at a peg on the left and connecting to a
peg to the right. Then we stretch the rubber band to form a right triangle.
If we start by going up the rise is positive, and if we stretch it down the rise is negative. We will count the run from left to
right, just like you read this paragraph, so the run will be positive.
Since the slope formula has rise over run, it may be easier to always count out the rise first and then the run.

  EXAMPLE 11.30

What is the slope of the line on the geoboard shown?

     Solution
Use the definition of slope.

Start at the left peg and make a right triangle by stretching the rubber band up and to the right to reach the second peg.
Count the rise and the run as shown.
922 11 · Graphs

              TRY IT 11.58 What is the slope of the line on the geoboard shown?

              TRY IT 11.59 What is the slope of the line on the geoboard shown?

         EXAMPLE 11.31
       What is the slope of the line on the geoboard shown?

            Solution
       Use the definition of slope.
       Start at the left peg and make a right triangle by stretching the rubber band to the peg on the right. This time we need

        Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 923

to stretch the rubber band down to make the vertical leg, so the rise is negative.

       TRY IT 11.60 What is the slope of the line on the geoboard?

       TRY IT 11.61 What is the slope of the line on the geoboard?

Notice that in the first example, the slope is positive and in the second example the slope is negative. Do you notice any
difference in the two lines shown in Figure 11.22.
924 11 · Graphs

                                                                            Figure 11.22

As you read from left to right, the line in Figure A, is going up; it has positive slope. The line Figure B is going down; it has
negative slope.

                                                                            Figure 11.23
  EXAMPLE 11.32
Use a geoboard to model a line with slope

     Solution
To model a line with a specific slope on a geoboard, we need to know the rise and the run.

  Use the slope formula.

  Replace with .

So, the rise is unit and the run is units.                                    unit, and then right  units.
Start at a peg in the lower left of the geoboard. Stretch the rubber band up

The hypotenuse of the right triangle formed by the rubber band represents a line with a slope of
       TRY IT 11.62 Use a geoboard to model a line with the given slope:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 925

       TRY IT 11.63 Use a geoboard to model a line with the given slope:

  EXAMPLE 11.33
Use a geoboard to model a line with slope

     Solution
  Use the slope formula.
  Replace with .

So, the rise is and the run is
Since the rise is negative, we choose a starting peg on the upper left that will give us room to count down. We stretch the
rubber band down unit, then to the right units.

The hypotenuse of the right triangle formed by the rubber band represents a line whose slope is

       TRY IT 11.64 Use a geoboard to model a line with the given slope:
       TRY IT 11.65 Use a geoboard to model a line with the given slope:

Find the Slope of a Line from its Graph

Now we'll look at some graphs on a coordinate grid to find their slopes. The method will be very similar to what we just
modeled on our geoboards.

          MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS
  Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Slope of Lines Between Two Points" will help you develop a better
  understanding of how to find the slope of a line from its graph.
To find the slope, we must count out the rise and the run. But where do we start?
We locate any two points on the line. We try to choose points with coordinates that are integers to make our calculations
easier. We then start with the point on the left and sketch a right triangle, so we can count the rise and run.
  EXAMPLE 11.34
Find the slope of the line shown:
926 11 · Graphs

Solution

Locate two points on the graph, choosing points whose coordinates are integers. We will use  and

Starting with the point on the left,  sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second point,

Count the rise on the vertical leg of the triangle. The rise is 4 units.

Count the run on the horizontal leg.        The run is 5 units.

Use the slope formula.

Substitute the values of the rise and run.

                                            The slope of the line is .

Notice that the slope is positive since the line slants upward from left to right.

TRY IT 11.66 Find the slope of the line:

TRY IT 11.67 Find the slope of the line:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 927

...

     HOW TO

Find the slope from a graph.

Step 1.  Locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers.
Step 2.  Starting with the point on the left, sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second point.
Step 3.  Count the rise and the run on the legs of the triangle.
Step 4.  Take the ratio of rise to run to find the slope.

  EXAMPLE 11.35
Find the slope of the line shown:

     Solution
Locate two points on the graph. Look for points with coordinates that are integers. We can choose any points, but we will
use (0, 5) and (3, 3). Starting with the point on the left, sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second
point.

Count the rise - it is negative.            The rise is -2.
Count the run.                              The run is 3.
Use the slope formula.

Substitute the values of the rise and run.

Simplify.

                                            The slope of the line is

Notice that the slope is negative since the line slants downward from left to right.
What if we had chosen different points? Let's find the slope of the line again, this time using different points. We will use
928 11 · Graphs

the points       and

Starting at      sketch a right triangle to

Count the rise.                              The rise is -6.
Count the run.                               The run is 9.
Use the slope formula.

Substitute the values of the rise and run.

Simplify the fraction.

                                             The slope of the line is

It does not matter which points you use--the slope of the line is always the same. The slope of a line is constant!

TRY IT 11.68 Find the slope of the line:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 929

       TRY IT 11.69 Find the slope of the line:

The lines in the previous examples had -intercepts with integer values, so it was convenient to use the y-intercept as
one of the points we used to find the slope. In the next example, the -intercept is a fraction. The calculations are easier
if we use two points with integer coordinates.

  EXAMPLE 11.36
Find the slope of the line shown:

Solution

Locate two points on the graph whose coordinates are integers.  and

Which point is on the left?

Starting at  , sketch a right angle to  as shown below.
930 11 · Graphs

Count the rise.                             The rise is 3.
Count the run.                              The run is 5.

Use the slope formula.

Substitute the values of the rise and run.

                                            The slope of the line is

TRY IT 11.70 Find the slope of the line:

TRY IT 11.71 Find the slope of the line:

Find the Slope of Horizontal and Vertical Lines

Do you remember what was special about horizontal and vertical lines? Their equations had just one variable.

horizontal line     all the -coordinates are the same.
vertical line    all the -coordinates are the same.

So how do we find the slope of the horizontal line  One approach would be to graph the horizontal line, find two

points on it, and count the rise and the run. Let's see what happens in Figure 11.24. We'll use the two points  and

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 931

to count the rise and run.

                                                      Figure 11.24

What is the rise? The rise is 0.
What is the run? The run is 3.
What is the slope?

The slope of the horizontal line  is

All horizontal lines have slope . When the -coordinates are the same, the rise is .

Slope of a Horizontal Line

The slope of a horizontal line,   is

Now we'll consider a vertical line, such as the line  , shown in Figure 11.25. We'll use the two points  and

to count the rise and run.

                                                      Figure 11.25

What is the rise? The rise is 2.
What is the run? The run is 0.
What is the slope?
932 11 · Graphs

But we can't divide by Division by is undefined. So we say that the slope of the vertical line  is undefined. The
slope of all vertical lines is undefined, because the run is

Slope of a Vertical Line

The slope of a vertical line,    is undefined.

  EXAMPLE 11.37
Find the slope of each line:

 Solution 


This is a vertical line, so its slope is undefined.



This is a horizontal line, so its slope is

       TRY IT 11.72 Find the slope of the line:

       TRY IT 11.73 Find the slope of the line:

  Quick Guide to the Slopes of Lines

Use the Slope Formula to find the Slope of a Line between Two Points

Sometimes we need to find the slope of a line between two points and we might not have a graph to count out the rise
and the run. We could plot the points on grid paper, then count out the rise and the run, but there is a way to find the
slope without graphing.

Before we get to it, we need to introduce some new algebraic notation. We have seen that an ordered pair     gives
the coordinates of a point. But when we work with slopes, we use two points. How can the same symbol      be used to
represent two different points?

Mathematicians use subscripts to distinguish between the points. A subscript is a small number written to the right of,
and a little lower than, a variable.

We will use         to identify the first point and  to identify the second point. If we had more than two points,
we could use                        and so on.

To see how the rise and run relate to the coordinates of the two points, let's take another look at the slope of the line

between the points        and    in Figure 11.26.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 933

                                                                            Figure 11.26  of the points.
Since we have two points, we will use subscript notation.
On the graph, we counted the rise of The rise can also be found by subtracting the

We counted a run of The run can also be found by subtracting the

We know

So

We rewrite the rise and run by putting in the coordinates.

But 6 is the -coordinate of the second point,
and 3 is the -coordinate of the first point .
So we can rewrite the rise using subscript notation.

Also 7 is the -coordinate of the second point,
and 2 is the -coordinate of the first point .
So we rewrite the run using subscript notation.

We've shown that  is really another version of                   We can use this formula to find the slope of a line
                                                            is
when we have two points on the line.

Slope Formula

The slope of the line between two points  and

Say the formula to yourself to help you remember it:
934 11 · Graphs

        MANIPULATIVE MATHEMATICS

Doing the Manipulative Mathematics activity "Slope of Lines Between Two Points" will help you develop a better
understanding of how to find the slope of a line between two points.

EXAMPLE 11.38

Find the slope of the line between the points    and

Solution

We'll call       point #1 and    point #2.

Use the slope formula.
Substitute the values in the slope formula:

   of the second point minus of the first point
   of the second point minus of the first point
Simplify the numerator and the denominator.

Let's confirm this by counting out the slope on the graph.

The rise is and the run is so

TRY IT 11.74 Find the slope of the line through the given points:  and

TRY IT 11.75 Find the slope of the line through the given points:  and

How do we know which point to call #1 and which to call #2? Let's find the slope again, this time switching the names of
the points to see what happens. Since we will now be counting the run from right to left, it will be negative.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 935

We'll call  point #1 and     point #2.

Use the slope formula.
Substitute the values in the slope formula:

   of the second point minus of the first point
   of the second point minus of the first point
Simplify the numerator and the denominator.

The slope is the same no matter which order we use the points.

EXAMPLE 11.39

Find the slope of the line through the points      and

Solution

We'll call     point #1 and             point #2.

Use the slope formula.
Substitute the values

   of the second point minus of the first point

   of the second point minus of the first point
Simplify.

Let's confirm this on the graph shown.
936 11 · Graphs

TRY IT 11.76 Find the slope of the line through the pair of points:  and

TRY IT 11.77 Find the slope of the line through the pair of points:  and

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

In this chapter, we graphed lines by plotting points, by using intercepts, and by recognizing horizontal and vertical lines.

Another method we can use to graph lines is the point-slope method. Sometimes, we will be given one point and the
slope of the line, instead of its equation. When this happens, we use the definition of slope to draw the graph of the line.

EXAMPLE 11.40

Graph the line passing through the point  whose slope is

     Solution
Plot the given point,

Use the slope formula  to identify the rise and the run.

Starting at the point we plotted, count out the rise and run to mark the second point. We count units up and units
right.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 937

Then we connect the points with a line and draw arrows at the ends to show it continues.

We can check our line by starting at any point and counting up and to the right  We should get to another point on
the line.

TRY IT 11.78 Graph the line passing through the point with the given slope:

TRY IT 11.79 Graph the line passing through the point with the given slope:

...

     HOW TO

Graph a line given a point and a slope.

Step 1.  Plot the given point.
Step 2.  Use the slope formula to identify the rise and the run.
Step 3.  Starting at the given point, count out the rise and run to mark the second point.
Step 4.  Connect the points with a line.

EXAMPLE 11.41

Graph the line with -intercept        and slope

     Solution
Plot the given point, the -intercept
938 11 · Graphs

Use the slope formula            to identify the rise and the run.

Starting at      count the rise and the run and mark the second point.

Connect the points with a line.

TRY IT 11.80           Graph the line with the given intercept and slope:
                        -intercept

TRY IT 11.81 Graph the line with the given intercept and slope:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                 11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 939

                                     -intercept  whose slope is

  EXAMPLE 11.42
Graph the line passing through the point

     Solution
Plot the given point.

  Identify the rise and the run.
  Write 4 as a fraction.
Count the rise and run.

Mark the second point. Connect the two points with a line.

TRY IT 11.82 Graph the line passing through the point            and with slope
940 11 · Graphs

TRY IT 11.83 Graph the line passing through the point                                 and with slope

Solve Slope Applications

At the beginning of this section, we said there are many applications of slope in the real world. Let's look at a few now.

  EXAMPLE 11.43

The pitch of a building's roof is the slope of the roof. Knowing the pitch is important in climates where there is heavy
snowfall. If the roof is too flat, the weight of the snow may cause it to collapse. What is the slope of the roof shown?

  Solution
Use the slope formula.
Substitute the values for rise and run.
Simplify.

                                                          The slope of the roof is .

TRY IT 11.84 Find the slope given rise and run: A roof with a rise                    and run

TRY IT 11.85 Find the slope given rise and run: A roof with a rise                    and run

Have you ever thought about the sewage pipes going from your house to the street? Their slope is an important factor in
how they take waste away from your house.

  EXAMPLE 11.44

Sewage pipes must slope down inch per foot in order to drain properly. What is the required slope?

  Solution
Use the slope formula.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 941

Convert 1 foot to 12 inches.

Simplify.

                              The slope of the pipe is

      TRY IT 11.86 Find the slope of the pipe: The pipe slopes down inch per foot.

      TRY IT 11.87 Find the slope of the pipe: The pipe slopes down inch per yard.

      MEDIA
      ACCESS ADDITIONAL ONLINE RESOURCES
      Determine Positive slope from a Graph (http://www.openstax.org/l/24posslope)
      Determine Negative slope from a Graph (http://www.openstax.org/l/24negslope)
      Determine Slope from Two Points (http://www.openstax.org/l/24slopetwopts)

        SECTION 11.4 EXERCISES

Practice Makes Perfect

Use Geoboards to Model Slope

In the following exercises, find the slope modeled on each geoboard.

203.                          204.                                          205.

206.

In the following exercises, model each slope. Draw a picture to show your results.

207.                          208.                                    209.
942 11 · Graphs

210.                             211.                           212.
                                                                      217.
213.                             214.

Find the Slope of a Line from its Graph

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line shown.

215.                             216.

218.                             219.                           220.

221.                             222.                           223.

224.                             225.                           226.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                               11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 943

227.  228.                                                               229.
230.

Find the Slope of Horizontal and Vertical Lines

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line.

231.  232.                                                               233.

234.  235.                                                               236.

237.  238.

Use the Slope Formula to find the Slope of a Line between Two Points

In the following exercises, use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between each pair of points.

239.  240.                                                               241.

242.  243.                                                               244.

245.  246.                                                               247.

248.  249.                                                               250.

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

In the following exercises, graph the line given a point and the slope.

251.  252.                                                               253.

254.  255.                                                               256.

257.  258.                                                               259.

260.  261.                                                               262.

263.  264.                                                               265.

266.
944 11 · Graphs

Solve Slope Applications

In the following exercises, solve these slope applications.

267. Slope of a roof A fairly easy  268. What is the slope of the roof  269. Road grade A local road
                                            shown?                              has a grade of The
way to determine the slope                                                      grade of a road is its
                                                                                slope expressed as a
is to take a       level and                                                    percent.

set it on one end on the roof                                                Find the slope of the

surface. Then take a tape                                                       road as a fraction and
                                                                                then simplify the fraction.
measure or ruler, and
                                                                             What rise and run
measure from the other end
                                                                                would reflect this slope or
of the level down to the roof                                                   grade?

surface. You can use these

measurements to calculate

the slope of the roof. What

is the slope of the roof in

this picture?

270. Highway grade A local
        road rises feet for every
            feet of highway.

     What is the slope of

        the highway?

     The grade of a

        highway is its slope
        expressed as a percent.
        What is the grade of this
        highway?

Everyday Math

271. Wheelchair ramp The rules for wheelchair                272. Wheelchair ramp A  rise for a              run

ramps require a maximum inch rise for a                      makes it easier for the wheelchair rider to

inch run.                                                    ascend the ramp.

 What run must the ramp have to                               What run must the ramp have to easily
accommodate a                    rise to the door?           accommodate a           rise to the door?

 Draw a model of this ramp.                                   Draw a model of this ramp.

Writing Exercises

273. What does the sign of the slope tell you about a        274. How does the graph of a line with slope
        line?                                                        differ from the graph of a line with slope

275. Why is the slope of a vertical line undefined?          276. Explain how you can graph a line given a point
                                                                     and its slope.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                               11.4 · Understand Slope of a Line 945

Self Check

 After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evaluate your mastery of the objectives of this section.

 On a scale of 1-10, how would you rate your mastery of this section in light of your responses on the checklist? How
can you improve this?
946 11 · Chapter Review

Chapter Review

Key Terms

horizontal line A horizontal line is the graph of an equation that can be written in the form        . The line passes

through the y-axis at

intercepts of a line Each of the points at which a line crosses the x-axis and the y-axis is called an intercept of the line.

linear equation An equation of the form          where             are not both zero, is called a linear equation in

two variables.

ordered pair An ordered pair            gives the coordinates of a point in a rectangular coordinate system. The first

number is the -coordinate. The second number is the -coordinate.

11.1

origin The point         is called the origin. It is the point where the -axis and -axis intersect.

quadrants The -axis and -axis divide a rectangular coordinate system into four areas, called quadrants.

slope of a line The slope of a line is           . The rise measures the vertical change and the run measures the

horizontal change.

solution to a linear equation in two variables An ordered pair     is a solution to the linear equation

, if the equation is a true statement when the x- and y-values of the ordered pair are substituted into the equation.

vertical line A vertical line is the graph of an equation that can be written in the form      . The line passes through
    the x-axis at

x-axis The x-axis is the horizontal axis in a rectangular coordinate system.
y-axis The y-axis is the vertical axis on a rectangular coordinate system.

Key Concepts

11.1 Use the Rectangular Coordinate System

  · Sign Patterns of the Quadrants

      Quadrant I Quadrant II Quadrant III Quadrant IV

      (x,y)       (x,y)                 (x,y)    (x,y)

      (+,+)       (-,+)                 (-,-)    (+,-)

· Coordinates of Zero
    Points with a y-coordinate equal to 0 are on the x-axis, and have coordinates ( a, 0).
    Points with a x-coordinate equal to 0 are on the y-axis, and have coordinates ( 0, b).
    The point (0, 0) is called the origin. It is the point where the x-axis and y-axis intersect.

11.2 Graphing Linear Equations

  · Graph a linear equation by plotting points.
      Step 1. Find three points whose coordinates are solutions to the equation. Organize them in a table.
      Step 2. Plot the points on a rectangular coordinate system. Check that the points line up. If they do not, carefully
                  check your work.
      Step 3. Draw the line through the points. Extend the line to fill the grid and put arrows on both ends of the line.

· Graph of a Linear Equation:The graph of a linear equation        is a straight line.
    Every point on the line is a solution of the equation.
    Every solution of this equation is a point on this line.

11.3 Graphing with Intercepts

· Intercepts

       The x-intercept is the point,    , where the graph crosses the x-axis. The x-intercept occurs when y is zero.

       The y-intercept is the point,    , where the graph crosses the y-axis. The y-intercept occurs when x is zero.

       The x-intercept occurs when y is zero.

       The y-intercept occurs when x is zero.

· Find the x and y intercepts from the equation of a line

       To find the x-intercept of the line, let  and solve for x.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          11 · Exercises 947

       To find the y-intercept of the line, let   and solve for y.
                                                                 xy
                                                                       0
                                                                 0

· Graph a line using the intercepts

      Step 1. Find the x- and y- intercepts of the line.

       Let       and solve for x.

       Let       and solve for y.

      Step 2. Find a third solution to the equation.
      Step 3. Plot the three points and then check that they line up.
      Step 4. Draw the line.

· Choose the most convenient method to graph a line

      Step 1. Determine if the equation has only one variable. Then it is a vertical or horizontal line.

      is a vertical line passing through the x-axis at a.

      is a horizontal line passing through the y-axis at b.

      Step 2. Determine if y is isolated on one side of the equation. The graph by plotting points.

      Choose any three values for x and then solve for the corresponding y- values.

      Step 3. Determine if the equation is of the form                 , find the intercepts.

      Find the x- and y- intercepts and then a third point.

11.4 Understand Slope of a Line

  · Find the slope from a graph
      Step 1. Locate two points on the line whose coordinates are integers.
      Step 2. Starting with the point on the left, sketch a right triangle, going from the first point to the second point.
      Step 3. Count the rise and the run on the legs of the triangle.
      Step 4. Take the ratio of rise to run to find the slope,

· Slope of a Horizontal Line             , is 0.
    The slope of a horizontal line,

· Slope of a Vertical Line               , is undefined.
    The slope of a vertical line,

· Slope Formula

       The slope of the line between two points           and             is

  · Graph a line given a point and a slope.
      Step 1. Plot the given point.
      Step 2. Use the slope formula to identify the rise and the run.
      Step 3. Starting at the given point, count out the rise and run to mark the second point.
      Step 4. Connect the points with a line.

Exercises

Review Exercises

Use the Rectangular Coordinate System

Plot Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

In the following exercises, plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system.

277.                               278.
948 11 · Exercises

In the following exercises, plot each point in a rectangular coordinate system and identify the quadrant in which the
point is located.

279.                             280.             
                                                  

Identify Points on a Graph

In the following exercises, name the ordered pair of each point shown in the rectangular coordinate system.

281.                             282.                                283.

284.

Verify Solutions to an Equation in Two Variables

In the following exercises, find the ordered pairs that are solutions to the given equation.

285.                             286.

                                     
                                     

Complete a Table of Solutions to a Linear Equation in Two Variables

In the following exercises, complete the table to find solutions to each linear equation.

287.                             288.               289.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                       11 · Exercises 949

290.

Find Solutions to a Linear Equation in Two Variables

In the following exercises, find three solutions to each linear equation.

291.                       292.                                            293.

294.

Graphing Linear Equations

Recognize the Relation Between the Solutions of an Equation and its Graph

In each of the following exercises, an equation and its graph is shown. For each ordered pair, decide

 if the ordered pair is a solution to the equation.     if the point is on the line.
295.                                 296.

      1.                                   1.

      2.                                   2.

      3.                                   3.

      4.                                   4.

Graph a Linear Equation by Plotting Points

In the following exercises, graph by plotting points.

297.                       298.                                            299.

Graph Vertical and Horizontal lines

In the following exercises, graph the vertical or horizontal lines.

300.                       301.
950 11 · Exercises

Graphing with Intercepts

Identify the Intercepts on a Graph

In the following exercises, find the and

302.                                303.

Find the Intercepts from an Equation of a Line

In the following exercises, find the intercepts.

304.                             305.                                 306.

307.

Graph a Line Using the Intercepts

In the following exercises, graph using the intercepts.

308.                             309.

Choose the Most Convenient Method to Graph a Line

In the following exercises, identify the most convenient method to graph each line.

310.                             311.                                 312.

313.                             314.                                 315.

Understand Slope of a Line

Use Geoboards to Model Slope

In the following exercises, find the slope modeled on each geoboard.

316.                                317.                                    318.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                              11 · Exercises 951

319.

In the following exercises, model each slope. Draw a picture to show your results.

320.  321.                                                      322.

323.

Find the Slope of a Line from its Graph

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line shown.

324.  325.                                                            326.

327.

Find the Slope of Horizontal and Vertical Lines

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line.

328.  329.                                                      330.

331.

Use the Slope Formula to find the Slope of a Line between Two Points

In the following exercises, use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between each pair of points.

332.  333.                                                      334.

335.
952 11 · Exercises

Graph a Line Given a Point and the Slope

In the following exercises, graph the line given a point and the slope.

336.                             337.

Solve Slope Applications

In the following exercise, solve the slope application.

338. A roof has rise feet and
        run feet. What is its
        slope?

Practice Test

339. Plot and label these        340. Name the ordered pair for          341. Find the               and
                                         each point shown.                       shown.  on the line
      points:

      
                    
      

342. Find the               and  343. Is  a solution to the              344. Complete the table to find
                                                                                 four solutions to the
                    of the             equation                                  equation

      equation                         How do you know?

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      11 · Exercises 953

345. Complete the table to find
        three solutions to the
        equation

In the following exercises, find three solutions to each equation and then graph each line.

346.                             347.

In the following exercises, find the slope of each line.

348.                             349.                                 350. Use the slope formula to

                                                                      find the slope of the line

                                                                      between                and

351. Find the slope of the line  352. Graph the line passing          353. A bicycle route climbs

                                       through            with slope  feet for               feet of

                                                                      horizontal distance. What

                                                                      is the slope of the route?
954 11 · Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                                                                    A · Cumulative Review 955

 A CUMULATIVE REVIEW

Note: Answers to the Cumulative Review can be found in the Supplemental Resources. Please visit https://openstax.org/
to view an updated list of the Learning Resources for this title and how to access them.

Chapter 1 Whole Numbers

No exercises.

Chapter 2 The Language of Algebra

Simplify:

Solve:

Translate into an algebraic expression.
        less than the product of and

Translate into an algebraic equation and solve.
   The difference of and gives
   Find all the factors of
   Find the prime factorization of
   Find the least common multiple of and

Chapter 3 Integers

Simplify:

Translate into an algebraic expression or equation.
     The sum of and increased by
     The product of
     The quotient of and the sum of
     The product of and is

Solve:

Chapter 4 Fractions

     Locate the numbers on a number line.
Simplify:
956 A · Cumulative Review

Chapter 5 Decimals

Simplify:

     Write in order from smallest to largest:
Solve:

Using    as the estimate for pi, approximate the (a) circumference and (b) area of a circle whose radius is inches.

Find the mean of the numbers,

Find the median of the numbers,

Identify the mode of the numbers,

Find the unit price of one t-shirt if they are sold at for

Chapter 6 Percents

Convert               to (a) a fraction and (b) a decimal.

Translate and solve.

is       of what number?

     The nutrition label on a package of granola bars says that each granola bar has       calories, and calories are from
fat. What percent of the total calories is from fat?

     Elliot received  commission when he sold a             painting at the art gallery where he works. What was the rate
of commission?

     Nandita bought a set of towels on sale for             The original price of the towels was  What was the discount
rate?

Alan invested                    in a friend's business. In years the friend paid him the         plus  simple interest.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                              A · Cumulative Review 957

What was the rate of simple interest per year?
Solve:

Chapter 7 The Properties of Real Numbers

     List the (a) whole numbers, (b) integers, (c) rational numbers, (d) irrational numbers,
(e) real numbers
Simplify:

A playground is feet wide. Convert the width to yards.

Every day last week Amit recorded the number of minutes he spent reading. The recorded number of minutes he

read each day was                       How many hours did Amit spend reading last week?

June walked kilometers. Convert this length to miles knowing mile is  kilometer.

Chapter 8 Solve Linear Equations

Solve:

Translate and solve.

Four less than is

Chapter 9 Math Models and Geometry

     One number is less than another. Their sum is negative twenty-two. Find the numbers.

The sum of two consecutive integers is  Find the numbers.

Wilma has          in dimes and quarters. The number of dimes is less than the number of quarters. How many of

each coin does she have?

     Two angles are supplementary. The larger angle is  more than the smaller angle. Find the measurements of both
angles.

     One angle of a triangle is more than the smallest angle. The largest angle is the sum of the other angles. Find the
measurements of all three angles.

     Erik needs to attach a wire to hold the antenna to the roof of his house, as shown in the figure. The antenna is feet
tall and Erik has feet of wire. How far from the base of the antenna can he attach the wire?
958 A · Cumulative Review

The width of a rectangle is less than the length. The perimeter is inches. Find the length and the width.

     Find the (a) volume and (b) surface area of a rectangular carton with length  inches, width  inches, and height
inches.

Chapter 10 Polynomials

Simplify:

     Write in scientific notation:
Factor the greatest common factor from the polynomial.

Chapter 11 Graphs

Graph:

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                        A · Cumulative Review 959

     Find the intercepts.
Graph using the intercepts.

     Find the slope of the line shown.

Use the slope formula to find the slope of the line between the points

Graph the line passing through the point  and with slope
960 A · Cumulative Review
Access for free at openstax.org
                           B · Powers and Roots Tables 961

B POWERS AND ROOTS TABLES

Table B1
962 B · Powers and Roots Tables

                                              Table B1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                     B · Powers and Roots Tables 963

Table B1
964 B · Powers and Roots Tables

                                              Table B1

Access for free at openstax.org
          B · Powers and Roots Tables 965

Table B1
966 B · Powers and Roots Tables
Access for free at openstax.org
C GEOMETRIC FORMULAS                                C · Geometric Formulas 967

     Name              Shape  Formulas
Rectangle

Square
Triangle

Right Triangle

  Circle
  Parellelogram
  Trapezoid
Table C1 2 Dimensions
968 C · Geometric Formulas        Shape  Formulas

                          Name
               Rectangular Solid

Cube
Cone

  Sphere
  Right Circular Cylinder
Table C2 3 Dimensions

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                        Answer Key 969

Answer Key

Chapter 1

Be Prepared

1.1                                1.2                                1.3

1.4                                1.5                                1.6

1.7                                1.8                                1.9

Try It                             1.2  7, 13, 201                    1.3 176
                                          0, 7, 13, 201
1.1  2, 9, 241, 376
       0, 2, 9, 241, 376

1.4 237                            1.5  ten millions                  1.6  billions
                                          tens                               ten thousands
                                          hundred thousands                  tens
                                          millions                           hundred thousands
                                          ones                               hundred millions

1.7 nine trillion, two hundred     1.8 seventeen trillion, eight      1.9 three hundred sixteen
      fifty-eight billion, one           hundred sixty-four billion,        million, one hundred
      hundred thirty-seven               three hundred twenty-five          twenty-eight thousand,
      million, nine hundred four         million, six hundred               eight hundred thirty-nine
      thousand, sixty-one                nineteen thousand, four
                                                                      1.12 2,022,714,466
1.10 thirty-one million, five      1.11 53,809,051
        hundred thirty-six                                            1.15 160
        thousand                   1.14 204,000,000 pounds
                                   1.17 17,900                        1.18 5,000
1.13 34,000,000 miles              1.20 156,000
                                                                      1.21   eight plus four; the sum
1.16 880                                                                    of eight and four

1.19 64,000                                                                  eighteen plus eleven; the
                                                                            sum of eighteen and eleven

1.212.   twenty-one plus sixteen;  1.23                               1.24
  2.    the sum of twenty-one and
        sixteen
         one hundred plus two
        hundred; the sum of one
        hundred and two hundred
970 Answer Key                     1.26                      1.27

1.25

1.28                               1.219.                    1.310. 
                                     2.                        2. 

1.31                               1.32                      1.33

1.34                               1.35                      1.36

1.37                               1.38                      1.39

1.40                               1.41                              1.42

1.43 Translate:    ;               1.44 Translate:  ;        1.45 Translate:   ;

        Simplify:                        Simplify:                   Simplify

1.46 Translate 37 + 69; Simplify   1.47 He rode 140 miles.   1.48 The total number is 720
        106                                                          students.

1.49 The perimeter is 30           1.50 The perimeter is 36  1.511.   twelve minus four; the
        inches.                            inches.             2.    difference of twelve and
                                                                     four
                                                                      twenty-nine minus
                                                                     eleven; the difference of
                                                                     twenty-nine and eleven

1.512.   eleven minus two; the     1.53                      1.54
  2.    difference of eleven and
        two
         twenty-nine minus
        twelve; the difference of
        twenty-nine and twelve

1.55                               1.56                      1.57

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         Answer Key 971

1.58                            1.59 7 - 0 = 7; 7 + 0 = 7           1.60 6 - 2 = 4; 2 + 4 = 6

1.61 86 - 54 = 32 because 54 +  1.62 99 - 74 = 25 because 74 +      1.63 93 - 58 = 35 because 58 +
        32 = 86                         25 = 99                             35 = 93

1.64 81 - 39 = 42 because 42 +  1.65 439 - 52 = 387 because         1.66 318 - 75 = 243 because
        39 = 81                         387 + 52 = 439                      243 + 75 = 318

1.67 832 - 376 = 456 because    1.68 847 - 578 = 269 because        1.69 4,585 - 697 = 3,888
        456 + 376 = 832                 269 + 578 = 847                     because 3,888 + 697 =
                                                                            4,585

1.70 5,637 - 899 = 4,738        1.711.  14 - 9 = 5                  1.712.  11 - 6 = 5
        because 4,738 + 899 =     2.  37 - 21 = 16                    2.  67 - 18 = 49
        5,637

1.73 The difference is 19       1.74 The difference is 17           1.75 The difference is $149.
        degrees Fahrenheit.             degrees Fahrenheit.

1.76 The difference is $136.    1.717.   eight times seven ; the    1.718.   thirteen times seven ; the
                                  2.    product of eight and seven    2.    product of thirteen and

                                         eighteen times eleven ;            seven
                                        the product of eighteen
                                                                             five times sixteen; the
                                        and eleven                          product of five and sixteen

1.79                            1.80                                1.811. 
                                                                      2. 

1.812.                          1.813.                              1.814. 
  2.                              2.                                  2. 

1.85 54 and 54; both are the    1.86 48 and 48; both are the        1.87
        same.                           same.
                                                                    1.90
1.88                            1.89                                1.913.  540
1.91 3,354                      1.92 3,776
                                                                      2.  5,400
1.914.  750                     1.95 127,995                        1.96 653,462
  2.  7,500
                                1.98 504,108                        1.99 13 · 28; 364
1.97 365,462
972 Answer Key

1.100 47 · 14; 658                  1.101 2(167); 334               1.102 2(258); 516

1.103 Valia donated 144 water       1.104 Vanessa brought 80 hot    1.105 Erin needs 28 dahlias.
         bottles.                            dogs.

1.106 There are 36 women in         1.107 Jane needs 320 tiles.     1.108 Yousef needs 1,080 tiles.
         the choir.

1.109 The area of the rug is 40     1.110 The area of the driveway  1.111    eighty-four divided by
         square feet.                        is 900 square feet             seven; the quotient of
                                                                            eighty-four and seven
                                                                             eighteen divided by six;
                                                                            the quotient of eighteen
                                                                            and six.
                                                                             twenty-four divided by
                                                                            eight; the quotient of
                                                                            twenty-four and eight

1.112   seventy-two divided by      1.113                           1.114
       nine; the quotient of
       seventy-two and nine
        twenty-one divided by
       three; the quotient of
       twenty-one and three
        fifty-four divided by six;
       the quotient of fifty-four
       and six

1.115  9  3                         1.116  4  5                     1.117.  1
                                                                        2.  27

1.118.  16                          1.119  0  undefined             1.120  0  undefined
    2.  4

1.121 659                           1.122 679                       1.123 861
                                    1.125 704                       1.126 809
1.124 651                           1.128 539 with a remainder of   1.129 114 R11

1.127 476 with a remainder of                7                      1.132 308 R77
         4                          1.131 307 R49                   1.135 Marcus can fill 15 cups.
                                    1.134 52 ÷ 13; 4
1.130 121 R9

1.133 91 ÷ 13; 7

1.136 Andrea can make 9
         bows.

Section 1.1 Exercises               a3..  50, 221                   5. 561
                                    b.  0, 50, 221
a1..  5, 125
b.  0, 5, 125

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                      Answer Key 973

7. 407                           19..  thousands                   111..  hundred thousands
                                 2.  hundreds                      2.  millions
                                 3.  tens                          3.  thousands
                                 4.  ten thousands                 4.  tens
                                 5.  hundred thousands             5.  ten thousands

13. One thousand, seventy-       15. Three hundred sixty-four      17. Five million, eight hundred
      eight                            thousand, five hundred ten        forty-six thousand, one
                                                                         hundred three
19. Thirty seven million, eight
      hundred eighty-nine        21. Fourteen thousand, four       23. Six hundred thirteen
      thousand, five                   hundred ten                       thousand, two hundred

25. Two million, six hundred     27. Twenty three million, eight   29. One billion, three hundred
      seventeen thousand, one          hundred sixty-seven               seventy-seven million, five
      hundred seventy-six              thousand                          hundred eighty-three
                                                                         thousand, one hundred
31. 412                          33. 35,975                              fifty-six
                                 39. 7,173,000,000
37. 3,226,512,017                415..  13,700                     35. 11,044,167
                                 2.  391,800
413..  390                                                         41. 39,000,000,000,000
2.  2,930
                                                                   417..  1,490
                                                                   2.  1,500

419..                            51. Twenty four thousand, four    513..  $24,490
2.                                     hundred ninety-three        2.  $24,500
                                       dollars                     3.  $24,000
                                                                   4.  $20,000

515..                            57. Answers may vary. The
2.                                     whole numbers are the
3.                                     counting numbers with the
                                       inclusion of zero.

Section 1.2 Exercises            61. thirteen plus eighteen; the   63. two hundred fourteen plus
                                       sum of 13 and 18.                 six hundred forty-two; the
59. five plus two; the sum of 5                                          sum of 214 and 642
      and 2.                     67.
                                                                   69.
65.
974 Answer Key

71.                                73.                                75.

77.                                719..  13                          811.. 

                                   2.  13                             2. 

83.                                85.                                87.

89.                                91.                                93.

95.                                97.                                99.

101.                               103.                               105.

107.                               109.                               111.

113.                               115.                               117.

119. The total cost was $1,875. 121. Ethan rode 138 miles.            123. The total square footage
                                                                              in the rooms is 1,167
125. Natalie's total salary is     127. The perimeter of the                  square feet.
        $237,186.                          figure is 44 inches.
                                                                      129. The perimeter of the
131. The perimeter of the          133. The perimeter of the                  figure is 56 meters.
        figure is 71 yards.                figure is 62 feet.
                                                                      135. The total number of
137. Yes, he scored 406 points.    138. Yes, the total weight is              calories was 640.
                                           1091 pounds.
                                                                      139. Answers will vary.

Section 1.3 Exercises              143. forty-two minus thirty-       145. six hundred seventy-five
                                           five; the difference of            minus three hundred fifty;
141. fifteen minus nine; the               forty-two and thirty-five          the difference of six
        difference of fifteen and                                             hundred seventy-five and
        nine                                                                  three hundred fifty

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                           Answer Key 975

147.                               149.                                151.
153.                                  155.                                157.

159. 5                             161. 8                              163. 22
                                   167. 123                            169. 1,321
165. 33                            173. 222                            175. 346
                                   179. 1,186                          181. 34,668
171. 28                            185. 15 - 4; 11                     187. 9 - 6; 3
                                   191. 45 - 20; 25                    193. 92 - 67; 25
177. 3,519                         197. 61 - 38; 23                    199. 29
                                   203. 1,060                          205. 22
183. 10 - 3; 7                     209. 41 - 13; 28                    211. 100 - 76; 24
                                   215. The difference between         217. The difference between
189. 75 - 28; 47
                                           the third grade and                 the regular price and sale
195. 16 - 12; 4                            second grade was 13                 price is $251.
                                           children.
201. 72                            221. 157 miles                      223. Answers may vary.

207. 75 + 35; 110

213. The difference between
        the high and low
        temperature was 17
        degrees

219. John needs to save $155
        more.

Section 1.4 Exercises              227. five times twelve; the         229. ten times twenty-five; the
                                           product of five and twelve          product of ten and
225. four times seven; the                                                     twenty-five
        product of four and seven

231. forty-two times thirty-       233.                                235.

      three; the product of

      forty-two and thirty-three
976 Answer Key                   239.                          241.

237.

243.                             245. 0                        247. 0

249. 43                          251. 28                       253. 240,055
                                 257. 395                      259. 1,650
2515..  42
  2.  42

261. 23,947                      263. 1,976                    265. 7,008
267. 2,295                       269. 230                      271. 3,600
273. 88,000                      275. 50,000,000               277. 34,333
279. 422,506                     281. 804,285                  283. 26,624
285. 245,340                     287. 1,476,417                289. 18 · 33; 594
291. 51(67); 3,417               293. 2(249); 498              295. 10(375); 3,750
297. 1,406                       299. 148                      301. 11,000
303. 11,424                      305. 0                        307. 15,383
309. 50 - 18; 32                 311. 2(35); 70                313. 20 + 980; 1,000
315. 12(875); 10,500             317. 89 - 74; 15              319. 3,075 + 95; 3,170
321. 814 - 366; 448              323. Tim brought 54 cans of   325. There were 308 students.

327. Rey donated 180 t-shirts.           soda to the party.    331. There are 100 senators in
                                 329. Stephanie should use 20          the U.S. senate.

                                         cups of fruit juice.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                         Answer Key 977

333. The area of the wall is 117    335. The area of the room is    337. The area of the court is
        square feet.                        1,428 square feet.              4,700 square feet.

339. Javier's portfolio gained      341. Answers will vary.
        $3,600.

Section 1.5 Exercises               345. thirty-two divided by      347. forty-eight divided by six;
                                            eight; the quotient of          the quotient of forty-eight
343. fifty-four divided by nine;            thirty-two and eight            and six
        the quotient of fifty-four
        and nine                    351.                            353.

349. sixty-three divided by
        seven; the quotient of
        sixty-three and seven

355.                                357.                            359. 9

361. 9                              363. 7                          365. 9
367. 9                              369. 5                          371. 1
373. 1                              375. 23                         377. 19
379. 0                              381. undefined                  383. undefined
385. 0                              387. 24                         389. 12
391. 93                             393. 132                        395. 871
397. 7,831                          399. 2,403                      401. 901
403. 704                            405. 10,209                     407. 352 R6
409. 6,913 R1                       411. 86,234 R4                  413. 43,338 R2
415. 382 R5                         417. 849                        419. 96
421. 1,986 R17                      423. 3,060                      425. 72
427. 1,060                          429. 35                         431. 45 ÷ 15; 3
433. 288 ÷ 24; 12                   435. Ric can fill 32 bags.      437. There are 25 groups.
978 Answer Key

439. Marta can wrap 16 cakes      441. The difference is 28 miles  443. They will need 5 vans for
        from 1 roll.                      per gallon.                      the field trip

445. Bill hiked 50 miles          447. LaVonne treated 48          449. Jenna uses 26 pairs of
                                          patients last week.              contact lenses, but there
451. Answers may vary. Using                                               is 1 day left over, so she
        multiplication facts can                                           needs 27 pairs for 365
        help you check your                                                days.
        answers once you've
        finished division.

Review Exercises

4513..  2, 99                     4515..  4, 90                    457.

2.  0, 2, 99                      2.  0, 4, 90

4519..  tens                      461. Five thousand, two          463. Five million, twelve
  2.  hundred thousands                   hundred eighty                   thousand, five hundred
  3.  ones                                                                 eighty-two
  4.  ten thousands
  5.  thousands                   467. 340,912,061                 469. 410

466. 15,253                       473. 39,000                      475. 81,500
471. 3,560
477. four plus three; the sum     479. five hundred seventy-one 481.
                                          plus six hundred twenty-
        of four and three                 nine; the sum of five
                                          hundred seventy-one and
483.                                      six hundred twenty-nine

                                  4815..  19                       4817..  13
                                    2.  19                           2.  13

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    Answer Key 979

489. 79                     491. 154                            493. 19,827
495. 30 + 12; 42
501. 46 feet                497. 39 + 25; 64                    499. $76

507.                        503. fourteen minus five; the       505. three hundred fifty-one
                                    difference of fourteen and          minus two hundred forty-
                                    five                                nine; the difference
                                                                        between three hundred
                                                                        fifty-one and two hundred
                                                                        forty-nine

                            509. 3                              511. 14

513. 23                     515. 322                            517. 380
519. 9,985                  521. 19 - 13; 6
525. 58 degrees Fahrenheit  527. eight times five; the          523. 74 - 8; 66

531.                                product of eight and five   529. ten times ninety-five; the
                                                                        product of ten and ninety-
                            533.                                        five

                                                                   535. 0

537. 99                     5319..  28                          541. 27,783
543. 640                      2.  28
549. 15(28); 420
555. 1,800 seats            545. 79,866                         547. 1,873,608

561.                        551. 2(575); 1,150                  553. 48 marigolds

567. 97                     557. fifty-four divided by nine;    559. seventy-two divided by
573. 300 R5                         the quotient of fifty-four          eight; the quotient of
                                    and nine                            seventy-two and eight

                            563. 7                              565. 13

                            569. undefined                      571. 638
                            575. 64 ÷ 16; 4                     577. 9 baskets
980 Answer Key

Practice Test                      5811..  613                          583. 68
                                     2.  55,208
5719..  4, 87                                                           589. 0
  2.  0, 4, 87                     587. 32                              595. 3,325
                                   593. 66                              601. 11
585. 17                            599. 442                             607. 2(524); 1,048
591. 0                             605. 32 - 18; 14                     613. Clayton walked 30 blocks.
597. 490                           611. Stan had $344 left.
603. 16 + 58; 74
609. 300 - 50; 250                 2.2                                  2.3
                                   2.5                                  2.6
Chapter 2                          2.8                                  2.9
                                   2.11                                 2.12
Be Prepared                        2.13

2.1
2.4 expression
2.7
2.10 and
2.13 prime

Try It                             21.2.  47 minus 19; the              21.3.  fourteen is less than or

21.1.  18 plus 11; the sum of            difference of forty-seven and        equal to twenty-seven
      eighteen and eleven
                                         nineteen                       2.  nineteen minus two is not
2.  27 times 9; the product of
      twenty-seven and nine        2.  72 divided by 9; the                   equal to eight

3.  84 divided by 7; the                 quotient of seventy-two and 3.  twelve is greater than four
      quotient of eighty-four and
      seven                              nine                                 divided by two

4.  p minus q; the difference      3.  m plus n; the sum of m           4.  x minus seven is less than
      of p and q
                                         and n                                one

                                   4.  13 times 7; the product of

                                         thirteen and seven

21.4.  nineteen is greater than or 21.5.  >                             21.6.  <
                                                                        2.  >
equal to fifteen                   2.  <
                                                                        2.9 415
2.  seven is equal to twelve

minus five

3.  fifteen divided by three is

less than eight

4.  y minus three is greater

than six

21.7.  equation                    21.8.  expression
2.  expression                     2.  equation

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                                Answer Key 981

2.10 79                             2.11.  4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4 · 4  2.12.  8 · 8 · 8 · 8 · 8 · 8 · 8 · 8
                                      2.  a · a · a · a · a · a · a         2.  b · b · b · b · b · b

2.13.  125                          2.14.  49                             2.15.  2
  2.  1                               2.  0                                 2.  14

2.16.  35                           2.17 18                               2.18 9
  2.  99
                                                                          2.21 86
2.19 16                             2.20 23                               2.24 75
                                                                          2.217.  13
2.22 1                              2.23 81
                                                                            2.  5
2.215.  10                          2.216.  4
  2.  19                              2.  12                              2.30 216

2.218.  8                           2.29 64                               2.33 33
  2.  16                                                                  2.36 9
                                                                          2.39 9 and 15; 2x3 and 8x3; y2
2.31 64                             2.32 81
                                                                                  and 11y2
2.34 10                             2.35 40
                                    2.38 The terms are 9a, 13a2,          2.42 17y + 7
2.37 The terms are 4x, 3b, and
        2. The coefficients are 4,          and a3, The coefficients      2.415.  47 - 41
        3, and 2.                           are 9, 13, and 1.               2.  5x ÷ 2

2.40 4x3 and 6x3; 8x2 and 3x2;      2.41 16x + 17                         2.418.  j + 19
        19 and 24                                                           2.  2x - 21
                                    2.44 12y2 + 15y
2.43 4x2 + 14x                                                            2.51 w - 5

2.416.  17 + 19                     2.417.  x + 11                        2.54 4n + 8
  2.  7x                              2.  11a - 14                        2.57 yes
                                                                          2.60 x + 3 = 4; x = 1
2.419.  4(p + q)                    2.510.  2x - 8                        2.63 y = 28
  2.  4p + q                          2.  2(x - 8)                        2.66 y = 4
                                                                          2.69 7 + 6 = 13
2.52 l + 2                          2.53 6q - 7                           2.72 21  3 = 63
2.55 no                             2.56 yes
2.58 yes                            2.59 x + 1 = 7; x = 6
2.61 x = 13                         2.62 x = 5
2.64 y = 46                         2.65 x = 22
2.67 a = 37                         2.68 n = 41
2.70 8 + 6 = 14                     2.71 6  9 = 54
982 Answer Key

2.73 2(x - 5) = 30                  2.74 2(y - 4) = 16                   2.75 x + 7 = 37; x = 30

2.76 y + 11 = 28; y = 17            2.77 z - 17 = 37; z = 54             2.78 x - 19 = 45; x = 64

2.719.  yes                         2.810.  no                           2.811.  yes
  2.  no                              2.  yes                              2.  no

2.812.  no                          2.813.  no                           2.814.  yes
  2.  yes                             2.  yes                              2.  no

2.815.  yes                         2.816.  no                           2.87 Divisible by 2, 3, 5, and 10
  2.  no                              2.  yes

2.88 Divisible by 2 and 3, not 5    2.89 Divisible by 2, 3, not 5 or     2.90 Divisible by 3 and 5.
        or 10.                              10.
                                                                         2.93 composite
2.91 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16, 24,  2.92 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 16, 20, 40,
        32, 48, 96                          80                           2.96 2  2  3  5, or 22  3  5
                                                                         2.99 2  2  2  2  5, or 24  5
2.94 prime                          2.95 2  2  2  2  5, or 24  5         2.102 2  3  7  7, or 2  3  72
2.97 2  3  3  7, or 2  32  7        2.98 2  3  7  7, or 2  3  72         2.105 60
2.100 2  2  3  5, or 22  3  5       2.101 2  3  3  7, or 2  32  7        2.108 360

2.103 36                            2.104 72

2.106 105                           2.107 440

Section 2.1 Exercises               3. 5 times 6, the product of five    5. 28 divided by 4, the quotient
                                        and six                              of twenty-eight and four
1. 16 minus 9, the difference of
    sixteen and nine

7. x plus 8, the sum of x and       9. 2 times 7, the product of two     11. fourteen is less than
    eight                               and seven                              twenty-one

13. thirty-six is greater than or   15. 3 times n equals 24, the         17. y minus 1 is greater than 6,
      equal to nineteen                   product of three and n               the difference of y and one
                                          equals twenty-four                   is greater than six

19. 2 is less than or equal to 18   21. a is not equal to 7 times 4,     23. equation
      divided by 6; 2 is less than        a is not equal to the
      or equal to the quotient of         product of seven and four
      eighteen and six

25. expression                      27. expression                       29. equation
31. 37                              33. x 5                              35.

37.                                 319..  43                            41. 5

                                    2.  55

43. 34                              45. 58                               47. 6

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      Answer Key 983

49. 13                    51. 4                       53. 35
55. 10                    57. 41                      59. 81
61. 149                   63. 50
                                                      73. 144
Section 2.2 Exercises     71. 26                      79. 21
                          77. 27                      84. 225
69. 22                    83. 9                       89. 15x2, 6x, 2
75. 32                    87. 54                      95. 5
81. 41                    93. 8                       101. 13x
85. 73                    99. 16ab and 4ab; 16b2 and
91. 10y3, y, 2                                        107. 12x + 8
97. x3 and 8x3; 14 and 5        9b2                   113. 22a + 1
                          105. 7c                     119. 14 - 9
103. 26a                  111. 12p + 10               125. x - 4
109. 10u + 3              117. 8 + 12                 131. y ÷ 3
115. 17x2 + 20x + 16      123. 36 ÷ 9                 137. b + 15
121. 9  7                 129. 8x + 3x                143. He will pay $750. His
127. 6y                   135. 5 (x + y)
133. 8 (y - 9)            141. 2n - 7                         insurance company will
139. b - 4                                                    pay $1350.

Section 2.3 Exercises     1419..  no                  1511..  yes
                            2.  yes                     2.  no
1417..  yes
  2.  no                                              1517..  no
                                                        2.  yes
1513..  no                1515..  no
  2.  yes                   2.  yes                   163. a = 16
                                                      169. x = 7
159. x + 2 = 5; x = 3     161. x + 3 = 6; x = 3       175. y = 22
165. p = 5                167. r = 24                 181. n = 32
171. p = 69               173. d = 67                 187. 8 + 9 = 17
177. u = 30               179. f = 178
183. p = 48               185. y = 467
984 Answer Key

189. 23 - 19 = 4                     191. 3  9 = 27                      193. 54 ÷ 6 = 9
195. 2(n - 10) = 52                  197. 3y + 10 = 100                  199. p + 5 = 21; p = 16
201. r + 18 = 73; r = 55             203. d - 30 = 52; d = 82            205. u - 12 = 89; u = 101
207. c - 325 = 799; c = 1124         209. $1300                          211. $460

Section 2.4 Exercises                217. 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32,  219. 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48
                                             36, 40, 44, 48
215. 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 12, 14, 16, 18,                                      225. Divisible by 2, 3, 4, 6
        20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32,                                      231. Divisible by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10
        34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46,                                      237. Divisible by 2, 5, 10
        48                                                               243. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 18, 36
                                                                         249. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 12, 14, 21,
221. 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48           223. 10, 20, 30, 40
                                                                                 28, 42, 49, 84, 98, 147,
227. Divisible by 3, 5               229. Divisible by 2, 3, 4, 6                196, 294, 588
                                                                         255. prime
233. Divisible by 2, 4               235. Divisible by 3, 5              261. composite

239. Divisible by 2, 5, 10           241. Divisible by 3, 5

245. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15,   247. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 16,
        20, 30, 60                           18, 24, 36, 48, 72,144

251. prime                           253. composite
257. composite                       259. composite
263.

Section 2.5 Exercises                269. 2  2  3  11                    271. 3  3  7  11
                                     275. 3  3  5  5  11                 277. 2  2  2  7
267. 2  43                           281. 17  23                         283. 2  2  2  2  3  3  3
273. 5  23                           287. 2  3  5  5                     289. 3  5  5  7
279. 2  2  2  3  7                   293. 2  5  5  7                     295. 24
285. 2  2  2  2  3  3  3  5
291. 2  2  3  3

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                          Answer Key 985

297. 30                              299. 120                             301. 300
303. 24                              305. 120                             307. 420
309. 42                              311. 120                             313. 40

Review Exercises                     319. 24 divided by 6, the            321. 50 is greater than or
                                             quotient of twenty-four              equal to 47
317. 3 times 8, the product of               and six.
        three and eight.                                                  327. expression
                                     325. equation
323. The sum of n and 4 is                                                333. 8  8  8  8
        equal to 13                  331. x 6                             339. 128
                                     337. 81                              345. 74
329. 23                              343. 18                              351. 26
335. y  y  y  y  y                   349. 58                              357. 3 and 4; 3x and x
341. 20                              355. 6                               363. 12n + 11
347. 31                              361. 14x                             369. 3n  9
353. 12n2,3n, 1                      367. x - 6                           3715..  yes
359. 24a                             373. c + 3
365. 10y2 + 2y + 3                                                          2.  no
371. 5(y + 1)                        3719..  no                           381. x + 3 = 5; x = 2
                                       2.  yes
3717..  yes                                                               387. y = 23
  2.  no                             385. x = 11                          393. 4  8 = 32
                                     391. 7 + 33 = 40                     399. q - 18 = 57; q = 75
383. c = 6                           397. x + 8 = 35; x = 27              405. q = 8
389. p = 34                          403. z = 33                          411. 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48
395. 2(n - 3) = 76                   409. 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24,
401. h = 42                                                               417. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30
407. v = 56                                  27, 30, 33, 36, 39, 42, 45,  423. composite
                                             48
413. 2, 3, 6                         415. 2, 3, 5, 6, 10                  429. 45
419. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12,    421. prime

        15, 18, 20, 30, 36, 45, 60,  427. 2  5  5  7
        90, 180                      433. Answers will vary
425. 2  2  3  7
431. 175
986 Answer Key

Practice Test                       437. equation   4319..  n6
                                                      2.  3  3  3  3  3 = 243
435. 15 minus x, the difference
       of fifteen and x.                            445. 45
                                                    451. x + 5
441. 36                             443. 5          457. y - 15 = 32; y = 47
447. 125                            449. 36
453. 3(a - b)                       455. n = 31           3.3
459. 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32,  461. 23  33  5
                                                    3.4
        36, 40, 44, 48                              3.7
                                                    3.10
Chapter 3
                                                       31.3.  >
Be Prepared                                             2.  <
                                                        3.  >
3.1                                        3.2          4.  >
                                                    31.6.  -8
3.3                                 3.3             2.  5
3.5                                 3.6
3.8                                 3.9             31.9.  -4
3.11                                3.12            2.  4
                                                    3.12.  9
Try It
                                                      2.  -37
3.1                                 3.2             3.15.  >

31.4.  <                            31.5.  -4         2.  >
2.  >                               2.  3             3.  <
3.  <                                                 4.  =
4.  >                               3.8 5

3.7 1

3.10.  -11                          3.11.  12
  2.  11                              2.  -28

3.13.   17                          3.14.   23
  2.    39                            2.    21
  3.    -22                           3.    -37
  4.    -11                           4.    -49

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 987

3.16.  >              3.17.  3                   3.18.  11
  2.  =                 2.  18                     2.  63
  3.  >
  4.  <               3.20 3                     3.21 16

3.19 2                3.213.   -9                3.214.   19
3.22 9                  2.     15                  2.     -22
                        3.     -20                 3.     -9
3.25 5 yards            4.     11-(-4)             4.     -8-(-5)

3.28                  3.26 -30 feet              3.27

        7             3.29                               6
3.31                                             3.30
                              -6
                          3.32                      -7
                                                 3.33

        -2                        -3                         2
3.34                                             3.316. 
                      3.315. 
        3               2.                         2. 
3.317.  -17             3. 
                                                 3.39 -50
  2.  57              3.318.  -46
3.40 -70                2.  26                   3.42 0
3.413.  2                                        3.415.  -6
                      3.41 13
  2.  -12             3.414.  2                    2.  10
3.416.  -1                                       3.48 13
                        2.  -1
  2.  17              3.47 9                     3.51 -7 + 4 = -3
3.49 196                                         3.54 [-8 + (-12)] + 7 = -13
3.52 -8 + (-6) = -14  3.50 8
                      3.53 [9 + (-16)] + 4 = -3
988 Answer Key                   3.56 -33 feet  3.57 14-yard line
                                 3.59           3.60
3.55 4 degrees Celsius
3.58 37-yard line                                       3
                                                3.63
3.61                                     2
                                 3.62                   -10
                                                      3.66
        -2                          -3
3.64                             3.65                         11
                                                         3.69 
        -11                           10
3.67                             3.68                            -2
                                                                 
                                         
                                                                 4
                                         

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                Answer Key 989

3.70                       3.711.  8, 8             3.712.  8, 8
                             2.  -18, -18             2.  -22, -22
        -3
        

        3                  3.714.  23, 23           3.75 -29
3.713.  19, 19               2.  3, 3
                                                    3.78 13
  2.  -4, -4               3.77 3
                           3.80 -47                 3.811.  -2
3.76 -26                                              2.  -15
3.79 -69
                                                    3.814.  -19
3.812.  -2                 3.813.  -2                 2.  9
  2.  -7                     2.  36
                                                    3.87 45 degrees Fahrenheit
3.815.  14 - (-23) = 37    3.816.  11 - (-19) = 30
  2.  -17 - 21 = -38         2.  -11 - 18 = -29     3.90 233 feet

3.88 9 degrees Fahrenheit  3.89 10,103 feet         3.913.   -48
                                                      2.     28
3.911.  $48                3.912.  -$54               3.     -63
  2.  -$2                    2.  No, -$5              4.     60
  3.  $18

3.914.   -56               3.915.  -9               3.916.  -8
  2.     54                  2.  17                   2.  16
  3.     -28
  4.     39                3.918.  -9
                             2.  23
3.917.  -7                                          3.919.  -6
  2.  39                   3.101 -63                  2.  36

3.1010.  -28               3.1014.  49              3.102 -84
    2.  52                     2.  -49
                                                    3.105 29
3.1013.  81                3.107 4
    2.  -81                                         3.108 9

3.106 52
990 Answer Key

3.109 21                         3.110 6                   3.111 39
3.112 13                         3.113 -8                  3.114 19
3.115 -5 (12) = -60              3.116 8 (-13) = -104      3.117 -63 ÷ -9 = 7
3.118 -72 ÷ -9 = 8               3.119.  no                3.1210.  no

3.121 -4                             2.  no                     2.  no
3.124 -4                             3.  yes                    3.  yes
3.127 7
3.130 -9                         3.122 -19                 3.123 -6
3.133 p - 2 = -4; p = -2         3.125 4x = 12; x = 3      3.126 3x = 6; x = 2
3.136 117 = -13z; z = -9         3.128 11                  3.129 -12
                                 3.131 x + 7 = -2; x = -9  3.132 y + 11 = 2; y = -9
                                 3.134 q - 7 = -3; q = 4   3.135 132 = -12y; y = -11

Section 3.1 Exercises                                      15..  >
                                                           2.  <
1.                               3.                        3.  <
                                                           4.  >
17..  <                          19..  -2
2.  >                            2.  6                     111..  8
3.  <                                                       2.  -1
4.  >                            15. 15
                                                           117..  -3
13. 4                            211..  7                   2.  3
                                  2.  25
119..  -12;                       3.  0                    213..  32
 2.  12                                                     2.  18
                                 217..  -19                 3.  16
215..  28                         2.  -33
 2.  15                                                    219..  <
                                 33. 4                      2.  =
311..  >
 2.  >                           39. 8                     35. 56
                                 415..  -20
37. 0                             2.  -(-5), or 5          41. 80
                                  3.  -12                  47. -6 degrees
413..  -8                         4.  18-(-7)
 2.  -(-6), or 6
 3.  -3
 4.  4-(-3)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                            Answer Key 991

49. -40 feet                51. -12 yards                       53. $3
55. +1
                            517..  20,320 feet                  519..  $540 million
61. Sample answer: I have   2.  -282 feet                       2.  -$27 billion
      experienced negative
      temperatures.

Section 3.2 Exercises

63.                         65.                                  67.

      11                           -9                                  -2
69.                         71. -80                             73. 32

      1                     77. 0                               79. -22
75. -135                    83. -4                              85. 29
81. 108                     819..  -47                          911..  -4
817..  -18                  2.  16                              2.  10
2.  -87
                            95. -8                              97. 10
913..  -13
2.  5                       101. 121                            103. -14 + 5 = -9
                                                                109. [-1 + (-12)] + 6 = -7
99. 64                      107. -15 + (-10) = -25              115. -$118
105. -2 + 8 = 6                                                 121. 20 feet
111. [10 + (-19)] + 4 = -5  113. 7°F
117. -8 yards
123. -32                    119. 25-yard line

                            125. Sample answer: In the
                                    first case, there are more
                                    negatives so the sum is
                                    negative. In the second
                                    case, there are more
                                    positives so the sum is
                                    positive.
992 Answer Key

Section 3.3 Exercises

127.                             129.                    131.

        6                            -4                          -9
133.                                                        1317..  16
                                 1315..  9
                                   2.  9                      2.  16

        12                       1411..  45              143. 27
1319..  17                         2.  45
                                                         149. -48
  2.  17                         147. -39                155. -51
                                 153. -59                161. -2
145. 29                          159. -2                 167. -20
151. -42                         165. 53                 173. 6
157. 9                           171. 4                  1719..  -3
163. 22                          177. -11
169. 0                                                     2.  -9
175. -8                          183. -8                 185. -192

1811..  3                        1819..  -6 - 9 = -15    1911..  -17 - 8 = -25
  2.  7                            2.  -16 - (-12) = -4    2.  -24 - 37 = -61

1817..  3 - (-10) = 13           195. -10°               197. 96°
  2.  45 - (-20) = 65
                                 201. $65                203. -$40
1913..  6 - 21 = -15             207. 13°                209. Sample answer: On a
  2.  -19 - 31 = -50
                                                                 number line, 9 is 15 units
199. 21-yard line                                                away from -6.
205. $26
                                                         215. 36
Section 3.4 Exercises            213. -35                221. 14
                                 219. -6
211. -32

217. -63

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                               Answer Key 993

223. -4                            225. -8                 227. 13
229. -12                           231. -49                233. -47
235. 43                            237. -125               239. 64
241. -16                           243. 90                 245. -88
247. 9                             249. 41                 251. -5
253. -9                            255. -29                257. 5
2519..  1                          2611..  -5              263. 11

  2.  33                             2.  25                269. -56

265. 21                            267. 38                 275.
271. -3·15 = -45                   273. -60 ÷ (-20) = 3
277. -10 (p - q)                   279. -$3,600            281. Sample answer:
                                                                   Multiplying two integers
                                                                   with the same sign results
                                                                   in a positive product.
                                                                   Multiplying two integers
                                                                   with different signs
                                                                   results in a negative
                                                                   product.

283. Sample answer: In the
        first expression the base
        is positive and after you
        raise it to the power you
        should take the opposite.
        Then in the second
        expression the base is
        negative so you simply
        raise it to the power.

Section 3.5 Exercises              2817..  no              289. n = -7
                                     2.  no
2815..  no                           3.  yes               295. h = 6
  2.  no                                                   301. 3x = 6; x = 2
  3.  yes                                                  307. c = -8
                                                           313. x = 20
291. p = -17                       293. u = -4             319. 8 + p = -3; p = -11
297. x = -16                       299. r = -14            325. -15f = 75; f = -5
303. 2x = 8; x = 4                 305. x = 9
309. p = 3                         311. q = -12
315. z = 0                         317. n + 4 = 1; n = -3
321. a - 3 = -14; a = -11          323. -42 = -7x; x = 6
994 Answer Key                       329. m - 9 = -4; m = 5  3311..  x = 8
                                     335. a = 20               2.  x = 5
327. -6 + c = 4; c = 10              341. r = -9
                                     347. 17 cookies         337. m = 7
3313..  p = -9
  2.  p = 30                                                 343. d = 5
                                                             349. Sample answer: It is
339. u = -52
345. x = -42                                                         helpful because it shows
                                                                     how the counters can be
351. Sample answer: The                                              divided among the
        operation used in the                                        envelopes.
        equation is multiplication.
        The inverse of                                             357.
        multiplication is division,
        not addition.                                        363. >
                                                             3619..  -8
Review Exercises
                                                               2.  8
353.                                 355.                    375. 36

359. <                               361. >                  381. -33
365. -6                              367. 4                  387. 55; -55
                                                             393. -1
3711..  -32                          373. 21                 399. -10°
  2.  32                                                     405. 96
                                     379. 14                 411. 21
377. 0                               385. =                  417. -8 + 2 = -6
383. <                               391. 54
389. 7                               397. -3
395. -16                             403. 1
401. 10                              409. -1
407. -50                             415. -27
4113..  3

  2.  -16

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                  Answer Key 995

419. 10 + [-5 + (-6)] = -1  421. 16 degrees            423.

425.                        427. 8                             5
                                                       429. -38

        7                   433. -1                    4315..  -2
431. -58                                                 2.  -11
                            439. -12 - 5 = -17
437. 41                     445. 121                   441. -2 degrees
443. -36                    451. -45                   447. -7
449. -8                     457. 54                    453. -9
455. -81                    463. -58                   459. 4
461. -66                    469. -12                   465. -12(6) = -72
4617..  no                                             471. -7

  2.  yes                   475. 9                     477. 4
  3.  no                    481. m + 4 = -48; m = -52  483. Answers will vary.

473. 3x = 9; x = 3          4817..  7                  489. 5
479. -6y = -42; y = 7         2.  -8
                                                       495. 54
Practice Test               493. 11                    501. 39
                            499. 22                    507. 4°F
4815..  <                   505. -7 - (-4) = -3        513. y - 8 = -32; y = -24
  2.  >                     511. r = 6

491. -27                    4.2                        4.3
497. -8
503. 34
509. n = -1

Chapter 4

Be Prepared

4.1
996 Answer Key                   4.5 Answers may vary.        4.6

4.4                                    Acceptable answers

4.7                                    include          etc.
4.10
                                 4.8                          4.9
4.13                             4.11                         4.12

4.16                             4.14                                 4.15
4.19                             4.17                         4.18

Try It                           41.2.                        4.3

41.1.                            2. 
2. 
                                 4.5                          4.6
4.4

4.7                              4.8                          4.9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          Answer Key 997

4.10                          4.11          4.12
4.13                            4.14         4.15

4.16                          4.17          4.18

4.19                          4.20          4.21
4.22                          4.23          4.24
4.25 2                        4.26 3        4.27 Correct answers include

4.28 Correct answers include  4.29                             and
                   and           4.32       4.30

4.31                                              4.33

4.34                             4.315.  >     4.316.  >
                                    2.  >         2.  <
4.37                                3.  <         3.  >
4.40                                4.  <         4.  <
4.43
4.46                          4.38          4.39
                              4.41          4.42
4.49                          4.44          4.45
                              4.47          4.48

                              4.50          4.51
998 Answer Key                   4.53     4.54
                                 4.516.   4.517. 
4.52
4.515.  9                          2.       2. 
                                            3. 
  2.  -33a                       4.59       4. 
                                            4.60
4.518. 
  2.                                            4.63 6
  3. 
  4.                                         4.66

4.61 2                           4.62 2   4.69
                                          4.72
4.64 6                           4.65     4.75 -15
                                          4.78
4.67                             4.68     4.81
4.70                             4.71     4.84
4.73 2                           4.74     4.87
4.76                             4.77     4.90
4.79 2                           4.80     4.93
4.82                             4.83     4.96
4.85                             4.86     4.99
4.88                             4.89     4.102 2
4.91                             4.92
4.94                             4.95
4.97                             4.98
4.100                            4.101 4

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Answer Key 999

4.103                       4.104                      4.105

4.106 1                     4.107                      4.108
4.109                       4.110                      4.111
4.112                       4.113                      4.114
4.115 , models may differ.  4.116 , models may differ  4.117
4.118                       4.119                      4.120
4.121                       4.122                      4.123 -1
4.124                       4.125 60                   4.126 15
4.127 96                    4.128 224                  4.129
4.130                       4.131                      4.132
4.133                       4.134                      4.135
4.136                       4.137                      4.138
4.139                       4.140                      4.141
4.142                       4.143                      4.144
4.1415.                     4.1416.                    4.1417. 

    2.                          2.                         2. 
                            4.149                      4.150 272
4.1418. 
    2.                      4.152                      4.1513. 
                                                           2. 
4.151 2                     4.155
                                                       4.156
4.1514.                     4.158
    2.                                                 4.159

4.157
1000 Answer Key                  4.161 5         4.162 5
                                                 4.165
4.160

4.163                            4.164

4.166                            4.167           4.168
4.169                            4.170           4.171
4.172
                                          4.173
4.174
                                 4.175

Access for free at openstax.org
                                      Answer Key 1001

4.176        4.177

4.178        4.179       4.180

4.181        4.182       4.183
4.184        4.185       4.186
4.187        4.188       4.1819.  no

4.1910.  no  4.191           2.  yes
    2.  no                   3.  no
    3.  yes  4.194       4.192
             4.197 -125
4.193 -1     4.200 132   4.195
4.196        4.203 35    4.198 -243
4.199 245    4.206 -108  4.201 -48
4.202 23     4.209       4.204 18
4.205 -91    4.212       4.207
4.208        4.215       4.210
4.211                    4.213

4.214                    4.216
1002 Answer Key

Section 4.1 Exercises

11..                             3.                             5.

2.                                                              11.

3.                                                                117.. 
                                                                   2. 
4.                                                                 3. 
                                                                23.
7.                               9.
                                                                  29.
13.                              15.

119..                            21.

2. 

25.                              27.

31.                              33.                            35.
37.
43.                              39.                            41.
49. 9
                                 45. 4                          47. 9

                                 51. Answers may vary. Correct  53. Answers may vary. Correct
                                       answers include                answers include

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                          Answer Key 1003

55. Answers may vary. Correct 57.              59.
      answers include                           65. <

61.                    63.

67. >                  69. <                   71. <
                       75. Answers will vary.
713..  2                                       81.
2.                                             87.
                                               93.
Section 4.2 Exercises                          99.

77.                    79.

83.                    85.

89.                    91.

95.                    97.

101.                   103.                    105.
107.                   109.                    111.
113.                   115. 9n                 117. 7p
119. -34               121.                    123.
125.                   127.                    129.
131.                   133.                    135. 1
136.
                          137.                    139. 4
1004 Answer Key                        143. 4                   145.

141. 12

147.                             149. 1                   151.
153.                             155.
159.                             161. -12                 157.
165. 9                           167.
                                                          163.

                                                          169.        cups cups

                                                                cups

                                                                 Answers will vary.

171. yard                        173. Answers will vary.  175. Answers will vary.

Section 4.3 Exercises

177.                             179.                     181.
                                                          187.
183.                             185.                     193.
                                                          199.
189. 2                           191. 5                   205.
                                                          211. 28
195.                             197.                     217.
                                                          223.
201.                             203.                     229.
                                                          235.
207.                             209.                     241. -10
                                                          247.
213.                             215.                     253. Answers will vary.

219.                             221.

225.                             227.

231. 2                           233.

237.                             239.

243. -2          cups            245.
                    cups         251. Answers will vary.
2419.. 
  2. 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                               Answer Key 1005

Section 4.4 Exercises

255.                                 257.        259.

261.                                 263.        265.
                                                 271.
267.                                 269.        277.

273.                                 275.                283.

279.                                       281.  289.
                                                 295.
285.                                 287.        301.
                                                 307.
291.                                 293.        313. cup

297.                                 299.        321. 240
                                                 327.
303.                                 305.        333.
                                                 339.
309.                                 311.        345.

315. No, adding up the
        number of pieces gives
            , which is greater than

        1. (Answers may vary.)

Section 4.5 Exercises                319. 48
                                     325. 60
317. 20

323. 245

329.                                 331.

335.                                 337.

341.                                 343.
1006 Answer Key                  349.                 351.
                                 355.                 357.
347.                             361.                 363.
353.                             367.                 369.
359.                             3713..               3715.. 
365.
3711..                             2.                   2. 

  2.                             379.                 381.
3717.. 
                                 385.                 387.
  2.                             391.                 393. 32
383.                             397.                 399.
389.                             403.                 405. -9
395.                             409.                 411.
401.                             415.                 4117.. 
407.
413. 1                           4211..                 2. 
                                   2.                 4213.. 
4119.. 
  2.                             427.                   2. 
                                 433. She needs cups
425.                                                  429. -2
431. 3                                                435. Answers will vary.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                Answer Key 1007

Section 4.6 Exercises

437.                     439.          441.

443. 11                  445.          447.

449.                     451.          453.

455.                     457.          459.
461.                                   465.
467.                     463.          471. 23
473.                                   477.
479.                     469.          483.
485.                                   489.
491. yards               475.          495. Answers will vary.
497. Answers will vary.
                         481.          503.

                         487.          509. z = -1
                                       515.
                         493.  inches

Section 4.7 Exercises    5011..  no
                           2.  yes
4919..  no                 3.  no
  2.  yes
  3.  no

505.                     507. c = -1

511.                     513.
1008 Answer Key                  519. b = -27             521. x = -256
                                 525. s = 45              527. y = -42
517.                             531. p = 100             533. m = -16
523. q = 160                     537. v = 36              539. y = 0
529.                             543.                     545.
535. b = -21                     549.                     551.
541.                             555.                     557.
547.                             561.                     563.
553.                             567.                     569.
559.                             573. Answers will vary.
565.                                                      579.
                                 577.                     585.
571. 30 inches                   583. Answers may vary.

Review Exercises

575.
581.

587. >                           589.                     591.
593.                             595.
599.                             601. -4                  597. 6
605.                             607.                     603. 4
611. 8                           613.
617. 22                          619.                     609.
623.                             625.
629.                             631.                     615.
635. 60                          637. and
641.                             643.                     621.

                                                          627.

                                                          633. 15

                                                          639.     and

                                                          645.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                             Answer Key 1009

647.           649.                 6511.. 
                                      2. 
653.           655.
                                    657.
659.           6611..  no           663.

               2.  yes              669.

               3.  no               677.
                                    683.
665.           667. z = -23         689. 13
                                    695.
671.                                701.

Practice Test  675.                 5.3
               681. -2
673.           687.                 5.6
679. 16u       693. -1              5.9
685. 5         699.                 5.12
691.                                5.15
697. 3                              5.18
703. c = -27                        5.21

Chapter 5

Be Prepared

5.1 Four million, nine hundred 5.2
      twenty-six thousand,
      fifteen

5.4            5.5

5.7            5.8

5.10           5.11

5.13           5.14

5.16           5.17

5.19           5.20
1010 Answer Key

Try It                           51.2.  five and eight tenths    5.3 13.68
                                 2.  three and fifty-seven
51.1.  six and seven tenths
2.  nineteen and fifty-eight           hundredths

      hundredths                 3.  five thousandths
3.  eighteen thousandths         4.  negative thirteen and four
4.  negative two and fifty-
                                       hundred sixty-one
      three thousandths
                                       thousandths

5.4 5.894                        5.5 0.058                       5.6 0.067
                                                                 5.9
51.7.                            51.8. 
2.                               2. 
3.                               3. 

5.10                             5.11                            5.12

5.13.  >                         5.14.  <                        5.15 >
  2.  >                            2.  <
                                                                 5.18 9.17
5.16 >                           5.17 1.05                       5.21 17.6
5.19.  6.58                      5.210.  15.218
                                                                 5.24 23.593
  2.  6.6                          2.  15.22                     5.27 -1.53
  3.  7                            3.  15.2                      5.30 87.6148
                                                                 5.33 0.00348
5.22 33.11                       5.23 16.49                      5.316.  142
5.25 0.42                        5.26 12.58
5.28 -3.58                       5.29 27.4815                      2.  1,420
5.31 -13.427                     5.32 -38.122                      3.  14,200
5.34 0.00603                     5.315.  25.8                    5.39 $0.19
                                                                 5.42 -0.4
5.37 0.07                          2.  258                       5.45 200
5.40 $0.42                         3.  2,580                     5.48 $65.97
5.43 587.3                                                       5.51 $15.47
5.46 350                         5.38 0.08                       5.54 $43.00
5.49 $41.28                      5.41 -0.39
5.52 $14.25                      5.44 34.25
                                 5.47 $16.52
                                 5.50 $48.75
                                 5.53 $5.97

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1011

5.55 0.25                     5.56 0.375                    5.57 -2.25
5.58 -5.5                     5.59                          5.60
5.61 5.275                    5.62 6.35                     5.63 >
5.64 <                        5.65 <                        5.66 >
5.67                          5.68                          5.619.  -183.2

5.710.  -776.25               5.71 11.16                      2.  4.5
  2.  2.2
                                                            5.72 1.51
5.713.  314 in.
  2.  7850 sq. in.            5.714.  628 ft.               5.715.  325.304 cm
                                2.  31,400 sq. ft.            2.  8425.3736 sq. cm
5.716.  165.792 m
  2.  2188.4544 sq. m         5.717.                        5.718. 
                                2.                            2. 
5.719.  no
  2.  yes                     5.810.  yes                   5.81 y = -8
  3.  no                        2.  no
                                3.  no                      5.84 n = 0.83
5.82 y = -8.4                                               5.87 c = 11.7
5.85 b = -12                  5.83 a = 1.07                 5.90 z - 5.7 = 3.4; z = 9.1
5.88 b = 6.48                 5.86 c = -8                   5.93
5.91 -4.3x = 12.04; x = -2.8  5.89 y - 4.9 = 2.8; y = 7.7   5.96 k + 4.7 = 0.3; k = -4.4
5.94                          5.92 -3.1m = 26.66; m = -8.6  5.99 21.5 years
5.97 8.5                                                    5.102 $39.62
5.100 10                      5.95 j + 3.8 = 2.6; j = -1.2  5.105 8.5
5.103 43                                                    5.108 5
5.106 20.5                    5.98 9                        5.111. 
5.109 21                      5.101 $7.19
                              5.104 30                          2. 
5.112.                        5.107 2
    2.                        5.110 5                       5.114. 
                                                                2. 
5.115.                        5.113. 
    2.                            2.                        5.117. 
                                                                2. 
                              5.116. 
                                  2. 
1012 Answer Key

5.118.                           5.119                           5.120
    2. 

5.121                            5.122                           5.123

5.124                            5.125                           5.126

5.127 $18.00/hour                5.128 $19.00/hour               5.129 23.5 mpg

5.130 28 mpg                     5.131 $0.29/box                 5.132 $0.53/bottle

5.133  Brand A costs $0.11 per   5.134  Brand C costs $0.07 per  5.1315.  689 mi/h hours
       bag. Brand B costs $0.13         ounce. Brand D costs         2.  y parents/22 students
       per bag. Brand A is the          $0.09 per ounce. Brand       3.  $d/9 min
       better buy.                      C is the better buy.
                                                                 5.1318.  4
5.1316.  m mi/9 h                5.1317.  6                          2.  14
    2.  x students/8 buses           2.  13
    3.  $y/40 h

5.1319.  -2                      5.1410.  -9                     5.1411.  not a real number
    2.  -15                          2.  -8                          2.  -9

5.1412.  not a real number       5.1413.  7                      5.1414.  17
    2.  -11                          2.  5                           2.  23

5.145                            5.146                           5.147  3.32
5.148  3.61                      5.149 y                         5.150 m
5.151 8x                         5.152 13y                       5.153 -11y
5.154 -10p                       5.155 10ab                      5.156 15mn
5.157 19.2 feet                  5.158 52 centimeters            5.159 9 seconds
5.160 3.5 seconds                5.161 42.7 mph                  5.162 54.1 mph

Section 5.1 Exercises            3. five and one hundredth       5. eight and seventy-one
                                                                     hundredths
1. five and five tenths
                                                                 11. negative seventeen and
7. two thousandths               9. three hundred eighty-one           nine tenths
                                     thousandths
13. 8.03                                                         17. 0.7
19. 0.001                        15. 29.81                       23. -11.0009
25. 13.0395                      21. 0.029
31.                              27.                             29.

                                 33.                             35.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                           Answer Key 1013

37.                     39.                                41.

43.                     45.                                47.

49.                     51.                                53.

55.                     57.                                59. >

61. <                   63. >                              65. >
67. <                   69. <
73. 2.8                 75. 0.85                           71. 0.7
79. 0.30                81. 4.10
                                                           77. 5.79
815..  63.48            817..  $58,966
2.  63.5                2.  $59,000                        813..  5.78
3.  63                  3.  $60,000                        2.  5.8
91. Answers will vary.                                     3.  6
                        93. Tim had the faster time.
                              12.3 is less than 12.32, so  819..  $142.19
                              Tim had the faster time.     2.  $142

Section 5.2 Exercises   97. 170.88                         99. -9.23
                        103. -40.91                        105. -7.22
95. 24.48               109. 35.8                          111. -27.5
101. 49.73              115. 42.51                         117. 102.212
107. -13.5              121. -4.89                         123. 0.12
113. 15.73              127. 42.008                        129. 26.7528
119. 51.31              133. 337.8914                      135. 2.2302
125. 0.144              139. 92.4                          141. 55,200
131. -11.653            145. 0.19                          147. $0.71
137. 1.305              151. 3                             153. -4.8
143. 0.03
149. $2.44
1014 Answer Key

155. 35                          157. 2.08                        159. 150
                                 163. 19.2                        165. 12.09
161. 20                          169. $48.60                      171. 20
                                 175. $17.80                      177. $24.89
167. 32.706                      181. $3.19                       183. 181.7 pounds
                                 187. $296.00                     189. $12.75
173. 2                           193. $18.64                      195. $259.45

179. $29.06                      199. The difference: 0.03
                                         seconds. Three
185. $15.00                              hundredths of a second.

1911..  $3
  2.  $2
  3.  $1.50
  4.  $1.20
  5.  $1

1917..  $243.57
  2.  $79.35

Section 5.3 Exercises            203. -0.375                      205. 0.85
                                 209. -12.4                       211.
201. 0.4                         215.                             217. 7
207. 2.75                        221. 10.58                       223. <
213.                             227. <                           229. <
219. 3.025                       233. >                           235.
225. >
231. >                                                            241.
                                                                  247. 6.15
237.                             239.                             253. 449
                                                                  259. -3.25
243. -187                        245. 295.12                      265. -5.742
249. 20.2                        251. 107.11                      2711..  288.88 cm
255. 9.14                        257. -0.23
261. 16.29                       263. 632.045                       2.  6644.24 sq.cm
2617..  31.4 in                  2619..  56.52.ft.
                                                                  2717.. 
  2.  78.5 sq.in.                  2.  254.34 sq.ft.                2. 

2713..  116.808 m                2715.. 
  2.  1086.3144 sq.m               2. 

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1015

2719..                      281. $56.66              283. Answers will vary.
  2. 
                                                     289. y = 2.8
Section 5.4 Exercises       2817..  no
                              2.  yes                295. c = -4.65
2815..  no                    3.  no                 301. j = -4.68
  2.  no                                             307. c = -5
  3.  yes                                            313. x = 20
                                                     319. x = -0.28
291. f = -0.85              293. a = -7.9            325. x = -6
297. n = 4.4                299. x = -3.5            331.
303. m = -1.42              305. x = 7               337.
309. p = 3                  311. q = -80             343. h = 24
315. z = 2.7                317. a = -8              349.
321. p = 8.25               323. r = 7.2             355. Answers will vary.
327. p = -10                329. m = 8
                                                     361. 245.5
333.                        335.                     367. 19.5 minutes
339. a = -0.8               341. r = -1.45           373. 45
345.                        347. -6.2x = -4.96; 0.8  379. $6.50
351. n + (-7.3) = 2.4; 9.7  353. $104                385. 22
                                                     391.
Section 5.5 Exercises       359. 35                  397.
                            365. $18.84
357. 4                      371. 21
363. 11.65                  377. 99.65
369. 0.329                  383. 2
375. 4.5                    389. 11 units
381. 40.5 months
387. 2 children

393.                        395.

3919..  $285.47             401. Answers will vary.
  2.  $275.63
  3.  $236.25
1016 Answer Key

Section 5.6 Exercises

403.                                405.                                407.

409.                                411.                                413.

415.                                417.                                419.

421.                                423.                                425.

427.                                429.                                431.

433.                                435.                                437.

439. 11.67 calories/ounce           441. 2.73 lbs./sq. in.              443. 69.71 mph

445. $14.88/hour                    447. 32 mpg                         449. 2.69 lbs./week

451. 92 beats/minute                453. 8,000                          455. $1.09/bar

457. $1.33/pair                     459. $0.48/pack                     461. $0.60/disc

463. $1.29/box                      465. The 50.7-ounce size costs      467. The 18-ounce size costs
                                            $0.138 per ounce. The               $0.222 per ounce. The
                                            33.8-ounce size costs               14-ounce size costs
                                            $0.142 per ounce. The               $0.235 per ounce. The
                                            50.7-ounce size is the              18-ounce size is a better
                                            better buy.                         buy.

469. The regular bottle costs       471. The half-pound block           473.
        $0.075 per ounce. The
        squeeze bottle costs              costs $6.78/lb, so the 1-lb.
        $0.069 per ounce. The
        squeeze bottle is a better        block is a better buy.
        buy.

475.                                477.                                479.

481. 15.2 students per teacher      4813..  72 calories/ounce           485. Answers will vary.
                                      2.  3.87 grams of fat/ounce
                                      3.  5.73 grams carbs/ounce
                                      4.  3.33 grams protein/
                                            ounce

487. Kathryn should swim for
        approximately 16.35
        minutes. Explanations will
        vary.

Section 5.7 Exercises               491. 8                              493. -2
                                    497. not a real number              499. not a real number
489. 6

495. -1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                             Answer Key 1017

501. 5                       503. 7                             505.
507.
513. y                       509. 4.36                          511. 7.28
519. 12xy
525. 15.8 seconds            515. 7x                            517. -8a
531. 45 inches
                             521. 8.7 feet                      523. 8 seconds

                             527. 72 mph                        529. 53.0 mph

                             533. Answers will vary. 92
                                     reads: "nine squared" and
                                     means nine times itself.
                                     The expression reads:
                                     "the square root of nine"
                                     which gives us the
                                     number such that if it
                                     were multiplied by itself
                                     would give you the
                                     number inside of the
                                     square root.

Review Exercises             537. five and twenty-four          539. negative four and nine
                                     hundredths                         hundredths
535. three hundred seventy-
        five thousandths     543. 10.035                        545. -0.05
                             549.
541. 0.09                                                       551. <
547.                         5515..  12.53
553. <                         2.  12.5                         5517..  5.90
                               3.  13                             2.  5.9
559. 24.67                                                        3.  6
565. -1.6                    561. 24.831
571. 4                       567. 15,400                        563. -2.37
577. $1.79                   573. 200                           569. 0.18
583.                         579. 0.875                         575. $28.22
589. >                                                          581. -5.25
595. 1.975                   585. >
                             591.                               587. >
                                                                593. 6.03
                             597. -0.22
                                                                5919..  21.98 ft.
6011..  34.54 cm             6013..  no                           2.  38.465 sq.ft.
  2.  94.985 sq.cm             2.  yes
                                                                6015..  no
607. h = -3.51               609. p = 2.65                        2.  yes

                                                                611. j = 3.72
1018 Answer Key

613. x = -4                       615. a = -7.2                617. s = 25
619. -5.9x = -3.54; x = 0.6       621. m + (-4.03) = 6.8; m =  623. $269.10
                                                               629. 16 clients
625. $40.94                               10.83                635.
631. 2                            627. 24.5                    641.
637.                              633.                         647. 12 pounds/sq.in.
643.                              639.                         653. $1.65
649. $17.50/hour                  645.                         659.
655. $0.11, $0.12; 60 tablets     651. $0.42                   665. not a real number
                                  657.                         671. 7.55
        for $6.49                                              677. 7y
661. 12                           663. -9                      683. 72 mph
667. 17                           669.
673. 8b                           675. 15mn                    689. 18.42
679. 11cd                         681. 5.5 feet
                                                               695. 2
Practice Test                     6817..  16.7                 701. -1.2
                                    2.  16.75                  7017..  52.1
685.                                3.  17
                                                                 2.  51.5
691. 0.192                        693. -0.08                     3.  55
697. 200                                                       713. 15 feet
703. 8.8                          699. 1.975
                                                               6.3
                                  705. $26.45                  6.6

709. The unit prices are $0.172   711. 12n
        per ounce for 64 ounces,
        and $0.177 per ounce for
        48 ounces; 64 ounces is
        the better buy.

Chapter 6

Be Prepared

6.1                               6.2

6.4                               6.5

Access for free at openstax.org
                                               Answer Key 1019

6.7            6.8              6.9
6.10           6.11             6.12

               6.2              6.3
6.13           61.5.            61.6. 
               2.               2. 
Try It
               61.8.            61.9.  0.09
6.1            2.               2.  0.87
6.4
               6.11.  1.15      6.12.  1.23
61.7.            2.  0.235        2.  0.168
2. 
               6.14.            6.15. 
6.10.  0.03      2.               2. 
  2.  0.91
               6.17.  1%        6.18.  4%
6.13.            2.  17%          2.  41%
  2. 
               6.210.  225%     6.211.  62.5%
6.16.            2.  9.25%        2.  275%
  2.                              3.  340%
               6.23 42.9%
6.19.  175%                     6.24 57.1%
  2.  8.25%    6.26
               6.29 117         6.27 36
6.212.  87.5%  6.32 64          6.30 126
  2.  225%     6.35 75%         6.33 $26
  3.  160%     6.38 175%        6.36 80%
               6.41 24.1 grams  6.39 $14.67
6.25           6.44 37%         6.42 2,375 mg
6.28 33        6.47 6.3%        6.45 8.8%
6.31 68                         6.48 10%
6.34 $36
6.37 125%
6.40 $2.16
6.43 26%
6.46 50%
1020 Answer Key

6.419.  $45.25                   6.510.  $20.50  6.51 9%
  2.  $769.25                      2.  $270.50
                                                 6.54 $394.20
6.52 7.5%                        6.53 $273       6.57 $450
6.55 4%                          6.56 5.5%       6.610.  $256.75
6.58 $82                         6.519.  $11.60
                                                    2.  $138.25
6.611.  $184.80                    2.  $17.40    6.613.  $600
  2.  33%
                                 6.612.  $60        2.  $1,800
6.614.  $2,975                     2.  15%       6.66 $56
  2.  $11,475
                                 6.65 $160       6.69 4.5%
6.67 $2,750                                      6.72 $7,020
6.70 6.5%                        6.68 $3,560     6.75 $11,450
6.73 6%                          6.71 $142.50    6.78 $143.50
6.76 $9,600                      6.74 4%         6.811.  no
6.719.                           6.77 $57.00
                                 6.810.             2.  yes
  2. 
  3.                               2.            6.84 104
                                   3. 
6.812.  no                                       6.87 -7
  2.  no                         6.83 77         6.90 180 mg
                                                 6.93 590 Euros
6.85 65                          6.86 24         6.96
6.88 -9                          6.89 12 ml      6.99
6.91 300                         6.92 5 pieces   6.102
6.94 56,460 yen                  6.95            6.105
                                 6.98            6.108
6.97                             6.101
                                 6.104           15.. 
6.100                            6.107           2. 

6.103

6.106

Section 6.1 Exercises

1.                               3.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                          Answer Key 1021

17..                          9.          11.
2. 
                              15.         17.
13.                           21.         23.
19.                           27. 0.01    29. 0.63
25. 0.05                      33. 1.15    35. 1.5
31. 0.4                       39. 0.078   411.. 
37. 0.214                                 2. 
                                          417.. 
413..                         415..       2. 
2.                            2.          53. 135%
                                          59. 8.75%
49. 1%                        51. 18%     65. 25%
55. 300%                      57. 0.9%    71. 680%
61. 150%                      63. 225.4%  77. 42.9%
67. 37.5%                     69. 175%    83. 35%
                                          89.
73.                           75.

79.                           81. 25%

85. Fraction Decimal Percent  817.. 
                              2. 

91. 80%; 0.8                  93.         95. The Szetos sold their home
                                                for five times what they
Section 6.2 Exercises         99. 26.88         paid 30 years ago.
                              105. 112
97. 54                        111. $940   101. 162.5
103. 18,000                   117. 150%   107. 108
109. $35                                  113. 30%
115. 36%                                  119. 175%
1022 Answer Key

121. $11.88                        123. $259.80                           125. 24.2 grams
127. 2,407 mg
133. 13.2%                         129. 45%                               131. 25%
139. 2.5%
145. 21.2%                         135. 125%                              137. 72.7%

                                   141. 11%                               143. 5.5%

                                   147. The original number               149. Alex should have packed
                                           should be greater than                 half as many shorts and
                                           44.80% is less than 100%,              twice as many shirts.
                                           so when 80% is converted
                                           to a decimal and
                                           multiplied to the base in
                                           the percent equation, the
                                           resulting amount of 44 is
                                           less. 44 is only the larger
                                           number in cases where
                                           the percent is greater
                                           than 100%.

Section 6.3 Exercises              1513..  $9.68                          1515..  $17.13
                                     2.  $138.68                            2.  $267.13
1511..  $4.20
  2.  $$88.20

1517..  $61.45                     159. 6.5%                              161. 6.85%
  2.  $1,260.45

163. $20.25                        165. $975                              167. $859.25

169. 3%                            171. 16%                               173. 15.5%

175. $139                          176. $81                               177. $125

1719..  $26.97                     1811..  $128.37                        1813..  $332.48
  2.  $17.98                         2.  $260.63                            2.  $617.47

1815..  $576                       1817..  $53.25                         1819..  $370
  2.  30%                            2.  15%                                2.  43.5%

1911..  $7.20                      1913..  $0.20                          1915..  $258.75
  2.  $23.20                         2.  $0.80                              2.  $373.75

1917..  $131.25                    1919..  Priam is correct. The
  2.  $126.25                              original price is 100%. Since
  3.  25% off first, then $20 off          the discount rate was 40%,
                                           the sale price was 60% of
                                           the original price.

                                     2.  Yes.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                          Answer Key 1023

Section 6.4 Exercises            203. $14,000                    205. 6.3%
                                 209. $579.96                    211. $14,167
201. $180                        215. $860                       217. $24,679.91
207. $90                         221. 5.5%                       223. $116
213. $3,280                      227. 3%                         229. 3.75%
219. 4%                          233. $3,345                     235. $332.10
225. $4,836                      239. Answers will vary.         241. Answers will vary.
231. $35,000
237. $195.00

Section 6.5 Exercises

243.                             245.                            247.
                                                                 253.
249.                             251.                            259. no
                                                                 265. z = 7
255. yes                         257. no                         271. a = 7
261. yes                                                         277. m = 4
267. a = 9                       263. x = 49                     283. 159 cal
273. c = 2
279. 9 ml                        269. p = -11                    289. 0.8 Euros
                                                                 295. 12.8 hours
285.                             275. j = 0.6                    301.
                                                                 307.
                                 281. 114 beats/minute. Carol    313.
                                         has not met her target  319.
                                         heart rate.             325.

                                 287. $252.50

291. 48 quarters                 293. 19 gallons, $58.71
297. 4 bags                      299.

303.                             305.

309.                             311.

315.                             317.

321.                             323.

327. He must add 20 oz of        329. Answers will vary.
        water to obtain a final
        solution of 32 oz.
1024 Answer Key                  333.               335.
                                 339. 0.06          341. 1.28
Review Exercises                 3415..             347. 4%

331.                               2.               353. 75%
337.                             351. 0.3%          359. 161
3413..                           357. 40%           365. 68%
                                 363. 25            371. 4%
  2.                             369. 28.4%         377. $11,400
                                 375. 7.25%
349. 282%                                           3813..  $25.47
355. 362.5%                      381. $45             2.  $59.43
361. 240
367. $16.70                      3817..  $0.48      389. $450
3713..  $45                        2.  $1.28
                                                    395. 2.5%
  2.  $795                       393. $900          401. yes
                                 399.               407. 4
379. 15%                         405. 20            413. 13 gallons
                                 411. 340 calories  419.
3815..  $13                      417.
  2.  26%                                           427.
                                 425.               433. 11.9%
391. $4400                       431. 40            439. 6.25%
397.                             437. $70
403. no                                             7.3
409. 12 ml                       7.2
415.
421.

Practice Test

423.
429. 25%
435. 4%
441. -52

Chapter 7

Be Prepared

7.1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                       Answer Key 1025

7.4                          7.5                             7.6
7.7                          7.8                             7.9
7.10                         7.11                            7.12
                             7.14                            7.15
7.13
                             71.2.                           71.3.  rational
Try It                       2.                              2.  rational
                                                             3.  irrational
71.1.                        71.5.  rational
2.                           2.  irrational                  71.6.  irrational
                                                             2.  rational
71.4.  rational              7.8
2.  rational                                                 71.9.  -4 + 7 = 7 + (-4)
3.  irrational                                                2.  6 · 12 = 12 · 6

7.7

7.10.  14 + (-2) = -2 + 14   7.11.                                  7.12. 
  2.  3(-5) = (-5)3            2.                                     2. 

7.13 8(4x) = (8 · 4)x = 32x  7.14 -9(7y) = (-9 · 7)y = -63y  7.15.  0.84
                                                               2.  0.84
7.16.  0.975                 7.17.  24
  2.  0.975                    2.  24                        7.18.  15
                                                               2.  15
7.19 -48a                    7.20 -92x
7.22                         7.23                            7.21
7.25 15.58c                  7.26 17.79d                     7.24
7.28 70.4                    7.29 24y                        7.27 10.53
                                                             7.30 60z
1026 Answer Key                  7.32 41m + 6n                  7.33 4x + 8
                                 7.35 27y + 72                  7.36 25w + 45
7.31 32r - s                     7.38 8x - 40                   7.39
7.34 6x + 42
7.37 7x - 42                     7.41 5y + 3                    7.42 4n + 9
                                 7.44 4 + 35d                   7.45 rs - 2r
7.40                             7.47 xp + 2p                   7.48 yq + 4q
7.43 70 + 15p                    7.50 -48n - 66                 7.51 -10 + 15a
7.46 yz - 8y                     7.53 -z + 11                   7.54 -x + 4
7.49 -18m - 15                   7.56 2x - 20                   7.57 5x - 66
7.52 -56 + 105y                  7.519.  120                    7.610.  126
7.55 -3x + 3
7.58 7x - 13                       2.  120                        2.  126

7.611.  30                       7.612.  3                      7.613.  -32
  2.  30                           2.  3                          2.  -32

7.614.  -45                      7.615.   identity property of  7.616.   identity property of
  2.  -45                          2.    addition                 2.    multiplication

7.617.                                    identity property of           identity property of
  2.                                     multiplication                 addition
  3. 
                                 7.618.                         7.619. 
7.710.                             2. 
  2.                                                              2. 
  3.                               3.                             3. 

7.713.  0                        7.711.  0                      7.712.  0
  2.  0                            2.  0                          2.  0
  3.  0                            3.  0                          3.  0

7.716.  undefined                7.714.  0                      7.715.  undefined
  2.  undefined                    2.  0                          2.  undefined
  3.  undefined                    3.  0                          3.  undefined

7.79 p                           7.77 9                         7.78 -18
7.82 0
7.85 20y + 50                    7.80 r                         7.81 0
7.88 54 feet                     7.83 undefined                 7.84 undefined
                                 7.86 12z + 16                  7.87 2.5 feet
                                 7.89 8600 pounds               7.90 102,000,000 pounds

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                   Answer Key 1027

7.91 440,000,000 yards             7.92 151,200 minutes          7.93 16 cups
7.94 48 teaspoons                  7.95 9 lbs. 8 oz              7.96 21 ft. 6 in.
7.97 4 lbs. 8 oz.                  7.98 11 gal. 2 qts.           7.99 5000 m
7.100 250 cm                       7.101 2.8 kilograms           7.102 4.5 kilograms
7.1013.  0.00725 kL                7.1014.  35,000 L             7.105 83 cm

    2.  6300 mL                        2.  410 cL                7.108 2.4 kg
                                                                 7.111 19,328 ft
7.106 1.04 m                       7.107 2 L                     7.114 5°C
7.109 2.12 quarts                  7.110 3.8 liters
7.112 3,470 mi                     7.113 15°C
7.115 59°F                         7.116 50°F

Section 7.1 Exercises              13..                          5. Rational:         .
                                   2. 
11..                                                             Irrational:
2. 

7. Rational: , .                   19..  rational                111..  irrational
    Irrational:                    2.  irrational                2.  rational

13.                                 15.                           117..  4
                                                                   2.  Teachers cannot be

                                                                        divided
                                                                   3.  It would result in a lower

                                                                        number.

19. Answers will vary.

Section 7.2 Exercises              23. 7(-13) = (-13)7           25. (-12)(-18) = (-18)(-12)
                                   29. y + 1 = 1 + y             31. -3m = m(-3)
21. 7 + 6 = 6 + 7                  35. (14 · 6) · 9 = 14(6 · 9)  37. (-2 + 6) + 7 = -2 + (6 + 7)
27. -15 + 7 = 7 + (-15)
33. (21 + 14) + 9 = 21 + (14 + 9)
1028 Answer Key                  41. 4(7x) = (4 · 7)x    43. (17 + y) + 33 = 17 + (y + 33)
                                 417..  2.375            419..  21
39.                              2.  2.375               2.  21
                                 53. 23                  55.
415..  0.97
2.  0.97                         59.                     61. -176
                                 65.                     67. 9.89d
511..  -8                        71. 29.193              73. 72w
2.  -8                           77. 12q                 79. 42u + 30v
                                 83.                     85. 7.41m + 6.57n
57.                              89. Answers will vary.
                                                         95. 7y - 91
63.                                                      101.
                                                         107. uv - 10u
69. 36                                                   113. -81a - 36
                                                         119. -q - 11
75. -46n                                                 125. -4x + 10
                                                         131. -c + 6
81. -57p + (-10q)                                        137. 24x + 4
                                                         1413..  56
817..  $975
2.  $700                                                   2.  56
3.  $1675                                                1419..  -525
4.  $185
5.  $270                                                   2.  -525
6.  $1220                                                1515..  3(4 - 0.03) = 11.91

Section 7.3 Exercises            93. 27w + 63              2.  $1.42
                                 99.
91. 3a + 27                      105. 2 + 9s
97. 35u - 20                     111. -3a - 33
103. 3x - 4                      117. -42x + 48
109. ax + 7x                     123. 8u + 4
115. -4q + 28                    129. -r + 15
121. -5p + 4                     135. 47u + 60
127. -42n + 39                   141. 17n + 76
133. 3y + 1
139. 6n - 72

1415..                           1417..  -89
  2.                               2.  -89

1511..  160                      1513..  -1.03
  2.  160                          2.  -1.03

Access for free at openstax.org
157. Answers will vary.                                                                                         Answer Key 1029

Section 7.4 Exercises      161. identity property of  163.
                                   addition
159. identity property of                             169.
        multiplication     167.                       175. 0
                                                      181. 0
165.                                                  187. 16
                                                      193. 2n
171.                       173. -2                    199. 0
                                                      205. undefined
177. 0                     179. undefined             2111..  8 hours
183. 0                     185. undefined
189. 31s                   191. p                       2.  8
195. 0                     197. 0                       3.  associative property of
201. undefined             203. undefined
207. 20q - 35              209. 225h + 360                    multiplication

213. Answers will vary.                               219. 58 inches
                                                      225. 300,000 pounds
Section 7.5 Exercises      217. 3.75 feet             231. 8100 seconds
                           223. 0.98 miles            237. 111 ounces
215. 24 inches             229. 162 hours             243. 5 weeks and 1 day
221. 90 feet               235. 128 ounces            249. 8000 meters
227. 110 tons              241. 4 lbs. 1 oz.          255. 3000 milligrams
233. 256 tablespoons       247. 8 yards               261. 0.3 liters
239. 31.25 gallons         253. 10.911 kilometers     267. 16.8 grams
245. 9 ft 2 in             259. 3800 grams            273. 8.2 meters
251. 245 centimeters       265. 1.82 kilograms        279. 33 pounds
257. 25,000 milligrams     271. 106.7 centimeters     285. -10°C
263. 65 centimeters        277. 5.2 feet              291. 77°F
269. 42,000 milligrams     283. 25°C
275. 40,900 kilograms      289. 48.9°C
281. 30.2 liters
287. -15.6°C
1030 Answer Key                  295. 46.4°F                       297. 60.8°F

293. 5°F                         305.                              307.
299. 110 reflectors                                                  313. -14·5 = 5(-14)
                                 3111.. 
Review Exercises                   2. 
                                   3. 
303.
3019..  irrational                 4.  none
                                   5. 
  2.  rational
                                 317. (22 + 7) + 3 = 22 + (7 + 3)  319.
315. a + 8 = 8 + a               3213..  13                        325.
3211..  5.39
                                   2.  13                          331. 25 q
  2.  5.39                                                         337. 56a + 96
327. -60                         329. 5.98 d                       3413..  9
333. 34 m + (-25 n)              335. 9y - 36
339. yp + 10p                    341. -4x + 68                       2.  9

3415..  36                       347. identity property of         349. identity property of
  2.  36                                 addition                          multiplication

351. -19.4                       353.                              355.
357.                             359. 0                            361. 0
363. n + 7                       365. 34                           367. 54x - 84
369. 3.5 feet                    371. 15 yards                     373. 9000 pounds
375. 64 tablespoons              377. 1.9 gallons                  379. 7 hours 10 minutes
381. 3 yards, 12 inches          383. 8.85 kilometers              385. 13,000 milligrams
387. 0.65 liters                 389. 855 milliliters              391. 10,000 milligrams
393. 25.6 meters                 395. 171.6 pounds                 397. 11.4 kilograms
399. -5°C                        401. 17.8°C                       403. 23°F
405. 75.2°F

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                    Answer Key 1031

Practice Test                       409. x·14 = 14·x                   411. (8·2)·5 = 8·(2·5)
                                415. 15y                           417.
407.
4113..                          421. 30x - 24                      423. 2a + 3
                                427. 0                             429. 0
  2.                            433. 9.317 miles                   435. 95°F

419. 30y - 4z                   8.2                                8.3 yes
425. 66p - 2                    8.5                                8.6
431. .276 grams                 8.8                                8.9
                                8.11                               8.12
Chapter 8

Be Prepared

8.1
8.4

8.7
8.10

Try It                          8.2 no                             8.3 x = -16
                                8.5 n = -1                         8.6 x = -4
8.1 no                          8.8                                8.9 b = 6.4
8.4 x = -20                     8.11 y = 15
8.7                             8.14 q = -16                       8.12 z = 2
8.10 c = 14                     8.17 x + 11 = 41; x = 30           8.15 h = -1
8.13 p = 5                      8.20 7a - 6a = -8; a = -8          8.18 y - 12 = 51; y = 63
8.16 x = 1                                                         8.21 a + 6 = 13; Athena weighs
8.19 4x - 3x = 14; x = 14
                                                                           7 pounds.
8.22 26 + h = 68; Henry has 42  8.23 19,875 = s - 1025; the        8.24 7.75 = n - 3.25; the price
        books.                          sticker price is $20,900.
                                                                           at night is $11.00.
8.25 y = -16                    8.26 z = -13                       8.27 b = 144
8.28 c = 128                    8.29 k = -8                        8.30 g = -3
8.31 n = 35                     8.32 y = 18                        8.33 x = 2
                                                                   8.36
8.34 n = -5                     8.35 c = -3                        8.39 x = -4

8.37 n = -6                     8.38 n = -5
1032 Answer Key

8.40 a = -8                      8.41 y = 5                8.42 m = 9
8.43 n = 10                      8.44 c = 1                8.45 p = -7
8.46 m = -3                      8.47 j = 2                8.48 h = 1
8.49 x = -1                      8.50 y = 4                8.51 q = 1
8.52 n = 1                       8.53 a = -5               8.54 k = -6
8.55 x = 10                      8.56 y = -3               8.57 x = -5
8.58 y = -5                      8.59 x = 4                8.60 y = 1
8.61 y = -6                      8.62 z = 8                8.63 a = 2
8.64 n = 2                       8.65                      8.66
8.67 p = -2                      8.68 q = -8               8.69 u = 2
8.70 x = 4                       8.71 n = 1                8.72 m = -1
8.73                             8.74 y = 3                8.75 v = 40
8.76 u = -12                     8.77 a = -2               8.78 c = -2
8.79 p = -4                      8.80 q = 2                8.81 n = 2
8.82 m = -1                      8.83 x = 20               8.84 x = 10
8.85 h = 12                      8.86 k = -1               8.87 n = 9
8.88 d = 16
                                                           5. x = 5
Section 8.1 Exercises            3. no                     11. a = 10
                                 9. p = -11.7              17. x = -27
1. yes                           15. y = 13.8              23. m = 17
7.                               21.                       29. y = 2
13.                              27. n = -20               35. m = -4
19.                              33. x = -2                41. y = 28
25. x = 8                        39. c = -41               47. p + 8 = 52; p = 44
31. w = -1.7                     45. y - 3 = -19; y = -16  53. -9m + 10m = -25; m = -25
37. k = 6                        51.
43. x + (-5) = 33; x = 38
49. 5c - 4c = 60; c = 60

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                     Answer Key 1033

55. Let p equal the number of        57. Let d equal the daughter's   59. 21 pounds
      pages read in the                    age. d = 12 - 5. Eva's     65.
      Psychology book. 41 + p =            daughter's age is 7 years
      54. Jeff read 13 pages in his        old.
      Psychology book.

61. 100.5 degrees                    63. $121.19

67. Answers will vary.

Section 8.2 Exercises                71. x = 3                        73. y = -6
                                     77. a = 15                       79. x = 0
69. p = 9                            83. c = 36                       85. q = -48
75. m = 7                            89. r = 25                       91. x = -32
81. z = 28                           95. y = -1                       97. m = -5
87. p = 80                                                            103. p = 56
93.                                                                   109. 42 yards

99.                                  101. q = 24

105. 6 children                      107. $1.08
111. Answer will vary.

Section 8.3 Exercises                115. y = 6                       117. m = -8
                                     121. x = -4                      123. q = -2
113. x = 6                           127. x = 9                       129. b = -3
119. b = -8                          133.                             135. r = -2
125. k = -11                         139. f = 7                       141. q = -5
131. z = 3                           145. x = 2                       147. y = 4
137. x = 19                          151. a = 7                       153. a = -40
143. c = -4                          157. z = 3.46                    159. w = 60
149. m = -6                          163. y = 9                       165. x = 6
155. p = 15                          169. n = -2                      171. p = -1
161. x = 23                          175. v = 1                       177. m = 0.25
167. y = 3                           181. b = 2                       183. m = 6
173. x = 5                           187. r = 3                       189. y = -4
179. t = -9
185.
1034 Answer Key

191. n = 2                       193. x = 34               195. s = 10
197.                             199. 30 feet              201. 8 nickels
203. Answers will vary.          205. Answers will vary.   207. Answers will vary.

Section 8.4 Exercises            211. y = -1               213.
                                                           219. x = -3
209. x = -1                                                225. b = 12
                                                           231.
215. x = 4                       217. m = 20               237. x = 18
221.                             223. x = 1                243. n = 9
                                                           249. d = 18
227. x = 1                       229. p = -41
                                                           259. 12
233. y = 10                      235. j = 2                265.
239. x = 18                      241. x = 20               271. y = 4
245. d = 8                       247. q = 11               277. s = 11 - 3; 8 years old
251. Answers will vary.          253. Answers will vary.   283. p = 21
                                                           289. m = 4
Review Exercises                 257. no                   295. p = 5
                                 263. u = 17               301. k = -5
255. yes                         269.                      307. x = -2
261.                             275. -6 + m = 25; m = 31  313. r = 38
267. n = 44                      281. x = 9                319.
273. n = -8                      287. x = 48
279. c - 46.25 = 9.75; $56.00    293. r = 3
285. n = 108                     299. y = -13
291. x = 15                      305. u = -7
297. x = -22                     311. y = 12
303. x = 6                       317. n = 2
309. s = -22                     323. p = -20
315. y = 26
321. x = 5

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                           Answer Key 1035

Practice Test                 327. c = 16                   329. x = -5

3215..  yes                   333. y = 4                    335. m = 6
  2.  no                      339. x = -2                   341.

331. x = 9                    9.2                           9.3
337. d = -32                                                9.6
                              9.5                           9.9
343. 2x - 4 = 16; x = 10                                    9.12
                              9.8                           9.15
Chapter 9
                              9.11                          9.18
Be Prepared
                              9.14 (a)     ; (b)            9.21
9.1
9.4                                        .                9.3 2
9.7                                                         9.6 $4,200
9.10                          9.17                          9.9 3
9.13                                                        9.12 27, 31
                              9.20                          9.15 -4, 0
9.16                                                        9.18 -15, -16
                                                            9.21 9 nickels, 16 dimes
                                                            9.24 51 dimes, 17 quarters
9.19                                                        9.27 330 day passes, 367

Try It                        9.2 40                                tournament passes
                              9.5 $950                      9.30 26 at 49 cents, 10 at 21
9.1 $180                      9.8 4
9.4 7                         9.11 9, 15                            cents
9.7 25                        9.14 -29, 11
9.10 6                        9.17 47, 48
9.13 -8, -15                  9.20 -11, -12, -13
9.16 -2, -3                   9.23 42 nickels, 21 dimes
9.19 31, 32, 33               9.26 22 nickels, 59 dimes
9.22 17 nickels, 5 quarters
9.25 41 nickels, 18 quarters  9.29 32 at 49 cents, 12 at 8
                                      cents
9.28 112 adult tickets, 199
        senior/child tickets
1036 Answer Key

9.311.  155°                     9.312.  103°          9.33 40°, 140°
  2.  65°                          2.  13°
                                                       9.36 56°
9.34 25°, 65°                    9.35 21°              9.39 20°, 70°, 90°
                                                       9.42 22.5
9.37 34°                         9.38 45°              9.45 8
                                                       9.48 8 feet
9.40 30°, 60°, 90°               9.41 8                9.511.  8 inches

9.43 10                          9.44 17                 2.  3 sq. inches

9.46 12                          9.47 12 feet          9.514.  220 ft
                                                         2.  2976 sq. ft
9.419.   cubic                   9.510.   cubic
  2.     linear                    2.     square       9.57 18 m, 11 m
  3.     square                    3.     cubic        9.60 5 cm, 4 cm
  4.     linear                    4.     linear       9.63 30 ft, 70 ft
  5.     square                    5.     square       9.66 49 sq. in.
  6.     cubic                     6.     linear       9.69 14 in.
                                                       9.72 17 cm
9.512.  8 centimeters            9.513.  340 yd        9.75 161 sq. yd
  2.  4 sq. centimeters            2.  6000 sq. yd     9.78 63 sq. m
                                                       9.811.  31.4 in.
9.55 15 in.                      9.56 9 yd
9.58 11 ft , 19 ft               9.59 8 ft, 24 ft        2.  78.5 sq. in.
9.61 26 ft                       9.62 29 m             9.84 37.68 ft
9.64 60 yd, 90 yd                9.65 13 sq. in.
9.67 8 ft                        9.68 6 ft             9.87 28 sq. units
9.70 6 ft                        9.71 13 in.           9.90 70 sq. units
9.73 14 ft                       9.74 7 m              9.913.  792 cu. ft
9.76 225 sq. cm                  9.77 42 sq. cm
9.79 40.25 sq. yd                9.80 240 sq. ft         2.  518 sq. ft
                                                       9.916.  2,772 cu. in.
9.812.  28.26 ft                 9.83 17.27 ft
  2.  63.585 sq. ft                                      2.  1,264 sq. in.
                                 9.86 110 ft
9.85 30 cm                       9.89 36.5 sq. units
9.88 110 sq. units               9.92 38.24 sq. units
9.91 103.2 sq. units

9.914.  1,440 cu. ft             9.915.  216 cu. ft
  2.  792 sq. ft                   2.  228 sq. ft

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                                  Answer Key 1037

9.917.  91.125 cu. m             9.918.  389.017 cu. yd.        9.919.  64 cu. ft
  2.  121.5 sq. m                  2.  319.74 sq. yd.             2.  96 sq. ft

9.1010.  4,096 cu. in.           9.1011.  113.04 cu. cm         9.1012.  4.19 cu. ft
    2.  1536 sq. in.                 2.  113.04 sq. cm              2.  12.56 sq. ft

9.1013.  3052.08 cu. in.         9.1014.  14.13 cu. ft          9.1015.  351.68 cu. cm
    2.  1017.36 sq. in.              2.  28.26 sq. ft               2.  276.32 sq. cm

9.1016.  100.48 cu. ft           9.1017.  3,818.24 cu. cm       9.1018.  91.5624 cu. ft
    2.  125.6 sq. ft                 2.  1,356.48 sq. cm            2.  113.6052 sq. ft

9.109 65.94 cu. in.              9.110 235.5 cu. cm             9.111 678.24 cu. in.
9.112 128.2 cu. in.                                             9.114 7 mi
9.115 11 hours                   9.113 330 mi                   9.117. 

9.118.                           9.116 56 mph                       2. 
    2. 
                                 9.119                          9.1210. 
9.1211.                                                             2. 
    2.                           9.1212. 
                                     2.                         9.1213. 
9.1214.                                                             2. 
    2.                           9.125 b = P - a - c
                                                                9.126 c = P - a - b
9.127 y = 11 - 7x                9.128 y = 8 - 11x
                                                                9.129
9.130

Section 9.1 Exercises            3. Zachary has 125 CDs.        5. There are 6 boys in the club.

1. There are 30 children in the  9. Lisa's original weight was  11. 18%
    class.                           175 pounds.
                                                                17. 15
7. There are 17 glasses.         15. 4
                                                                23. -5
13. The original price was       21. 12                         29. -2, -3
      $120.                      27. 8, 12                      35. 38, 39
                                 33. 32, 46                     41. -11, -12, -13
19. 5                            39. 25, 26, 27
25. 18, 24
31. 4, 10
37. -11, -12
1038 Answer Key

43. The original price was $45.  45. Each sticker book cost        47. The price of the
                                       $1.25.                            refrigerator before tax was
                                                                         $1,080.

49. Answers will vary.

Section 9.2 Exercises            53. 15 dimes, 8 quarters          55. 12 dimes and 27 nickels

51. 8 nickels, 22 dimes          59. 10 of the $1 bills, 7 of the  61. 10 of the $10 bills, 5 of the
57. 63 dimes, 20 quarters              $5 bills                          $5 bills

63. 16 nickels, 12 dimes, 7      65. 30 child tickets, 50 adult    67. 110 child tickets, 50 adult
      quarters                         tickets                           tickets

69. 40 postcards, 100 stamps     71. 30 at 49 cents, 10 at 21      73. 15 at $10 shares, 5 at $12
                                       cents                             shares
75. 9 girls, 3 adults
                                 77. Answers will vary.            79. Answers will vary.

Section 9.3 Exercises            813..  151°                       85. 45°
                                 2.  61°
811..  127°                                                        91. 62°, 28°
2.  37°                                                            97. 57°
                                                                   103. 30°, 60°, 90°
87. 62.5°                        89. 62°, 118°                     109. 15
93. 56°                          95. 44°                           115. 12
99. 67.5°                        101. 45°, 45°, 90°                121. 5 feet
105. 12                          107. 351 miles                    127. Answers will vary.
111. 25                          113. 8
117. 10.2                        119. 8
123. 14.1 feet                   125. 2.9 feet

Section 9.4 Exercises            131. square                       133. linear
                                                                   1319..  10 cm
129. cubic                       1317..  8 cm
                                   2.  3 sq. cm                      2.  5 sq. cm
1315..  10 cm                                                      145. 24 inches
  2.  4 sq. cm
                                                                   151. 7 in., 16 in.
1411..  260 ft                   1413..  58 ft                     157. 25 ft, 50 ft
  2.  3825 sq. ft                  2.  210 sq. ft

147. 27 meters                   149. 23 m
153. 17 m, 12 m                  155. 13.5 m, 12.8 m

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            Answer Key 1039

159. 7 m, 11 m           161. 26 in.              163. 55 m
165. 35 ft, 45 ft        167. 76 in., 36 in.      169. 30 sq. in.
171. 25.315 sq. m        173. 0.75 sq. ft         175. 8 ft
177. 23 in.              179. 11 yd               181. 28 cm
183. 17 yd               185. 6 m                 187. 15 ft
189. 24 in.              191. 27.5 in.            193. 12 ft, 13 ft, 14 ft
195. 3 ft, 6 ft, 8 ft    197. 144 sq. ft          199. 2805 sq. m
201. 231 sq. cm          203. 28.56 sq. m         205. 13.5 sq. ft
207. 1036 sq. in.        209. 15 ft               211. $240
213. Answers will vary.  215. Answers will vary.
                                                  221. 62.8 ft
Section 9.5 Exercises    2119..  53.38 ft
                           2.  226.865 sq. ft     227. 52 in.
2117..  43.96 in.                                 233. 6.5 mi
  2.  153.86 sq. in.                              239. 57.5 sq. units
                                                  245. 89 sq. units
223. 37.68 in.           225. 6.908 ft            251. 35.13 sq. units
229. 5.5 m               231. 24 ft               257. 9400 sq. ft
235. 16 sq. units        237. 30 sq. units
241. 12 sq. units        243. 67.5 sq. units      2617..  1,024 cu. ft
247. 44.81 sq. units     249. 41.12 sq. units       2.  640 sq. ft
253. 95.625 sq. units    255. 187,500 sq. ft
2519..  6.5325 sq. ft    261. Answers will vary.  2713..  1124.864 cu. ft.
                                                    2.  648.96 sq. ft
  2.  10.065 sq. ft
                                                  2719..  113.04 cu. cm
Section 9.6 Exercises    2615..  17.64 cu. yd.      2.  113.04 sq. cm
                           2.  41.58 sq. yd.
2613..  9 cu. m                                   2815..  381.51 cu. cm
  2.  27 sq. m                                      2.  254.34 sq. cm

2619..  3,350.49 cu. cm  2711..  125 cu. cm
  2.  1,622.42 sq. cm      2.  150 sq. cm

2715..  262,144 cu. ft   2717..  21.952 cu. m
  2.  24,576 sq. ft        2.  47.04 sq. m

2811..  1,766.25 cu. ft  2813..  14,130 cu. in.
  2.  706.5 sq. ft         2.  2,826 sq. in.
1040 Answer Key

2817..  254.34 cu. ft            2819..  29.673 cu. m            2911..  1,020.5 cu. cm
  2.  226.08 sq. ft                2.  53.694 sq. m                2.  565.2 sq. cm

2913..  678.24 cu. in.           295. 37.68 cu. ft               297. 324.47 cu. cm
  2.  508.68 sq. in.
                                 301. 64,108.33 cu. ft           3013..  31.4 cu. ft
299. 261.67 cu. ft                                                 2.  2.6 cu. ft
                                                                   3.  28.8 cu. ft
305. Answers will vary.
                                                                 311. 6.5 hours
Section 9.7 Exercises            309. 7 mi                       317. 80 mph
                                                                 3213.. 
307. 612 mi                      315. 60 mph
                                                                   2. 
313. 3.6 hours                   3211..                          3219.. 
                                   2. 
3119..                                                             2. 
  2.                                                             3315.. 

3215..                           3217..                            2. 
  2.                               2.                            341. a = 180 - b - c

3311..                           3313..                          347.
  2.                               2.                            353.
                                                                 359. Answers will vary
3317..  y = 13                   3319..  b = 90 - a
  2.  y = 7 - 3x                   2.  a = 90 - b

343. y = 15 - 8x                 345. y = -6 + 4x

349. y = 4 + x                   351.
355.                             357. 104° F

Review Exercises                 363. There are 116 people at    365. His original weight was
                                         the concert.                    180 pounds.
361. Answers will vary.
                                                                 371. 16 dimes, 11 quarters
367. 38                          369. 18, 9
                                                                 377. 3 of 26 -cent stamps, 8 of
373. 6 of $5 bills, 11 of $10 bills 375. 35 adults, 82 children          41 -cent stamps

379. 132°                        381. 33°, 57°                   383. 73°
385. 30°, 60°, 90°               387. 15
391. 8                           393. 8.1                        389. 26

                                                                 395. 6 feet

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                      Answer Key 1041

397. cubic                    399. square                4011..  8 units
                                                           2.  3 sq. units
4013..  140 m                 4015..  98 ft.
  2.  1176 sq. m                2.  180 sq. ft.          407. 25 cm

409. 62 m                     411. 24.5 cm., 12.5 cm.    413. 135 sq. in.
415. 600 sq. in.              417. 7 in., 7 in.          419. 17 ft., 20 ft., 22 ft.
421. 100 sq. ft.              423. 675 sq. m             4215..  18.84 m

427. 48 in.                   429. 30 sq. units            2.  28.26 sq. m
433. 199.25 sq. units         4315..  630 cu. cm         431. 300 sq. units
                                                         4317..  15.625 cu. in.
4319..  267.95 cu. yd.          2.  496 sq. cm
  2.  200.96 sq. yd.                                       2.  37.5 sq. in.
                              4411..  12.76 cu. in.      4413..  75.36 cu. yd.
4415..  753.6 cu. cm            2.  26.41 sq. in.
  2.  477.28 sq. cm                                        2.  100.48 sq. yd.
                              447. 5.233 cu. m           449. 4.599 cu. in.
451. 1520 miles
                              453. 1.6 hours             4515.. 
                                                           2. 
4517..                        4519.. 
  2.                            2.                       4611.. 
                                                           2. 
463. a = 90 - b               465. y = 17 - 4x
                                                         467.
Practice Test                 473. 7 quarters, 12 dimes
                              479. 10                    475. 38°
471. -16                      485. 282.6 inches          481. 127.3 ft
477. 48.3                     491. 14.7 miles per hour   487. 1440
483. 2200 square centimeters                             4913.. 
489. 31,400 cubic inches
                                                           2. 
Chapter 10
                                                         10.3
Be Prepared                                              10.6

10.1                          10.2

10.4                          10.5
1042 Answer Key

10.7                             10.8                 10.9
                                                      10.12 ten thousand
10.10                            10.11                10.15

10.13 twelve ten-thousandths     10.14                101.3.  1
10.16                            10.17                  2.  1
                                                        3.  4
Try It                                                  4.  2
                                                        5.  0
101.1.   monomial                101.2.   binomial
  2.     polynomial                2.     trinomial   10.6 -3y2
  3.     trinomial                 3.     polynomial
  4.     binomial                  4.     monomial    10.9 -2x2 + 3y2
  5.     monomial                  5.     monomial    10.12 11y2 + 9y - 5
                                                      10.15 4n2 + 12n
101.4.  0                        10.5 17x2            10.18.  114
  2.  2
  3.  4                                                   2.  -2
  4.  5                                               10.211.  64
  5.  3
                                                          2.  11
10.7 14n                         10.8 -2a3            10.214. 
10.10 -2a2 + b2                  10.11 4x2 - 8x + 10
10.13 3y2 + 3y + 3               10.14 3u2 - u + 2        2. 
10.16 5a2 + 8a + 8               10.17.  13           10.27 x 15

10.19 4 feet                         2.  3            10.30 m 8
                                                      10.33 y 43
                                 10.20 20 feet        10.36 y 15
                                                      10.39 196x2
10.212.  81                      10.213. 
    2.  21                           2.               10.42 216x3y3
                                                      10.45 -512x12y21
10.215.  16                      10.216.  64
    2.  -16                          2.  -64

10.28 x 16                       10.29 p 10
10.31 610                        10.32 915
10.34 z 39                       10.35 x 21
10.317.  x28                     10.318.  x54

    2.  732                          2.  842

10.40 144a2                      10.41 256x4y4
10.43 x 40                       10.44 y 42

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                    Answer Key 1043

10.46 81a20b24               10.47 98n14                10.48 48m5
10.49 64u18v22               10.50 675x7y18             10.51 -56x11
10.52 54y9                   10.53 12m5n6               10.54 12p11q8
10.55 6x + 48                10.56 2y + 24              10.57 y2 - 9y
10.58 p2 - 13p               10.59 8x2 + 24xy           10.60 18r2 + 3rs
10.61 -32y3 - 20y2 + 36y     10.62 -54x3 - 6x2 + 6x     10.63 12x4 - 9x3 + 27x2
10.64 24y4 - 16y3 - 32y2     10.65 xp + 8p              10.66 ap + 4p
10.67 x2 + 17x + 72          10.68 a2 + 9a + 20         10.69 20x2 + 51x + 27
10.70 80m2 + 142m + 63       10.71 56y2 - 13y - 3       10.72 15x2 - 14x - 16
10.73 x2 - xy + 5x - 5y      10.74 x2 - x + 2xy - 2y    10.75 x2 + 15x + 56
10.76 y2 + 16y + 28          10.77 y2 + 5y - 24         10.78 q2 + q - 20
10.79 20a2 + 37a - 18        10.80 49x2 - 28x - 32      10.81 12x2 - 60x - xy + 5y
10.82 12a2 - 54a - 2ab + 9b  10.83 12m2 - 55m + 63      10.84 42n2 - 47n + 10
10.85 y3 - 8y2 + 9y - 2      10.86 3x3 + 2x2 - 3x + 10  10.87 y3 - 8y2 + 9y - 2
10.88 3x3 + 2x2 - 3x + 10    10.819.  x3                10.910.  y6

10.911.                          2.  79                     2.  88
    2. 
                             10.912.                    10.913. 
10.914.                          2.                         2. 
    2. 
                             10.915.  1                 10.916.  1
10.97 1                          2.  1                      2.  1

                             10.98 1                    10.919.  1
                                                            2.  7x2
10.1010.  -23x2              10.1011. 
      2.  1                        2.                   10.1012. 
                                   3.                         2. 
10.103 a 11                                                   3. 
10.106                       10.104 b 19
10.109                       10.107 f 12                10.105 k 2
                                                        10.108
                             10.110
                                                        10.111
1044 Answer Key                  10.113             10.114 9x5
                                 10.116 16y3        10.117
10.112
10.115 7x4                       10.119             10.120
                                                    10.123 2xy2
10.118                           10.122             10.1216. 
                                 10.1215. 
10.121                                                    2. 
10.124 -4ab5                           2.           10.1219. 
                                 10.1218. 
10.1217.                                                  2. 
      2.                               2. 
                                 10.131             10.132
10.1310. 
      2.                         10.1314.           10.1315. 
                                       2.                 2. 
10.1313.                               3.                 3. 
      2. 
      3.                         10.137             10.138

10.1316.                         10.140             10.141
      2.                         10.143             10.144
      3.                         10.146 y 13        10.147 9.6 × 104
                                 10.149 7.8 × 10-3  10.150 1.29 × 10-2
10.139                           10.152 92,500      10.153 0.00012
10.142                           10.155 0.06        10.156 0.009
10.145 x 11                      10.158 20,000      10.159 18
10.148 4.83 × 104                10.161 7           10.162 11
10.151 1,300                     10.164 9y3         10.165 3x
10.154 0.075                     10.167 4(x + 3)    10.168 6(a + 4)
10.157 400,000                   10.170 11(x + 1)   10.171 11(x - 4)
10.160 16
10.163 8x2
10.166 5m2
10.169 9(a + 1)

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Answer Key 1045

10.172 13(y - 4)        10.173 4(y2 + 2y + 3)    10.174 6(x2 + 7x - 2)
10.175 x(9x + 7)        10.176 a(5a - 12)        10.177 2x2(x + 6)
10.178 3y2(2y - 5)      10.179 9y(2y + 7)        10.180 8k(4k + 7)
10.181 6y(3y2 - y - 4)  10.182 4x(4x2 + 2x - 3)  10.183 -5(y + 7)
10.184 -8(2z + 7)       10.185 -7a(a - 3)        10.186 -x(6x - 1)

Section 10.1 Exercises  3. trinomial             5. polynomial
                                                 11. 1
1. binomial                                      17. -8u
                                                 23. 16x
7. monomial             9. 5                     29. -3x2 + 17x - 1
13. 0                   15. 15x2                 35. 11z + 8
                                                 41. x2 + 3x + 4
19. 5a + 7b             21. -4a -3b              417..  -104
25. -17x6               27. 12y2 + 4y + 8        2.  4
31. 4a2 - 7a - 11       33. 4m2 - 10m + 2        3.  40
37. 12s2 - 16s + 9      39. 2p3 + p2 + 9p + 10
                                                 53. Answers will vary.
43. 11w - 66            415..  187
                        2.  40                   59. 0.008
                        3.  2                    65. -10,000
                                                 71. x 9
49. 19 feet             51. 10 mpg               77. z 6
                                                 83. u 8
Section 10.2 Exercises                           89. x 90
                                                 95. 25a2
55. 1,024               57.                      101. 256x4y4z4
                                                 107. 45x3
61. 625                 63. -625                 113. 1,000x6y3
                                                 119. 1,024a10
67.                     69. -0.25
73. a 5                 75. 314
79. x a+2               81. y a+b
85. y 20                87. 1012
91. x 2y                93. 5xy
97. -216m3              99. 16r2s2
103. x 14               105. a 36
109. 200a5              111. 8m18
115. 16a12b8            117.
1046 Answer Key

121. 25,000p24                   123. x 18 y 18            125. 144m8n22
127. -60x6                       129. 72u7                 131. 4r11
133. 36a5b7                      135. 8x2y5                137.
139. 1,679,616                   141. Answers will vary.   143. Answers will vary.

Section 10.3 Exercises           147. 15r - 360            149. -3m - 33
                                                           155. n3 - 3n2
145. 4x + 40                                               161. 24x2 + 6xy
                                                           167. 8n3 - 8n2 + 2n
151. -8z + 40                    153. u2 + 5u              173. -12z4 - 48z3 + 4z2
                                                           179. x2 + 10x + 24
157. 12x2 - 120x                 159. -27a2 - 45a          185. a2 + 22a + 96
                                                           191. x2 + 3x - 28
163. 55p2 - 25pq                 165. 3v2 + 30v + 75       197. 20m2 - 88m - 9
                                                           203. 2a2 + 5ab + 3b2
169. -8y3 - 16y2 + 120y          171. 5q5 - 10q4 + 30q3    209. 3a3 + 31a2 + 5a - 50
                                                           2115..  195
175. 2y2 - 9y                    177. 8w - 48
                                                             2.  195
181. n2 + 9n - 36                183. y2 + 11y + 24          3.  Answers will vary.

187. u2 - 14u + 45               189. z2 - 32z + 220       223. r 4
                                                           229.
193. v2 + 7v - 60                195. 6n2 + 11n + 5
                                                           235. -1
199. 16c2 - 1                    201. 15u2 - 82u + 112     2411..  1

205. 5x2 - 20x - xy + 4y         207. u3 + 7u2 + 14u + 8     2.  15

211. y3 - 16y2 + 69y - 54        213. 2x3 - 9x2 - 17x - 6  247.
                                                           253. x 3
217. Answers will vary.

Section 10.4 Exercises

219. 46                          221. x 9

225.                             227.

231. 1                           233. 1
                                 2319..  1
2317..  1
  2.  10                           2.  -27x5

243. 7                           245.

249.                             251.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                  Answer Key 1047

255. u 2                 257.            259. 1
261.                     263. a 14       265. y 3
267.                     269.            271. 1
273.                     275. 3x8        277. 8b6
279.                     281. 2x         283.

285.                     287.            289.
                         293.            295. 5u4v3
291.                     2919..          3011.. 

2917..                     2.              2. 
  2. 
  3.                     305.            307.
  4.                     311. 1,000,000  313. Answers will vary.

303.
309.
315. Answers will vary.

Section 10.5 Exercises

317.                     319.            321.
                                         327.
323.                     325.            3313.. 

3219..                   3311..            2. 
  2.                       2.            339.

3315..                   337.            345. r 3

2.                                       351.
                                         357.
3411..                   3413..          363.
  2.                       2. 
  3.                       3. 

347.                     349.

353.                     355.

359.                     361.
1048 Answer Key                  367.                     369.

365.                             373.                     375.
                                 379. m 7                 381.
371. m 6                         385. 2.8 × 105           387. 1.29 × 106
377. b 8                         391. 1.03 × 10-5         393. 6.85 × 109
383. p 3                         397. 830                 399. 16,000,000,000
389. 4.1 × 10-2                  403. 0.0000000615        405. $15,000,000,000,000
395. 5.7 × 10-9                  409. 0.003               411. 0.00000735
401. 0.028                       415. 50,000,000          4117..  1.25 × 10-4
407. 0.00001
413. 20,000,000                                             2.  8,000

419. 11,441,304,000              421. Answers will vary.  427. 4
                                                          433. 12p3
Section 10.6 Exercises                                    439. 5x3
                                                          445. 4(b - 5)
423. 15                          425. 25                  451. 6(q2 + 5q + 7)
                                                          457. q(4q + 7)
429. 5                           431. 3x                  463. b(a + 8)
                                                          469. 6c(c2 - d2)
435. 2a                          437. 10y                 475. 10(y2 + 5y + 4)
441. 7b2                         443. 5(y + 3)            481. 8c3(c2 + 5c - 7)
447. 7(x - 1)                    449. 3(n2 + 7n + 4)      487. -8a2(a - 4)
                                                          493. Answers will vary.
453. c(9c + 22)                  455. x(17x + 7)
                                                          498. 2
459. 3r(r + 9)                   461. 10u(3u - 1)         504. -3n5
465. 11y(5 - y3)                 467. 15c2(3c - 1)        510. 8q3 + q2 + 6q - 29
471. 24x2(2x + 3)                473. 18a3(8a3 + 5)
477. 12(u2 - 3u - 9)             479. 5p2(p2 - 4p - 3)

483. -7(p + 12)                  485. -6b(3b + 11)
489. -9b3(b2 - 7)                491. -4(4t2 - 20t - 1)

Review Exercises                 496. binomial
                                 502. 15p
494. trinomial                   508. 6y2 - 3y + 3

500. 0
506. 10a2 + 4a - 1

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                            Answer Key 1049

512. 995                  514. 2,955                  516. -163
518. 64 feet              520. 216                    522. 0.25
524. p 13                 526. a 6                    528. y 12
530. 310                  532. 64n2                   534. 256a8b8
536. 27a15                538. x 21                   540. -54p5
542. 56x3y11              544. 70 - 7x                546. -625y4 + 5y
548. a2 + 7a + 10         550. 6x2 - 19x - 7          552. n2 + 9n + 8
554. 5u2 + 37u - 24       556. p2 + 11p + 28          558. 27c2 - 3c - 4
560. x3 - 2x2 - 24x - 21  562. m3 - m2 - 72m - 180    564. 26 or 64
566.                      568. 1                      570. 1

572.                      574.                        576. a 2
                                                      582. 9p9
578.                      580.
                                                      588.
584.                      586.
                                                      594. x 6
590.                      592.                        600. b 10
596.                      598. k 6
602. 5.3 × 106            604. 9.7 × 10-2 millimeter  606. 29,000
608. 0.375                610. 6,000                  612. 30,000,000,000
614. 5                    616. 4x2                    618. 8(2u - 3)
620. 6p(p + 1)            622. -9a3(a2 + 1)           624. 5(y2 - 11y + 9)

Practice Test             628. 6x2 - 3x + 11          630. n 5

6216..  trinomial         634. s2 + 17s + 72          636. 55a2 - 41a + 6
  2.  4                   640. x 14                   642.
                          646.                        648. x 9
632. -48x5y9              652. 0.000525               654.
638. 24a2 + 34ab - 45b2
644. 3y2 - 7x

650. -6x(x + 5)
1050 Answer Key

Chapter 11                       11.2           11.3
                                 11.5           11.6
Be Prepared                      11.8           11.9 b
                                 11.11          11.12
11.1
                                                11.3
11.4

11.7

11.10

Try It                           111.2.  1A
                                   2.  Library
111.1.  1C
  2.  Engineering Building

11.4                             11.5 (a) Quadrant II, (b) Quadrant  11.6 (a) Quadrant II, (b) Quadrant
                                         III, (c) Quadrant IV, (d)           II, (c) Quadrant IV, (d)
                                         Quadrant II                         Quadrant II

11.7                             11.8                                11.9

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                              Answer Key 1051

11.10                     11.11 1. A: (5,1)         11.12 1. A: (4,2)
                                     2. B: (-2,4)              2. B: (-2,3)
                                     3. C: (-5,-1)             3. C: (-4,-4)
                                     4. D: (3,-2)              4. D: (3,-5)

11.13 1. A: (4,0)         11.14 1. A: (-3,0)        11.15  , 
           2. B: (0,3)               2. B: (0,-3)
           3. C: (-3,0)              3. C: (5,0)    11.18  , 
           4. D: (0,-5)              4. D: (0,2)    11.21

11.16  ,                  11.17 

11.19                     11.20

11.22                     11.23 Answers will vary.  11.24 Answers will vary.

11.25 Answers will vary.  11.26 Answers will vary.  11.27 Answers will vary.
11.28 Answers will vary.                            11.30
                          11.29 1.  yes  yes
                                     2.  no  no
                                     3.  no  no
                                     4.  yes  yes
1052 Answer Key                  11.32  11.33

11.31

11.34                            11.35  11.36

11.37                            11.38  11.39

11.40                            11.41  11.42

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                         Answer Key 1053

11.43                         11.44 x-intercept (2,0):     11.45 x-intercept (3,0);
                                       y-intercept (0,-2)           y-intercept (0,2)

11.46  and                    11.47    and                 11.48 x-intercept (4,0);
                                                                    y-intercept: (0,-3)
11.49 x-intercept (4,0);      11.50
         y-intercept: (0,-2)                                    11.51

11.52                         11.53                               11.54

11.55                         11.516.   intercepts         11.517.   vertical line
11.58                             2.    horizontal line        2.    plotting points
                                  3.    plotting points        3.    horizontal line
                                  4.    vertical line          4.    intercepts

                              11.59                        11.60
1054 Answer Key                  11.62     11.63

11.61

11.64                            11.65     11.66

11.67                            11.68     11.69
11.70                            11.71     11.72 undefined
11.73 0                          11.74 1   11.75 1
11.76 -1                         11.77 10  11.78

11.79                            11.80            11.81

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                      Answer Key 1055

11.82                       11.83                    11.84

11.85                   11.86                 11.87
                                              5.
Section 11.1 Exercises

1.                      3.

7.                      9.                    11.

13.                     15. C(1, -3) D(4, 3)  17. S(-2, 4) T(-4, -2)
1056 Answer Key                  21.  ,               23.  , 
                                 27.  ,               29.
19. C(0, -1) D(-1, 0)
25.  ,                                                315.. 

31.                              33.

37. Answers may vary.                                 2.  Age and weight are only
                                                            positive.
Section 11.2 Exercises           41. 1.  yes  yes
                                        2.  yes  yes  43.
39. 1.  yes  yes                        3.  yes  yes
       2.  no  no                       4.  no  no
       3.  yes  yes
       4.  no  no

45.                              47.                  49.

Access for free at openstax.org
               Answer Key 1057

51.  53.  55.

57.  59.  61.

63.  65.  67.

69.  71.  73.
1058 Answer Key

75.                              77.  79.

81.                              83.  85.

87.                              89.  91.

93.                              95.  97.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                         Answer Key 1059

99.                     101.                    103.

105.                    107.                    109.

111.                    113.                    115. Answers will vary.

                              $722, $850, $978

Section 11.3 Exercises  119. (5,0),(0,-5)       121. (-2,0),(0,-2)
                                                127. (4,0),(0,4)
117. (3,0),(0,3)                                133. (-3,0),(0,3)
                                                139. (12,0),(0,-4)
123. (-1,0),(0,1)       125. (0,0)              145. (4,0),(0,-6)
                                                151. (0,0)
129. (-2,0),(0,-2)      131. (5,0),(0,-5)

135. (8,0),(0,4)        137. (2,0),(0,6)

141. (2,0),(0,-8)       143. (5,0),(0,2)

147. (3,0),(0,-1)       149. (-10,0),(0,2)
1060 Answer Key                  155.  157.

153. (0,0)

159.                             161.  163.

165.                             167.  169.

171.                             173.  175.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                                        Answer Key 1061

177.                     179.                                       181. vertical line

183. horizontal line     185. plotting points                 187. intercepts
189. plotting points
195. plotting points     191. horizontal line                 193. intercepts

201. Answers will vary.  197.  (0,1,000),(15,0).  At          199. Answers will vary.
                                 (0,1,000) he left Chicago 0
                                 hours ago and has 1,000
                                 miles left to drive. At
                                 (15,0) he left Chicago 15
                                 hours ago and has 0 miles
                                 left to drive.

Section 11.4 Exercises

203.                     205.                                 207.

209.                     211.                                 213.

215.                     217.                                 219.
221.                     223.                                 225.
227.                     229.                                 231. 0
233. undefined           235. 0                               237. undefined
1062 Answer Key                  241.                          243.
                                 247.                          249. -1
239.
245.                                253.                             255.
251.

257.                             259.                          261.

263.                             265.                          267.

269.                             2711..  288 inches (24 feet)  273. Answers will vary.
275. Answers will vary.            2.  Models will vary.

Access for free at openstax.org
                                                                     Answer Key 1063

Review Exercises   2719..  III              2811..  (5,3)
                     2.  II                   2.  (2,-1)
277.                 3.  IV                   3.  (-3,-2)
                     4.  I                    4.  (-1,4)

2813..  (2,0)      285.  ,                  287.
  2.  (0,-5)
  3.  (-4,0)       291. Answers will vary.  293. Answers will vary.
  4.  (0,3)

289.

295. 1.  yes  yes  297.                     299.

2.  no  no

3.  yes  yes

4.  yes  yes
1064 Answer Key                  303. (0,3) (3,0)      305. (-1,0) (0,1)

301.

307. (0,0)                       309.                  311. horizontal line

313. intercepts                  315. plotting points  317.
319.
                                 321.                  323.

325. 1                           327.                  329. undefined
331. 0                           333. -4               335.
337.

Access for free at openstax.org
Practice Test  341. (4,0), (0,-2)                                                        Answer Key 1065

339.                               343. no; 1 + 4 · 3  12

345.           347.                349.

351. 0         353.
1066 Answer Key
Access for free at openstax.org
Index                               difference 38                                                                   Index 1067
                                    discount 499
A                                   Distributive Property 560, 562,      irrational numbers 543
                                    563, 575, 801, 804, 810, 811, 848    irregular figure 729
absolute value 178, 178, 178, 181   dividend 69                          isosceles triangle 712
absolute value symbols 182          dividing integers 223
addends 27                          divisibility tests 144               L
Addition Property of Equality 133,  divisible 146
604                                 Division Property of Equality 237,   ladder method 155
additive identity 567, 570, 575     614                                  leading coefficient 853
additive inverse 569, 575           divisor 69                           least common denominator 642
algebraic expression 123                                                 Least Common Denominator 519
angle 679                           E                                    least common denominator (LCD)
applications 47, 61                                                      312, 313
area 63, 408, 452, 698, 700         elevation 172                        least common multiple 157, 846
area of a trapezoid 715             equal sign 98                        legs 688
                                    equation 102, 102, 235, 237, 239,    like terms 118, 119
B                                   602, 669                             linear equation 629, 904, 914
                                    equilateral triangle 712             linear equation in one variable
base 103, 789                       equivalent 314                       874
binomial 780, 851                   equivalent decimals 377              linear measure 698
                                    Equivalent fractions 264, 264
C                                   Equivalent Fractions Property 814    M
                                    evaluate 113
circumference 407, 457, 725, 746    exponent 789                         mean 422, 422
coefficient 117, 805                exponential notation 788             median 424
coefficients 119                    expression 101, 102, 113, 129        metric system 585, 586, 589
commission 497                      expressions 192, 193, 211, 225,      mixed number 259, 259, 261, 267,
Commutative Property 783, 836       228                                  291, 337, 339
Commutative Property of Addition                                         mode 426, 426
119, 546                            F                                    monomial 780, 798, 803
Commutative Property of                                                  multiple 140
Multiplication 546                  factor tree 152                      multiple of a number 140
complementary angles 680            factors 147                          Multiplication Property of Equality
complex fraction 294                FOIL method 808                      417, 519, 614, 638
composite number 148, 149           fraction 255, 368                    multiplicative identity 568, 575
cone 749                            fraction tiles 257                   multiplicative inverse 569, 575
congruent 709                       frequency 426                        multiplying integers 223
consecutive integers 661
constant 96                         G                         846, 847,  N
constants 621, 623, 625
coordinate 8                        geoboard 919                         negative exponent 831
coordinate grid 925                 gravity 453                          negative number 172, 173
counting numbers 7, 8, 172          greatest common factor               negative numbers 172, 172, 172,
cross products 519                  851                                  172, 174
cube 741                                                                 neutral pair 187, 203
cubic units 699                     H                                    number line 8, 172, 173
cylinder 746                                                             number problems 656
                                    horizontal line 898, 931             numerator 255, 259, 266, 274,
D                                   hypotenuse 688                       275, 277, 297

decimal 374, 384, 386, 387, 389,    I                                    O
390, 391, 393, 395
decimal notation 369                improper fraction 259, 261, 262,     operations 96
decimal point 384, 386, 387, 389,   269, 291                             opposites 175, 177, 178
389, 391                            inequality 98                        order of operations 105, 182, 833,
degree of a constant 781            integer 541                          834
degree of a polynomial 781          integers 177, 182, 187, 540, 543     ordered pair 867, 876, 932
degree of a term 781                intercept of the line 904            origin 8
denominator 255, 259, 266, 274,     invert 284                           overdraft 172, 215
275, 277, 297, 304, 307             irrational number 542
diameter 407
1068 Index

P                                  rate 437, 437                        surface area 737, 746
                                   ratio 433, 433
partial product 60                 rational number 540, 541             T
percent 468, 469, 470, 473, 474,   rational numbers 543
489                                real numbers 543                     term 117, 780
percent decrease 490               reciprocal 282, 831                  trapezoid 715
percent increase 489               rectangle 701                        triangle 683
percent proportion 524             rectangular solid 737                trinomial 780, 803, 851
perfect square 445, 445            repeating decimal 403, 478
perimeter 700                      right triangle 684                   U
periods 11                         rise 920, 921, 925
place value system 8               round 477                            U.S. system 586, 589
Point-Plotting Method 889          rounding 15, 16                      unit price 439, 439
point-slope method 936             run 920, 921, 925                    unit rate 438, 438
polynomial 780
positive number 173                S                                    V
Power Property 837
prime factor 149                   sales tax 494, 495                   variable 96, 113, 193, 602, 621,
prime factorization 152            scientific notation 839, 857         623, 625
prime number 148                   signed numbers 220                   vertex 679
principal 511                      similar figures 686                  vertical line 896, 932
principal square root 446          simple interest 508, 510, 512, 513,  Vertical Method 810, 811
probability 428, 428, 428          533                                  volume 699
Problem Solving Strategy 655, 656  slope 931, 932, 933
product 51, 220                    slope of the line 919                W
Product Property of Exponents      solution 127, 603, 627, 874
793, 836                           solution of an equation 602          whole numbers 8, 8, 543
Product to a Power Property 837    solution to an equation 127          word phrases 46, 60
proper fraction 259, 267, 333      solution to the linear equation 875
proportion 516, 521                sphere 743                           X
Pythagorean Theorem 688            square root 446, 446, 447, 447,
                                   453                                  x-axis 866, 872
Q                                  square units 698                     x-coordinate 872
                                   standard form 782
quadrants 867                      subscripts 932                       Y
quotient 69, 147, 223              subtracting negative numbers 211
Quotient Property 838              Subtraction Property 208             y-axis 866, 872
Quotient Property of Exponents     Subtraction Property of Equality     y-coordinate 872
818, 830, 834                      415, 603                             y-intercept 929
                                   sum 23
R                                  supplementary angles 679             Z

radius 407                                                              zero exponent 818

Access for free at openstax.org
Index 1069
