Technical Mathematics, 2nd Edition
TECHNICAL MATHEMATICS, 2ND
EDITION

Morgan Chase

Bob Brown
Technical Mathematics, 2nd Edition Copyright © 2024 by Morgan Chase is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
Contents

Introduction                               1

Changes from the first edition             1

To the student                             1

To the instructor                          3

To everyone                                4

PART I. MAIN BODY

1. Order of Operations                     5

Evaluating an Expression                   5

Exponents                                  7

Grouping Symbols                           8

2. Negative Numbers                        11

Absolute Value                             11

Adding Negative Numbers                    12

Subtracting Negative Numbers               13

Absolute Value, Revisited                  15

Multiplying Negative Numbers               15

Dividing Negative Numbers                  17

Order of Operations with Negative Numbers  19

3. Decimals                                20

Adding & Subtracting Decimals              21

Multiplying Decimals                       21

Dividing Decimals                          22

Rounding Numbers                           24
4. Fractions                                  26

Writing Fractions                             26

Simplifying Fractions                         27

Multiplying Fractions                         28

Dividing Fractions                            29

Comparing Fractions                           29

Adding & Subtracting Fractions                30

Fractions and Decimals                        31

Improper Fractions & Mixed Numbers            32

5. Accuracy and Significant Figures           35

Exact Values and Approximations               35

Accuracy and Significant Figures              36

Accuracy-Based Rounding                       39

Accuracy when Multiplying and Dividing        40

6. Precision and GPE                          43

Precision                                     43

Precision-Based Rounding                      44

Precision when Adding and Subtracting         45

Greatest Possible Measurement Error (GPE)     46

Summary of Accuracy, Precision, GPE           48

7. Formulas                                   50

Formulas with One Input                       50

Temperature Conversions                       52

Formulas with More than One Input             53

Formulas with a Yes or No Answer              54

8. Perimeter and Circumference                55

Perimeter                                     55

Circumference                                 59

9. Percents Part 1                            62

Percent Basics                                62

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Amount  65
10. Ratios, Rates, Proportions                     67

Ratios & Rates                                     67

Unit Rates                                         68

Proportions                                        69

11. Scientific Notation                            73

Powers of Ten                                      73

Scientific Notation                                74

Multiplying & Dividing with Scientific Notation    77

Engineering Notation                               78

12. Percents Part 2 and Error Analysis             81

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Rate         82

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Base         82

Solving Percent Problems: Using Proportions        83

Solving Percent Problems: Percent Increase         84

Solving Percent Problems: Percent Decrease         85

Relative Error                                     86

Tolerance                                          87

13. The US Measurement System                      89

U.S. System: Measurements of Length                90

U.S. System: Measurements of Weight or Mass        91

U.S. System: Measurements of Volume or Capacity    92

U.S. System: Using Mixed Units of Measurement      92

14. The Metric System                              95

Metric System: Measurements of Length              96

Metric System: Measurements of Weight or Mass      97

Metric System: Measurements of Volume or Capacity  99

15. Converting Between Systems                     102

Converting Measurements of Length                  102

Converting Measurements of Weight or Mass          105

Converting Measurements of Volume or Capacity      106

Converting Measurements: Extensions                107
16. Other Conversions                           109

Converting Measurements of Time                 109

Converting Rates                                110

Measurement Prefixes: Larger                    111

Measurement Prefixes: Smaller                   113

17. Angles                                      116

Angle Measure                                   116

Angles in Triangles                             119

Angles and Parallel Lines                       121

Degrees, Minutes, Seconds                       122

18. Triangles                                   125

Classifying Triangles                           125

Similar Triangles                               127

The Pythagorean Theorem                         129

19. Area of Polygons and Circles                133

Area: Rectangles and Squares                    134

Area: Parallelograms                            135

Area: Triangles                                 137

Area: Trapezoids                                139

Area: Circles                                   141

20. Composite Figures                           144

Composite Figures with Polygons                 144

Composite Figures with Circles                  146

21. Converting Units of Area                    149

U.S. System: Converting Measurements of Area    149

Metric System: Converting Measurements of Area  152

Both Systems: Converting Measurements of Area   153

Areas of Similar Figures                        154

22. Surface Area of Common Solids               156

Surface Area: Rectangular Solids                157

Surface Area: Cylinders                         158

Surface Area: Spheres                           159
23. Area of Regular Polygons                      161

Using the Distance from the Center to an Edge     162

Using the Distance from the Center to a Vertex    164

Composite Figures with Regular Polygons           166

24. Volume of Common Solids                       167

Volume: Rectangular Solids                        167

Volume: Rectangular Prisms                        169

Volume: Cylinders                                 171

Volume: Spheres                                   172

Volume: Composite Solids                          173

25. Converting Units of Volume                    174

U.S. System: Converting Measurements of Volume    175

Metric System: Converting Measurements of Volume  177

Both Systems: Converting Measurements of Volume   178

Density                                           181

Volumes of Similar Solids                         181

26. Pyramids and Cones                            183

Pyramids                                          183

Cones                                             186

27. Percents Part 3                               191

Finding the Base After a Percent Increase         192

Finding the Base After a Percent Decrease         193

28. Mean, Median, Mode                            195

Mean                                              195

Median                                            197

Mode                                              198

29. Probability                                   202

Theoretical Probability                           202

Empirical Probability                             206

Probability of More Than One Event                207
30. Standard Deviation                         210

Normal Distributions & Standard Deviation      210

The 68-95-99.7 Rule                            212

31. Right Triangle Trigonometry                219

Bob Brown and Morgan Chase

Sine, Cosine, Tangent                          219

Trigonometry Applications                      222

Inverse Sine, Inverse Cosine, Inverse Tangent  225

Inverse Trigonometry Applications              226

Using Multiple Methods                         228

32. Slope                                      231

Bob Brown and Morgan Chase

Slope as a Ratio                               232

Slope as an Angle                              234

33. Non-Right Triangle Trigonometry            237

Law of Sines                                   238

Law of Cosines                                 241

34. Radian Measure                             244

Radian Measure                                 244
Exercise Answers                               247

Module 1: Order of Operations                  247

Module 2: Negative Numbers                     248

Module 3: Decimals                             250

Module 4: Fractions                            251

Module 5: Accuracy and Significant Figures     253

Module 6: Precision and GPE                    255

Module 7: Formulas                             256

Module 8: Perimeter and Circumference          257

Module 9: Percents Part 1                      258

Module 10: Ratios, Rates, Proportions          259

Module 11: Scientific Notation                 260

Module 12: Percents Part 2 and Error Analysis  262

Module 13: The US Measurement System           263

Module 14: The Metric System                   264

Module 15: Converting Between Systems          266

Module 16: Other Conversions                   267

Module 17: Angles                              268

Module 18: Triangles                           269

Module 19: Area of Polygons and Circles        270

Module 20: Composite Figures                   271

Module 21: Converting Units of Area            272

Module 22: Surface Area of Common Solids       273

Module 23: Area of Regular Polygons            273

Module 24: Volume of Common Solids             274

Module 25: Converting Units of Volume          274

Module 26: Pyramids and Cones                  276

Module 27: Percents Part 3                     277

Module 28: Mean, Median, Mode                  277

Module 29: Probability                         279

Module 30: Standard Deviation                  280

Module 31: Right Triangle Trigonometry         281

Module 32: Slope                               284
Module 33: Non-Right Triangle Trigonometry                      284

Module 34: Radian Measure                                       285

Accessibility                                                   287

Accessibility Statement                                         287

Accessibility features of the web version of this textbook      287

Other file formats available                                    288

Known accessibility issues and areas for improvement            288

Let us know if you are having problems accessing this textbook  289
              Tech Math, 2e 1

Introduction

This developmental-level mathematics textbook is intended for career-technical
students. It was made possible by grants from Open Oregon Educational
Resources, which supports the development and implementation of high-quality
materials at low or no cost to community college and university students.

Changes from the first edition

I won't list every detail, but here are the broad strokes.
        · Added Modules 31, 32, 33, 34.
        · Revised real-world data and examples from 2019 that felt outdated.
        · Deleted or revised complicated explanations and examples.
        · Redrew some low-resolution geometry figures.
        · Cleaned up the formatting and made the online text easier to navigate.

To the student

This textbook is designed to bring a bit of fun to what can often be a boring or
intimidating subject. Many of the examples are taken from everyday life rather
than the trades, which helps make the material accessible to students in any field.
There are very few step-by-step examples, because--let's face it--does anyone
ever read those? The general structure is a brief introduction of a topic followed
by some practice exercises, a brief introduction of the next topic followed by

                                                                                       1
2 Morgan Chase

more practice exercises, etc. Therefore, this book is not designed for self-study
unless you already have some experience with the material and are simply look-
ing for a refresher.

I have tried to indicate when a calculator would be appropriate, but your instruc-
tor has the final say on that. My personal philosophy is that a calculator is a useful
tool, but the user needs to know enough to be able to estimate and judge whether
a result is reasonable. I don't mention calculators until we get to formulas in
Module 7 because I want students to be able to work with fractions, decimals,
negatives, exponents, and all that stuff without a calculator if necessary.

In most careers, nobody is going to say you cheated if you use technology such
as a calculator or spreadsheet; the important thing is that you use the available
technology to get the correct answer. However, you're in school trying to obtain
a degree or certificate, which means that you need to demonstrate certain knowl-
edge and skills. Therefore, you need to show that you can (1) do the calculations
without technology if necessary, and (2) determine whether an answer given by
technology is reasonable or not.

One final thought about learning in general. After going through a particular
topic, let's say fractions, you may feel that you understand everything, but there
is a big difference between recognizing something when it's shown to you and
actually doing it yourself. Think about learning to drive a car; your driving class
has a lot of reading and videos and lectures to familiarize you with what you
need to know, but it's impossible to learn to drive a car without actually driving
the car yourself. Reading about it and watching other people do it is not enough;
it is crucial that you actually practice the techniques yourself to be sure that you
have mastered them. (And then you need to continue practicing the techniques
to maintain that mastery, but that's another speech for another time.) Two ways
to know that you've really and truly learned something are to either perform it
yourself with no guidance or explain it to someone else. If you can follow some-
one else's explanation of how to add fractions, you're partway there. If you can
explain how to add fractions to someone else, though? Now you're in business!

I wish you the best of luck, and I hope you enjoy pictures of cats!
                                          Tech Math, 2e 3

To the instructor

To paraphrase the key points from above:

Many of the examples are taken from everyday life rather than specific trades.
At my school, students in this course come from many different CTE pro-
grams--welding, machining, automotive, landscaping, horticulture, renewable
energy--but not other programs such as nursing, electrical, or wastewater. I also
have a few students in other non-CTE programs who don't need a course in the
math of CNC machining. You should of course feel free to supplement the text-
book with topics you'd like to emphasize... Or heck, this is an OER with a CC-BY-
NC-SA 4.0 license; you can copy, revise, and remix it however you like! The only
restrictions are that you must credit the author where you use his work and you
may not charge money for your product, excluding a reasonable printing cost
for a print edition. If you have a Pressbooks account, you can clone the book and
then start revising as needed.

There are very few step-by-step worked out examples in the textbook. I believe
that they add clutter without adding value. I provide my students with a playlist
of YouTube videos that I ask them to watch before class, because watching
and listening to someone work a problem--with the ability to pause, rewind,
replay--is generally more effective than reading a static example printed on the
page. Rather than reading examples that I've typed out step by step, students can
actively try the exercises for themselves, with guidance from you.

If you use MyOpenMath for homework assignments, I have good news! I have
written and/or collected over 600 questions and organized them into assign-
ments for each module. You can copy course #181716 and use it as you please.

I shared my personal philosophy on calculators above, but you're the expert on
your situation and what your students need. Similarly, you (or your department)
will decide how students will be assessed in your course. Will students be allowed
to use the textbook or their notes during exams? Will you provide formulas and
other reference information? Will a calculator be allowed for some or all of each
exam? Will you be giving exams or assigning some kind of mastery worksheets
instead? This paragraph is getting beyond the scope of a textbook introduction,
but I would ask that you think about what it's important for your students to
know how to do, with and without technology, and how they can best demon-
strate that knowledge.
4 Morgan Chase

To everyone

Whether you are a student or instructor, I would love to hear your thoughts on
the book and whether it works well for you. Feel free to let me know about any
errors you find or suggestions for improvements. In fact, the trigonometry mod-
ules were written at the request of--and in collaboration with--instructors who
reached out to let me know what they needed. I had intended to include a mod-
ule on arc length but ran out of time, energy, and ideas.

Special thanks go out to Bob Brown at Kishwaukee College, who provided many
of the diagrams and exercises in Modules 31 & 32.

 Extra special thanks go out to my Math 50 students at CCC who have given me

first-hand evidence of what worked well in the first edition and what did not.

Morgan Chase
Clackamas Community College
Oregon City, Oregon

morganc[at]clackamas.edu
morganchase64[at]gmail.com

March, 2024

                             Pepper the cat oversees the revisions.
                        Tech Math, 2e 5

[1]

Order of Operations

We'll begin with a look at order of opera-
tions. In many situations in life, the order
in which we perform certain actions is
important. For example, if you are
putting on your shoes and socks, you
need to put a sock on your foot before
you put a shoe on that foot. However, if
you put on your left sock first, it doesn't
really matter whether the next thing you
put on is your left shoe or your right sock,
as long as you don't try putting on your Photo by bastamanography on flickr.
right shoe next. A multi-step math calcu-
lation can be the same way; you might have some steps that need to happen in a
specific sequence, but there may be some steps that you can do in whatever order
you prefer.

Evaluating an Expression

To evaluate an expression means to simplify it and find its value.

                     5
6 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

    1. Evaluate by performing the addition first:
   2. Evaluate by performing the subtraction first:

When we evaluate an expression, we want to have a single correct answer. It isn't
very helpful for the answer to be "maybe 7, or maybe 13". Mathematicians have
decided on an order of operations, which tells us which steps should be done
before other steps. You can think of them as the rules of the road.

        Order of Operations: PEMDAS
           P: Work inside of parentheses or grouping symbols, following the order
           PEMDAS as necessary inside the grouping symbols.
           E: Evaluate exponents.
           MD: Perform multiplications and divisions from left to right.
           AS: Perform additions and subtractions from left to right.

Exercises

Evaluate each expression.
3.
4.

Based on Exercises 3 & 4, we can see that Exercise 1 told us to use the wrong order

of operations. If there are no parentheses, we must evaluate  by first

performing the subtraction and then performing the addition.
                                                             Tech Math, 2e 7

Before we move on, you should be aware that there are a handful of ways to show

multiplication. All of the following represent  :

In this textbook, you will most often see the dot, like , or parentheses directly

next to a number, like . We tend to avoid using the          symbol because it

can be mistaken for the letter x.

Exercises

Evaluate each expression.
5.
6.
 7.
8.

Exponents

An exponent indicates repeated multiplication. For example,  and

           . The exponent tells us how many factors of the base are being

multiplied together.

Exercises

 Evaluate each expression.
 9.
10.
11.
8 Morgan Chase

  12.

Grouping Symbols

In the next set of exercises, the only differences are the parentheses, but every
exercise has a different answer.

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression.
  13.
  14.
  15.
  16.
  17.

It is possible to have grouping symbols nested within grouping symbols; for

example,                             .

To make it somewhat easier to match up the pairs of left and right parentheses,

we can use square brackets instead:     .

Exercises

Simplify the expression.
18.
                                                                                                                                                           Tech Math, 2e 9

A fraction bar is another grouping symbol; it tells us to perform all of the steps
on the top and separately perform all of the steps down below. The final step is
to divide the top number by the bottom number.

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression.
  19.
 20.
  21.
 22.
 23.
 24.
10 Morgan Chase

We will look at formulas in a later module, but let's finish by translating from
words to a mathematical expression.

   Exercises

 25. You can find the approximate Fahrenheit temperature by doubling the Celsius
        temperature and adding . If the temperature is °C, what is the approximate
        Fahrenheit temperature? Write an expression and evaluate it.

 26. You can find the approximate Celsius temperature by subtracting from the
        Fahrenheit temperature and then dividing by . If the temperature is °F,
        what is the approximate Celsius temperature? Write an expression and evalu-
        ate it.

                                                Exercise Answers
                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 11

[2]

Negative Numbers

Negative numbers are a fact of life, from winter tempera-
tures to our bank accounts. (And occasionally elevators, if
they go underground.)

Before we start calculating with negative numbers, we'll take
a look at absolute value. This will make it easier for us to talk
about what we're doing when we add, subtract, multiply, or
divide signed numbers.

Absolute Value

The absolute value of a number is its distance from . You can think of it as the
size of a number without identifying it as positive or negative. Numbers with the
same absolute value but different signs, such as and , are called opposites. The
absolute value of is , and the absolute value of is also , because both num-
bers are units away from .

We use a pair of straight vertical bars to indicate absolute value; for example,

and             .

                   11
12 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression.
    1.
   2.

Adding Negative Numbers

To add two negative numbers, add their absolute values (i.e., ignore the negative
signs) and make the final answer negative.

   Exercises

   Perform each addition.
   3.
   4.

To add a positive number and a negative number, we subtract the smaller absolute
value from the larger. If the positive number has the larger absolute value, the
final answer is positive. If the negative number has the larger absolute value, the
final answer is negative.

   Exercises

   Perform each addition.
   5.
   6.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 13

    7.
   8.
   9. The temperature at noon on a chilly Monday was °F. By the next day at

        noon, the temperature had risen °F. What was the temperature at noon on
        Tuesday?

If an expression consists of only additions, we can break the rules for order of
operations and add the numbers in whatever order we choose.

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression using any shortcuts that you notice.
  10.
  11.

Subtracting Negative Numbers

The following image shows part of a paystub in which an payment needed
to be made, but the payroll folks wanted to track the payment in the deductions
category. Of course, a positive number in the deductions will subtract money
away from the paycheck. Here, though, a deduction of negative dollars has
the effect of adding dollars to the paycheck. Subtracting a negative amount is
equivalent to adding a positive amount.
14 Morgan Chase

        To subtract two signed numbers, we add the first number to the opposite of the
        second number.

   Exercises

   Perform each subtraction.
  12.
  13.
  14.
  15.
  16.
  17.
  18.
  19.
                                                                              Tech Math, 2e 15

Absolute Value, Revisited

Absolute value can be useful when we want to find the difference between two

numbers but we want the result to be positive. For example, suppose that the

temperature in Portland, Oregon is °F, and the temperature in Portland, Maine

is °F. What is the difference in temperature? The simplest way to find the dif-

ference is to do                    , and you would report that as a dif-

ference of "fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit". If you instead did                           , it

would sound a bit strange to say the the difference is "negative fifty-five degrees

Fahrenheit" and you would most likely ignore the negative sign when reporting

the difference. To guarantee that the result of a subtraction is positive, we can put

absolute value bars around the entire calculation. This is sometimes called the

positive difference.

Exercises

Evaluate each expression.

20.

21.

22. The lowest point in Colorado is on the Arikaree River, with an elevation

      feet above sea level. The highest point in Colorado is the peak of Mount Elbert,

      with an elevation          feet above sea level.1 Find the positive difference

      between these elevations.

23. The lowest point in Louisiana is in New Orleans, with an elevation feet below

      sea level. The highest point in Louisiana is the peak of Driskill Mountain, with

      an elevation          feet above sea level.2 Find the positive difference between

      these elevations.

Multiplying Negative Numbers

Suppose you spend dollars on a coffee every day. We could represent spending

3 dollars as a negative number, dollars. Over the course of a -day work week,

you would spend dollars, which we could represent as            dollars. This shows

that                  , or       .
16 Morgan Chase

        If two numbers with opposite signs are multiplied, the product is negative.

 Exercises

 Find each product.
24.
25.

Going back to our coffee example, we saw that  . Therefore, the oppo­

site of  must be positive . Because is the opposite of , this implies that

         .

If two numbers with the same sign are multiplied, the product is positive.

WARNING! These rules are different from the rules for addition; be careful not to mix
them up.

   Exercises

   Find each product.
 26.
  27.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 17

Recall that an exponent represents a repeated multiplication. Let's see what hap-
pens when we raise a negative number to an exponent.

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression.
 28.
 29.
 30.
  31.

        If a negative number is raised to an even power, the result is positive.
        If a negative number is raised to an odd power, the result is negative.

Dividing Negative Numbers

Let's go back to the coffee example we saw earlier:  . We can rewrite

this fact using division and see that  ; a negative divided by a posi-

tive gives a negative result. Also,    ; a negative divided by a negative

gives a positive result. This means that the rules for division work exactly like the

rules for multiplication.

If two numbers with opposite signs are divided, the quotient is negative.
If two numbers with the same sign are divided, the quotient is positive.
18 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Find each quotient.
 32.
 33.
 34.
 35.
 36.
  37.

Go ahead and check those last three exercises with a calculator. Any surprises?

        0 divided by another number is 0.
        A number divided by 0 is undefined, or not a real number.

Here's a quick explanation of why  can't be a real number. Suppose that

there is a mystery number, which we'll call , such that  . Then we can

rewrite this division as a related multiplication,  . But because times any

number is , the left side of this equation is , and we get the result that       ,

which doesn't make sense. Therefore, there is no such number , and          can-

not be a real number.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 19

Order of Operations with Negative Numbers

           P: Work inside of parentheses or grouping symbols, following the order
           PEMDAS as necessary.
           E: Evaluate exponents.
           MD: Perform multiplications and divisions from left to right.
           AS: Perform additions and subtractions from left to right.

   Exercises

   Evaluate each expression using the order of operations.
 38.
 39.
 40.
  41.
 42.
 43.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colorado
   2. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louisiana
20 Morgan Chase

[3]

Decimals

                 Photo by Christian Collins on flickr.

Decimal notation is based on powers of :                                              is one tenth,  is one hundredth,
        is one thousandth, and so on.

thousands hundreds tens ones/units . tenths hundredths thousandths

Exercises

Write each number.
 1. ninety and twenty-three hundredths
2. seven and fifty-six thousandths

                                                                                  20
                               Tech Math, 2e 21

Adding & Subtracting Decimals

Before you add or subtract decimals, you must line up the decimal points.

Exercises

Add each pair of numbers.
3.
4.

When subtracting, you may need to add zeros to the first number so you can bor-
row correctly.

   Exercises

   Subtract each pair of numbers.
   5.
   6.

Multiplying Decimals

        To multiply decimal numbers:
         1. Temporarily ignore the decimal points.
        2. Multiply the numbers as though they are whole numbers.
        3. Add the total number of decimal digits in the two numbers you multi-

             plied. The result will have that number of digits to the right of the deci-
             mal point.
22 Morgan Chase

Note: You do NOT need to line up the decimal points when you are multiplying.

   Exercises

Multiply each pair of numbers.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14. Evie worked       hours at a pay rate of  per hour. How much did she
      earn in total?

Dividing Decimals

Let's review everyone's favorite topic, long division. The three parts of a division
are named as follows: dividend divisor = quotient. When this is written with a
long division symbol, the dividend is inside the symbol, the divisor is on the left,
and the quotient is the answer we create on top.
                                                                                                                                                      Tech Math, 2e 23

     To divide by a decimal:
      1. Write in long division form.
      2. Move the decimal point of the divisor until it is a whole number.
      3. Move the decimal point of the dividend the same number of places to

           the right.
      4. Place the decimal point in the quotient directly above the decimal point

           in the dividend.
      5. Divide the numbers as though they are whole numbers.
      6. If necessary, add zeros to the right of the last digit of the dividend to

           continue.

 Exercises

Divide each pair of numbers.
15.
16.
17.
18.
24 Morgan Chase

Rounding Numbers

It is often necessary to round a number to a specified place value. We will see
more specific instructions in Modules 5 & 6, but let's review the basics of round-
ing a number.

        Rounding a number:
         1. Locate the rounding digit in the place to which you are rounding.
        2. Look at the test digit directly to the right of the rounding digit.
        3. If the test digit is 5 or greater, increase the rounding digit by 1 and drop

             all digits to its right.
        4. If the test digit is less than 5, keep the rounding digit the same and drop

             all digits to its right.

Exercises

Round each number to the indicated place value.

19.  (thousands)

20.  (tens)

21.  (hundredths)

22.  (thousandths)
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 25

If a decimal answer goes on and on, it may be practical to round it off.

   Exercises

23. A subscription to The Chicago Manual of Style Online costs  . Determine
      the monthly cost, rounded to the nearest cent.

24. In the summer of 1919, a military convoy (including Lt. Col. Dwight Eisen-

       hower) drove from Washington, D.C. to San Francisco to assess the condition

       of the nation's developing highway system. The journal entry for August 1 says
       "Good dirt roads. Made 82 miles in 11 hrs."1 What was the convoy's effective

       speed in miles per hour for that day? Round your result to the nearest tenth.

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://after-ike.com/logbook-1919-transcontinental-military-convoy/. See
        https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/07/opinion/the-most-important-road-trip-in-ameri-
        can-history.html if you're interested in the historical context.
26 Morgan Chase

[4]

Fractions

Working with fractions is one of the
most hated/feared/avoided topics in
lower-level mathematics. If you've
always struggled with fractions, now is
the time to face them. Don't avoid
them and hope they'll go away. (They
won't.) We'll start with the basics of what fractions are and proceed from there.

Writing Fractions

A fraction describes equal parts of a whole:
Using official math vocabulary:

   Exercises

   The month of April had rainy days and days that were not rainy.
    1. What fraction of the days were rainy?
   2. What fraction of the days were not rainy?

                                                                                       26
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 27

Simplifying Fractions

Two fractions are equivalent if they represent the same number. (The same por-
tion of a whole.) To build an equivalent fraction, multiply the numerator and
denominator by the same number.

   Exercises

   3. Write as an equivalent fraction with a denominator of .
   4. Write as an equivalent fraction with a denominator of .

Many fractions can be simplified, or reduced. Here are four special cases.
   Exercises

   Simplify each fraction, if possible.
   5.
   6.
    7.
   8.

A fraction is completely reduced, or in simplest form, or in lowest terms, when the
numerator and denominator have no common factors other than . To reduce a
fraction, divide the numerator and denominator by the same number.
28 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Reduce each fraction to simplest form.
   9.
  10.

Multiplying Fractions

To multiply fractions, multiply the numerators and multiply the denominators
straight across. If possible, simplify your answer.

   Exercises

   Multiply each pair of numbers. Be sure that each answer is in simplest form.
  11.
  12.
  13.
  14.

To find a fraction of a number, multiply.
   Exercises

  15. To pass his workplace training, Nathan must correctly answer at least of
        questions. How many questions must he answer correctly to pass the training?
                    Tech Math, 2e 29

Dividing Fractions

To divide by a fraction, multiply by the reciprocal of the second number. (Flip
the second fraction upside-down.)

Exercises

Divide. Be sure that each answer is in simplest form.
16.
17.
18. Suppose you need to measure cups of flour, but the only scoop you can find

      is cup. How many scoops of flour will you need?

Comparing Fractions

If two fractions have the same denominator, we can simply compare their
numerators.
If two fractions have different denominators, we can rewrite them with a com-
mon denominator and then compare their numerators.

   Exercises

  19. Banana bread recipe A requires cup of sugar, whereas banana bread recipe B
        requires cup of sugar. Which recipe requires more sugar?
30 Morgan Chase

Adding & Subtracting Fractions

To add or subtract two fractions with the same denominator, add or subtract the
numerators and keep the common denominator.

   Exercises

20. Jack ate of a pizza. Mack ate    of the pizza. What fraction of the pizza did
       they eat together?

21. Tracy ate of a pizza. Stacy ate  of the pizza. How much more of the pizza
      did Tracy eat?

To add or subtract two fractions with different denominators, first write them
with a common denominator. Then add or subtract them.

   Exercises

   A -inch thick sheet of plywood is going to be laid onto a -inch thick sheet of ply-
   wood.
 22. What is the combined thickness of the two sheets?
                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 31

23. What is the difference in thickness of the two sheets of plywood?

Jacqueline budgets  of her monthly income for food and  of her monthly income
for rent.

24. What fraction of her monthly income does she budget for these two expenses
       combined?

25. What fraction more of her monthly income does she budget for her rent than
      for her food?

Fractions and Decimals

To write a fraction as a decimal, divide the numerator by the denominator.

A decimal that ends (eventually has a remainder of ) is called a terminating dec-

imal. Fun fact: If the denominator of a fraction has no prime factors other than

`s and `s, the decimal will terminate. Also, the fraction can be built up to have a

denominator of , or , or            ...

Exercises

 Write each fraction as a decimal.
26.
27.

A decimal that continues a pattern of digits is called a repeating decimal. We can
represent the repeating digits by using either an overbar or ellipsis (three dots)...

   Exercises

   Write each fraction as a decimal.
32 Morgan Chase

 28.
 29.

Improper Fractions & Mixed Numbers

A fraction which has a larger numerator than denominator is called an improper
fraction. Because an improper fraction is larger than , it can also be written as a
mixed number, with a whole number followed by a fractional part.

Keep in mind that a mixed number represents an addition, not a multiplication.

For example, means  , not .

To write an improper fraction as a mixed number:
 1. Divide the numerator by the denominator to get the whole number

     part.
2. The remainder after dividing is the new numerator.
3. Keep the same denominator.

 Exercises

 Rewrite each improper fraction as a mixed number.
30.
31.
                                                                                                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 33

    To write a mixed number as an improper fraction:
     1. Multiply the whole number part by the denominator.
    2. Add this result to the original numerator to get the new numerator.
    3. Keep the same denominator.

 Exercises

 Rewrite each mixed number as an improper fraction.
32.
33.

Adding or subtracting mixed numbers can be fairly simple or more complicated,

depending on the numbers. One approach is to work with the fractional parts

separately from the whole numbers. For example,      can be rewritten

as             and rearranged to                     . Then

               and, with a little more work,         , so the result is .

    Exercises

 34.
 35.

Multiplying or dividing mixed numbers is more complicated than it may appear.
Change any mixed numbers into improper fractions before doing the calcula-
tion, then change the answer back to a mixed number if possible.
34 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

36. Multiply:

37. cups of water will be divided equally into  jars. How much water will go
      into each jar?

                 Exercise Answers
                                                               Tech Math, 2e 35

[5]

Accuracy and Significant Figures

In the first few modules, we rarely con-

cerned ourselves with rounding; we

assumed that every number we were told

was exact and we didn't have to worry

about any measurement error. However,

every measurement contains some error.

A standard sheet of paper is  inches

wide and inches high, but it's possible

that the actual measurements could be

closer to  and  inches. Even Photo by Tudor Barker on flickr.

if we measure something very carefully,

with very sensitive instruments, we should assume that there could be some
small measurement error.1

Exact Values and Approximations

A number is an exact value if it is the result of counting or a definition.
A number is an approximation if it is the result of a measurement or of rounding.

   Exercises

   Identify each number as an exact value or an approximation.

                                                                                       35
36 Morgan Chase

1. An inch is of a foot.

2. This board is inches long.

3. There are students in class.

4. A car's tachometer reads       rpm.

5. A right angle measures .

6. The angle of elevation of a ramp is .

Accuracy and Significant Figures

      African-American women were vital to NASA's success in the 1960s, as shown in the movie Hidden
      Figures. Photo by NASA/Kim Shiflett on flickr.

Because measurements are inexact, we need to consider how accurate they are.
This requires us to think about significant figures--often abbreviated "sig figs" in
conversation--which are the digits in the measurement that we trust to be cor-
rect. The accuracy of a number is equal to the number of significant figures. (By
the way, the terms "significant digits" and "significant figures" are used inter-
changeably.) The following rules aren't particularly difficult to understand but
they can take time to absorb and internalize, so we'll include lots of examples and
exercises.
                                                                Tech Math, 2e 37

Significant Figures

1. All nonzero digits are significant.

Ex:  has five sig figs, and             has five sig figs.

2. All zeros between other nonzero digits are significant.

Ex:  has five sig figs, and             has five sig figs.

3. Any zeros to the right of a decimal number are significant.

Ex: has three sig figs, but             has five sig figs.

4. Zeros on the left of a decimal number are NOT significant.

Ex:  has three sig figs, and            has three sig figs.

5. Zeros on the right of a whole number are NOT significant unless they

are marked with an overbar.

Ex:  has three sig figs, but            has five sig figs.

Another way to think about #4 and #5 above is that zeros that are merely showing
the place value--where the decimal point belongs--are NOT significant.

   Exercises

   Determine the accuracy (i.e., the number of significant figures) of each number.
    7.
   8.
   9.
  10.
  11.
  12.
38 Morgan Chase

In 1856, the first official measurement of

the height of Mount Everest--called

Sagarmatha in Nepal and Chomolungma in

Tibet--was announced. The height was

determined to be exactly  feet, but

there was concern that people would

think this was only a rough estimate

rounded to the nearest thousand feet.

Therefore, the height was announced as

         feet, so that everyone seeing that

number would believe that the measure-
ment was correct to the nearest foot.2 Yes,

to demonstrate the correctness of the

measurement, an incorrect measurement        Mt. Everest, Lohtse, and Nupse in the early
                                             morning. Photo by Ralf Kayser on flickr.
was announced.

Instead of fudging a number like  to show that it is correct to the nearest

foot, we can write it with an an overbar to indicate that the zeros are significant.

Putting          in a newspaper headline in 1856 would probably have confused

people, but you can handle it because you're in a math class. Writing                     is

our way of saying "Really, to the nearest foot, it's exactly  feet!"

Exercises

Determine the accuracy (i.e., the number of significant figures) of each number.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Two things to remember: we don't put an overbar over a nonzero digit, and we
don't need an overbar for any zeros on the right of a decimal number because
those are already understood to be significant.
                                                             Tech Math, 2e 39

Accuracy-Based Rounding

As we saw in Module 3, it is often necessary to round a number. We often round
to a certain place value, such as the nearest hundredth, but there is another
way to round. Accuracy-based rounding considers the number of significant figures
rather than the place value.

     Accuracy-based rounding:

      1. Locate the rounding digit to which you are rounding by counting from
          the left until you have the correct number of significant figures.

     2. Look at the test digit directly to the right of the rounding digit.

     3. If the test digit is 5 or greater, increase the rounding digit by 1 and drop
          all digits to its right. If the test digit is less than 5, keep the rounding digit
          the same and drop all digits to its right.

Exercises

Round each number so that it has the indicated number of significant figures.

17.        (three sig figs)

18.        (four sig figs)

19.  (two sig figs)

20.  (three sig figs)

When the rounding digit of a whole number is a that gets rounded up to a , we
must write an overbar above that .

Similarly, when the rounding digit of a decimal number is a  that gets rounded
up to a , we must include the in that decimal place.
40 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

Round each number so that it has the indicated number of significant figures. Be sure
to include trailing zeros or an overbar if necessary.

21.        (two sig figs)

22.        (three sig figs)

23.  (two sig figs)

24.  (three sig figs)

The height of Mount Everest has changed over the years due to plate tectonics and

earthquakes. In December 2020, it was jointly announced by Nepal and China that

the summit of Mount Everest has an elevation of         ft.3

25. Round            ft to two sig figs.

26. Round            ft to three sig figs.

27. Round            ft to four sig figs.

28. Round            ft to five sig figs.

29. Round            ft to six sig figs.

Accuracy when Multiplying and Dividing

Suppose you needed to square the number . You could rewrite as the

improper fraction and then figure out that                    , which equals the

repeating decimal

Because most people prefer decimals to fractions, we might decide to round

to   and find that                        . The answer  looks very accurate, but

it is a false accuracy because there is round-off error involved. Only when we

round to three sig figs do we get an accurate result:         rounded to three sig

figs is , which is accurate because         rounded to three sig figs is also

. It turns out that because  has only three significant figures, our answer must

be rounded to three significant figures.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 41

        When multiplying or dividing approximate numbers, the answer must be
        rounded to the same number of significant figures as the least accurate of the
        original numbers.

Don't round off the original numbers; do the necessary calculations first, then
round the answer as your last step.

   Exercises

   Use a calculator to multiply or divide as indicated. Then round to the appropriate
   level of accuracy.
 30.
  31.
 32.
 33.
 34. Suppose you are filling a 5-gallon can of gasoline. The gasoline costs

        per gallon, and you estimate that you will buy gallons. How much should
        you expect to spend?
42 Morgan Chase

Bonus material: Here is a comic strip from xkcd.com showing that including a lot
of decimal digits can give a false sense of accuracy.

             From the web comic xkcd.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Here is an example of a speed camera with gigantic measurement error:
        https://youtube.com/shorts/cCYy29RuhV8

   2. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_Everest#cite_ref-tas1982_33-0
   3. Source: https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/mount-everest-height-

        nepal-china/2020/12/08/a7b3ad1e-389a-11eb-aad9-8959227280c4_story.html
                                                  Tech Math, 2e 43

[6]

Precision and GPE

When someone is selling a used car, its
mileage might be listed as 80,000 miles or
82,000 miles because a buyer will want to
know the approximate mileage but doesn't
need an exact value. If you buy the car,
however, you'll need to know the mileage to the nearest mile when you're com-
pleting the registration paperwork.

Precision

The precision of a number is the place value of the rightmost significant figure.

For example,  is precise to the thousands place,  is precise to the

ones place, and something like  would be precise to the tenths place.

Exercises

Identify the precision (i.e., the place value of the rightmost significant figure) of each
number.
 1.
2.
3.

                                43
44 Morgan Chase

   4.
   5.
   6.

Precision-Based Rounding

In Module 3, we used precision-based rounding because we were rounding to a
specified place value; for example, rounding to the nearest tenth. Let's practice
this with overbars and trailing zeros.

        Precision-based rounding:
            1. Locate the rounding digit in the place to which you are rounding.
           2. Look at the test digit directly to the right of the rounding digit.
           3. If the test digit is 5 or greater, increase the rounding digit by 1 and
                drop all digits to its right. If the test digit is less than 5, keep the round-
                ing digit the same and drop all digits to its right.

Remember, when the rounding digit of a whole number is a that gets rounded
up to a , we must write an overbar above that .
Also, when the rounding digit of a decimal number is a that gets rounded up to
a , we must include the in that decimal place.
                                                                    Tech Math, 2e 45

Exercises

Round each number to the indicated place value. Be sure to include an overbar or
trailing zeros if necessary.

7.   (thousands)

8.   (hundreds)

9.   (tens)

10.  (tenths)

11.  (hundredths)

12.  (thousandths)

Precision when Adding and Subtracting

Suppose the attendance at a large event is estimated at        people, but then

you see people leave. Is the new estimate  ? No, because the original esti-

mate was precise only to the nearest thousand. We can't start with an imprecise

number and finish with a more precise number. If we estimated that                    peo-

ple had left, then we could revise our attendance estimate to  because this

estimate maintains the same level of precision as our original estimate.

     When adding or subtracting numbers with different levels of precision, the
     answer must be rounded to the same precision as the least precise of the origi-
     nal numbers.

Don't round off the original numbers; do the necessary calculations first, then
round the answer as your last step.
46 Morgan Chase

Exercises

Add or subtract as indicated. Round to the appropriate level of precision.

13. Find the combined weight of four packages with the following weights: lb,

           lb,   lb, lb.

14. Find the combined weight of four packages with the following weights: lb,

           lb,   lb, lb.

15. While purchasing renter's insurance, Chandra estimates the value of her

insurable possessions at       . After selling some items valued at         ,

what would be the revised estimate?

16. Chandra knows that she has roughly     in her checking account. After using

her debit card to make two purchases of        and  , how much would

she have left in her account?

Before we move on, let's circle back to multiplication and division

again. If you are multiplying by an exact number, you can consider

this a repeated addition. For example, suppose you measure the

weight of an object to be      ounces and you want to know the

weight of three of these objects; multiplying  times is the same

as adding                      ounces. The answer is still pre-

cise to the hundredths place. When working with an exact number,

we can assume that it has infinitely many significant figures. (Treat exact num-

bers like royalty; their accuracy is perfect and it would be an insult to even ques-

tion it.)

Greatest Possible Measurement Error (GPE)

Suppose you are weighing a dog with a scale that displays the weight rounded to

the nearest pound. If the scale says Sir Barks-A-Lot weighs pounds, he could

weigh anywhere from        pounds to almost    pounds. The true weight could

be as much as pounds above or below the measured weight, which we could

write as         .
                                                                           Tech Math, 2e 47

Now suppose you are weighing Sir Barks-A-Lot with a scale that displays the

weight rounded to the nearest tenth of a pound. If the scale says Sir Barks-A-

Lot weighs     pounds, we now know that he could weigh anywhere from

pounds to almost     pounds. The true weight could be as much as           pounds

above or below the measured weight, which we could write as                .

As we increase the level of precision in our measurement, we decrease the great­-
est possible measurement error or GPE. The GPE is always one half the precision; if
the precision is to the nearest tenth, , the GPE is half of one tenth, or five hun-
dredths, . The GPE will always be a in the place to the right of the place
value of the number's precision.

Another way to think about the GPE is that it gives the range of values that

would round off to the number in question.     tells us a lower value and an

upper value.         is the lowest weight that would round up to , and

               is the upper limit of the weights that would round down to .

(Yes, 23.5 technically would round up to 24, but it is easier to just say  instead

of  .) Using inequalities, we could represent                 as the range of values

                  .

    Exercises

The attendance at a Portland Thorns match is estimated to be  people.
17. What is the precision of this estimate?
48 Morgan Chase

18. What is the greatest possible error in this estimate?

A roll of plastic sheeting is  inches thick.

19. What is the precision of this measurement?

20. What is the greatest possible error in this measurement?

Plastic sheeting  inches thick is referred to as           mil.

21. What is the precision of this measurement, in mils?

22. What is the greatest possible measurement error, in mils?

Summary of Accuracy, Precision, GPE

Here is a summary of the important terms from Modules 5 & 6. It is easy to get
them mixed up, but remembering that "precision" and "place value" both start
with "p" can be helpful.

        Summary of Terms
        Significant figures: the digits in a number that we trust to be correct
        Accuracy: the number of significant figures
        When multiplying or dividing, we use the accuracy to round the result.
        Precision: the place value of the rightmost significant digit
        Greatest possible measurement error (GPE): one half the precision
        When adding or subtracting, we use the precision to round the result.
                                                                 Tech Math, 2e 49

 Exercises

 Google Maps says that the driving distance from
 CCC's main campus to the Canadian border,
 rounded to the nearest mile, is miles.
23. Write the distance with an overbar showing the

       correct precision.
24. What is the precision?
25. What is the GPE?

 Google Maps says that the driving time, rounded to
 the nearest minute, is hours and minutes.
26. What is the precision of this estimate?
27. What is the GPE of this estimate?
 Of course, the traffic conditions will change during
 the trip, making the estimate of hours and
 minutes unrealistically precise. Let's assume that
 the drive will take 5.5 hours.
28. What is the accuracy of this estimate?
29. What is the accuracy of the distance?
30. Calculate the average speed of the vehicle,

       rounded appropriately.
31. Why did we need to consider the accuracy

       instead of the precision for this calculation?

                                               Exercise Answers
50 Morgan Chase

[7]

Formulas

You may use a calculator throughout this module if needed.

A formula is an equation or set of calcula-
tions that takes a number (or numbers) as
input, and produces an output. The out-
put is often a number, but it could also be
a decision such as yes or no.

Each unknown number in a formula is
called a variable because its value can vary.
A variable is usually represented with a
letter of the alphabet. To evaluate a for- Photo by Rainier Ridao on Unsplash.
mula, we substitute a number (or num-
bers) into the formula and then perform the steps using the order of operations.

Formulas with One Input

Many formulas will have just one input variable. Note: When a number is written

directly next to a variable, it indicates multiplication. For example,  means

.

                         50
                                                                        Tech Math, 2e 51

Exercises

The formula                        gives the cost, in dollars, of mailing a large envelope

weighing ounces through the USPS.1

1. Find the cost of mailing a -ounce envelope.

2. Find the cost of mailing a -ounce envelope.

Radio Cab charges the following rates for a taxi ride: a fixed fee of      to get in the
                                                                        miles long can
taxi, plus a rate of  per mile.2 The total cost, in dollars, of a ride

be represented by the formula                   .

3. Find the cost of a -mile ride.

4. Find the cost of a -mile ride.

5. Find the cost of getting in the taxi, then changing your mind and getting out
    without riding anywhere.

The number of members a state has in the U.S. House of Representatives can be

approximated by the formula         , where is the population in millions.3

The 2020 populations of three states are as follows:4

                Oregon
             Washington
              California

 Round all answers to the nearest whole number.
 6. How many U.S. Representatives does Oregon have?
  7. How many U.S. Representatives does Washington have?
 8. How many U.S. Representatives does California have?
 The number of electoral votes a state has can be approximated by the formula

                               , where is the population in millions.
 9. How many electoral votes does Oregon have?
10. How many electoral votes does Washington have?
11. How many electoral votes does California have?
52 Morgan Chase

Temperature Conversions

You probably know that ° Fahrenheit is the freezing point of water, and °
Fahrenheit is the boiling point of water. The Celsius equivalents are °C and
°C. The formulas shown below allow us to convert between the two temperature
scales.

        Temperature Formulas

   Exercises

  12. The record high temperature in Portland, Oregon occurred during the "heat
        dome" event in June, 2021. As shown, it was °C at your author's house and
        the squirrels were laying low. Convert this temperature to Fahrenheit.

                                  Based on the evidence, the melting point of squirrel is right around 46°C.
                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 53

13. The traditionally accepted "normal" body temperature of a human5 is  °F.

   What is this temperature in Celsius?

14. The FDA recommends that a freezer be set below  °C. What is the Fahren-
      heit equivalent?

15. A package of frozen pancakes from IKEA calls for the oven to be set to
      °F. IKEA is based in Sweden, and this temperature clearly was originally calcu-
      lated in Celsius. What is the corresponding Celsius temperature?

Formulas with More than One Input

Some formulas have more than one input variable. Just pay attention to which
number goes in for each variable.

   Exercises

When a patient's blood pressure is checked, they are usually told two numbers: the
systolic blood pressure (SBP) and the diastolic blood pressure (DBP). The mean arter-
ial pressure (MAP) can be estimated by the following formula:
. (The units are mm Hg.) Calculate the mean arterial pressure for each patient.

16. SBP = , DBP =

17. SBP = , DBP =

UPS uses the following formula6 to determine the "mea-

surement" of a package with length , width , and height

:                  . Determine the measurement of a

package with the following dimensions.

18. length inches, width inches, height inches

19. length inches, width inches, height inches
54 Morgan Chase

Formulas with a Yes or No Answer

Some formulas give a yes or no answer: success or failure, approved or disap-
proved, etc. After calculating the result from the formula, we need to compare it
to a given number to see whether the result is within a specified range.

   Exercises

In Australia, a chicken egg is designated "large" if its

mass, in grams, satisfies the following formula:

                  . Determine whether each egg qual-

ifies as large.7

20. Egg 1's mass is  grams.

21. Egg 2's mass is  grams.

22. Egg 3's mass is  grams.

23. Egg 4's mass is  grams.

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://pe.usps.com/text/dmm300/Notice123.htm#_c037
   2. Source: https://www.radiocab.net/services-radio-cab/
   3. The value 0.76 comes from dividing the total U.S. population in 2020, around 331 mil­

        lion people, by the 435 seats in the House of Representatives.
   4. Source: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2020/dec/2020-apportionment-data.html
   5. See this article for a counterargument: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/12/well/live/

        fever-normal-body-temperature.html
   6. Source: https://www.ups.com/us/en/help-center/packaging-and-supplies/prepare-over-

        ize.page
    7. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicken_egg_sizes
                                                              Tech Math, 2e 55

[8]

Perimeter and Circumference

You may use a calculator throughout this module if needed.

Perimeter

A polygon is a closed geometric figure with   Photo by Hermes Rivera on Unsplash
straight sides. Common polygons include
triangles, squares, rectangles, parallelo-
grams, trapezoids, pentagons, hexagons,
octagons... Just as a perimeter fence runs
along the outside edge of a region, the
perimeter of a polygon is the total distance
around the outside. In general, to find the
perimeter of a polygon, you can add up
the lengths of all of its sides.

Also, if you haven't already, now is the
time to get in the habit of including units in your answers.

           55
56 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

    1. Find the perimeter of the triangle.

   2. Find the perimeter of the trapezoid.

If we know that some of the sides of a polygon are equal, we can use a formula
as an alternative to adding up all of the lengths individually. The first formula
shown below uses the variable for the side of a square. The rectangle formulas
use for length and for width, or for base and for height; these terms are
interchangeable.

Perimeter Formulas

Square:

Rectangle:          or

Rectangle:          or
                                         Tech Math, 2e 57

Exercises

3. Find the perimeter of the square.

4. Find the perimeter of the rectangle.

5. A storage area, which is a rectangle that is feet long and feet wide, needs
     to be fenced around all four sides. How many feet of fencing is required? (To
     keep it simple, ignore any gates or other complications.)

6. Giancarlo is putting crown molding around the edge of the ceiling of his living
     room. If the room is a -foot by -foot rectangle, how much crown molding
     does he need?
58 Morgan Chase

The sides of a regular polygon are all equal in length. Therefore, multiplying the
length of a side by the number of sides will give us the perimeter.

        Perimeter Formula
        Regular Polygon with sides of length :

   Exercises

   Find the perimeter of each regular polygon.
    7. Each side of the hexagon is inches long.

   8. Each side of the octagon is centimeters long.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 59

Circumference

The distance around the outside of a circle is called the circumference, rather than
the perimeter. Let's review some circle vocabulary before moving on.
Every point on a circle is the same distance from its center. This distance from
the center to the edge of the circle is called the radius. The distance from one
edge to another, through the center of the circle, is called the diameter. As you can
see, the diameter is twice the length of the radius.

Throughout history, different civilizations have discovered that the circumfer-

ence of a circle is slightly more than times the length of its diameter. (By the

year 2000 BCE, the Babylonians were using the value    and the Egyp-
                                                     is an even better
tians were using the value  .)1 The value

approximation for the ratio of the circumference to the diameter. However, the

actual value cannot be written as an exact fraction; it is the irrational number ,

pronounced "pie", which is approximately  .
60 Morgan Chase

        Circumference Formulas

Any scientific calculator will have a key; using this will give you the most accu-

rate result, although you should be sure to round your answer appropriately.

(Remember from Module 5 that we need to pay attention to significant figures

when multiplying or dividing.) Many people use  as an approximation for ,

but this can lead to round-off error. If you must use an approximation for , use

     .

Exercises

Calculate the circumference of each circle. Round each answer to the appropriate
level of accuracy.

9.

10.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 61

  11.

  12.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. This information comes from Chapter 1 of the book A History of Pi by Petr Beckmann. It
        is a surprisingly interesting read.
62 Morgan Chase

[9]

Percents Part 1

In this module, we will look at the basics of percents, and
how percents are related to fractions and decimals. Then we
will solve some straightforward percent problems.
We'll return to percents in modules 12 and 27 and solve
more complicated problems. This will give you a chance to
develop your skills gradually without getting confused.

Percent Basics

The word percent means "per one hundred". You can think of a percent as a frac-
tion with a denominator of 100.

                                                                                       62
                                                                                                             Tech Math, 2e 63

Exercises

1. What percent of the squares are shaded blue?
2. What percent of the squares are not shaded blue?

To write a percent as a fraction: drop the percent sign, write the number over
100, and simplify if possible. (Notice that if a percent is greater than 100%, the
fraction will be greater than 1, and if a percent is less than 1%, the fraction will be
less than .)

   Exercises

Write each percent as a fraction, and simplify if
possible.

3. About       of Earth's surface is covered by
    water.1

4. About       of Earth's land surface is perma-

nent cropland.2

5. About       of Earth's atmosphere is carbon
    dioxide.3
                                                                                  Photo by NASA on Unsplash

6. The number of HVACR technician jobs in the U.S. in 2032 is predicted to be
              of the number of jobs in 2022.4
64 Morgan Chase

To write a percent as a decimal: drop the percent sign and move the decimal
point two places to the left. (Notice that if the percent is not a whole number, the
decimal will extend beyond the hundredths place.)

   Exercises

   Write each percent from Exercises 3 through 6 as a decimal.
    7.
   8.
   9.
  10.

To write a decimal as a percent: move the decimal point two places to the right
and insert a percent sign.

   Exercises

   Write each decimal number as a percent.
  11.
  12.
  13.
  14.
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 65

To write a fraction as a percent, write the fraction as a decimal by dividing the
numerator by the denominator, then move the decimal point two places to the
right and insert a percent sign.
Alternate method: If the denominator of the fraction is a factor of 100, it can eas-
ily be built up to have a denominator of .

   Exercises

  15. out of students were tardy on Wednesday. Write as a percent.
  16. A package of m&m's contained orange m&m's. Write as a percent.

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Amount

You may use a calculator for the remainder of this module if needed.
We often use the words amount and base in a percent problem. The amount is the
answer we get after finding the percent of the original number. The base is the
original number, the number we find the percent of. (You may also think of the
amount as the part, and the base as the whole.) We can call the percent the rate.

Be sure to change the percent to a decimal before multiplying.
66 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

17. What is of ?

18.       of is what number?

19. Find         of .

20.       of is equal to what amount?

21. What number is     of     ?

22. Calculate    of .

Suppose you buy an electric drill with a retail price of  in a city with
sales tax.

23. Find the amount of the tax. Round to the nearest cent, if necessary.

24. How much do you pay in total?

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth#Surface
   2. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth#Surface
   3. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmosphere_of_Earth#Composition
   4. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook

        Handbook, Heating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Mechanics and Installers, at
        https://www.bls.gov/ooh/installation-maintenance-and-repair/heating-air-conditioning-
        and-refrigeration-mechanics-and-installers.htm
                            Tech Math, 2e 67

[10]

Ratios, Rates, Proportions

As we saw in the previous module, a percent is a fraction that compares a number
to 100. This is an example of a ratio. In this module, we will focus on ratios and
rates, which look like fractions, and then we'll finish up with proportions, which
look like two fractions set equal to each other. Many of the examples in this mod-
ule can be worked without a calculator, while others are best done with a cal-
culator because you'll be multiplying big numbers or dividing messy decimals.
You can ask your instructor for guidance if you aren't sure whether a calculator
is appropriate.

Ratios & Rates

A ratio is the quotient of two numbers or the quotient of two quantities with the
same units. (Pop quiz... Which operation gives you a quotient: addition, subtrac-
tion, multiplication, or division?)
When writing a ratio as a fraction, the first quantity is the numerator and the sec-
ond quantity is the denominator. If the fraction can be simplified, reduce it to
lowest terms.

   Exercises

    1. Find the ratio of minutes to hours. Simplify the fraction, if possible.

                                                                                       67
68 Morgan Chase

A rate is the quotient of two quantities with different units. You must include the
units.
When writing a rate as a fraction, the first quantity is the numerator and the sec-
ond quantity is the denominator. If the fraction can be simplified, reduce it to
lowest terms.

   Exercises

   2. A car travels miles in hours. Write the rate as a fraction.

Unit Rates

For practical purposes, expressing a rate as a reduced fraction is not always use-
ful. Expressing a rate as a single number with units such as miles per hour is often
more meaningful. This is called a unit rate because it expresses the quantity in
the numerator that corresponds to one unit of the denominator.
To find the unit rate, divide the numerator by the denominator and express the
rate as a mixed number or decimal. The units can be expressed with the word
"per": miles per hour, dollars per gallon, grams per deciliter, pounds per square
inch, and so on.

   Exercises

   3. A car travels miles in hours. Write the car's average speed as a unit rate.

A unit price is a rate with the price in the numerator and a denominator equal to .
The unit price tells the cost of one unit or one item. To find the unit price, divide
the cost by the size or number of items.
You may use a calculator to calculate the unit price.
                                                               Tech Math, 2e 69

Exercises

4. A 15.8-ounce box of Carmella Creeper cereal costs $5.29.
     Determine the unit price.

5. An 18.8-ounce box of Count Chocula cereal costs $5.29.
     Determine the unit price.

6. The Monster Cereals are on sale, 2 boxes for $9. If you
     buy a 16-ounce box of Franken Berry cereal and a
     16-ounce box of Boo Berry cereal, what is the unit price
     per ounce?

Proportions

A proportion says that two ratios (or rates) are equal.
   Exercises

   Determine whether each proportion is true or false by simplifying each fraction.
    7.
   8.

A common method of determining whether a proportion is true or false is called
cross-multiplying or finding the cross products. We multiply diagonally across the
equal sign. In a true proportion, the cross products are equal.

                                                              
70 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Determine whether each proportion is true or false by cross-multiplying.
   9.
  10.
  11.
  12.

As we saw in Module 7, we can use a variable to stand for a missing number. If
a proportion has a missing number, we can use cross multiplication to solve for
the missing number. This is as close to algebra as we get in this textbook.

        To solve a proportion for a variable:
         1. Set the cross products equal to form an equation of the form

                                .
        2. Isolate the variable by rewriting the multiplication equation as a divi-

             sion equation.
        3. Check the solution by substituting the answer into the original propor-

             tion and finding the cross products.

You may discover slightly different methods that you prefer. If you think "Hey,
can't I do this a different way?", you're probably right.

   Exercises

   Solve for the variable.
  13.
                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 71

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.       (calculator recommended)

Problems that involve rates, ratios, scale models, etc. can be solved with propor-
tions. When solving a real-world problem using a proportion, be consistent with
the units.
You may use a calculator for the remainder of this module if needed.

   Exercises

19. Tonisha drove her car miles and used         gallons of gas. At this rate, how
      far could she drive using gallons of gas?

20. Marcus worked hours and earned               . At the same rate of pay, how long

     would he have to work to earn       ?

21. Taylor is trying to figure out the straight-line distance from Portland to Mt.

     Hood. On their map, inch represents miles. The distance between Portland

     and Mt. Hood on the map is pretty close to  inches. What is the actual dis-
     tance?

22. Púki the cat lives in a Reykjavík bookstore and likes to sleep on a warm table-

     top video screen. Suppose you have a picture of Púki that is  pixels wide

     and  pixels high but you need to reduce it in size so that it is  pixels

     high. If the height and width are kept proportional, what is the width of the

     picture after it has been reduced?
72 Morgan Chase

                                                That's pronounced "pookee", not "pyookee".

                                                Exercise Answers
                                                                 Tech Math, 2e 73

[11]

Scientific Notation

               "Number 10" by yoppy is licensed under CC BY 2.0

Powers of Ten

Decimal notation is based on powers of 10: 0.1 is  , 0.01 is     , 0.001 is  , and
so on.                                                                 ,           ,

We represent these powers with negative exponents:
                , etc.

Negative exponents:

Note: This is true for any base, not just 10, but we will focus only on 10 in this course.

                                                                                       73
74 Morgan Chase

With our base 10 number system, any power of 10 can be written as a 1 in a cer-
tain decimal place.

If you haven't watched the video "Powers of Ten" from 1977 on YouTube, take ten
minutes right now and check it out. Your mind will never be the same again.

Scientific Notation

Let's consider how we could rewrite some different numbers using these powers
of 10.

Let's take 50,000 as an example. 50,000 is equal to   or                 .

Looking in the other direction, a decimal such as 0.0007 is equal to           or

.

The idea behind scientific notation is that we can represent very large or very
small numbers in a more compact format: a number between and , multi-
plied by a power of .

A number is written in scientific notation if it is written in the form     ,

where is an integer and is any real number such that      .

Note: An integer is a number with no fraction or decimal part: ... -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,
3 ...

Although we generally try to avoid using the "x" shaped multiplication symbol,
it is frequently used with scientific notation.
                                      Tech Math, 2e 75

Exercises

    1. Earth and Mars are two of the smaller planets. Earth has a mass of approxi-
        mately 5,970,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms, and Mars has a mass
        of approximately 639,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms. Can you
        determine which mass is larger?

Clearly, it is difficult to keep track of all those zeros. Let's rewrite those huge
numbers using scientific notation.

   Exercises

2. Earth has a mass of approximately                    kilograms, and Mars has a
     mass of approximately            kilograms. Can you determine which
     mass is larger?

It is much easier to compare the powers of 10 and determine that the mass of the
Earth is larger because it has a larger power of 10. You may be familiar with the
term order of magnitude; this simply refers to the difference in the powers of of
the two numbers. Earth's mass is one order of magnitude larger because 24 is 1
more than 23.

   Exercises

   Suppose someone tells you their salary is "six figures".
   3. To the nearest dollar, what is their minimum possible salary? Write the answer

        in standard notation and in scientific notation.
   4. To the nearest dollar, what is their maximum possible salary? Write the answer

        in standard notation and in scientific notation.
76 Morgan Chase

We can apply scientific notation to small decimals as well.

   Exercises

   5. The radius of a hydrogen atom is approximately 0.000000000053 meters.
        The radius of a chlorine atom is approximately 0.00000000018 meters. Can
        you determine which radius is larger?

Again, keeping track of all those zeros is a chore. Let's rewrite those decimal
numbers using scientific notation.

   Exercises

6. The radius of a hydrogen atom is approximately                   meters. The
     radius of a chlorine atom is approximately              meters. Can you
     determine which radius is larger?

The radius of the chlorine atom is larger because it has a larger power of 10; the
digits 1 and 8 for chlorine begin in the tenth decimal place, but the digits 5 and 3
for hydrogen begin in the eleventh decimal place.

Scientific notation is very helpful for really large numbers, like the mass of a
planet, or really small numbers, like the radius of an atom. It allows us to do
calculations or compare numbers without going cross-eyed counting all those
zeros.

   Exercises

   Write each of the following numbers in scientific notation.
    7.
   8.
                                                                                                                                                      Tech Math, 2e 77

 9.
10.
 Convert the following numbers from scientific notation to standard decimal notation.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Multiplying & Dividing with Scientific Notation

You may be familiar with a shortcut for multiplying numbers with zeros on the

end; for example, to multiply   , we can multiply the significant digits

and count up the total number of zeros, which is five, and write five

zeros on the back end of the :  . This shortcut can be applied to num-

bers in scientific notation.

To multiply powers of , add the exponents:

 Exercises

Multiply each of the following and write the answer in scientific notation.
15.
16.
17.
18.
78 Morgan Chase

When the numbers get messy, it's probably a good idea to use a calculator. If you
are dividing numbers in scientific notation with a calculator, you may need to use
parentheses carefully. The following rule is true, but you may just want to use a
calculator instead.

               To divide powers of , subtract the exponents:

Exercises

19. New Jersey has the highest population density of the 50 states.1 Its population

is              people and its land area is       square miles. Divide these

numbers to find the population density in people per square mile.

20. California has the highest population density of all states west of the Missis-

sippi River.2 Its population is              people and its land area is

square miles. Divide these numbers to find the population density in people

per square mile.

21. The mass of a proton is                  kg. The mass of an electron is

                kg. Divide these numbers to determine approximately how

many times greater the mass of a proton is than the mass of an electron.

Engineering Notation

Closely related to scientific notation is engineering notation, which uses powers of
        . This is the way large numbers are often reported in the news; if roughly
           people live in Oregon City, we say "thirty-seven thousand" and we might

see it written as "37 thousand"; it would be unusual to think of it as
and report the number as "three point seven ten thousands".

One thousand =  , one million =  , one billion =  , one trillion =        , and so
on.
                                                                          Tech Math, 2e 79

In engineering notation, the power of is always a multiple of , and the other

part of the number must be between and  .

A number is written in engineering notation if it is written in the form

, where is a multiple of and is any real number such that                 .

Note: Prefixes for large numbers such as kilo, mega, giga, and tera are essentially engi­
neering notation, as are prefixes for small numbers such as micro, nano, and pico. We'll see
these in Module 16.

   Exercises

Write each number in engineering notation, then in scientific notation.

22. The U.S. population is around     million people.3

23. The world population is around    billion people.4

24. The U.S. national debt is around  trillion dollars.5

25. Divide the U.S. national debt by the U.S. population to determine the amount
      of debt per person.

For a visualization of the relative sizes of a million, a billion, and a trillion, see
this graphic made by Chris Kane, graphic artist and my friend from high school
(PDF file).

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Jersey
   2. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_states_and_territo-

        ries_of_the_United_States_by_population_density
   3. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/popclock/, January 1, 2024
80 Morgan Chase

   4. Retrieved from https://www.census.gov/popclock/, January 1, 2024
   5. Retrieved from https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/datasets/debt-to-the-penny/, January 1, 2024
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 81

[12]

Percents Part 2 and Error Analysis

You may use a calculator throughout
this module.
Recall: The amount is the answer we get
after finding the percent of the original
number. The base is the original num-
ber, the number we find the percent of.
We can call the percent the rate.
When we looked at percents in Module How could anyone pass up that 0.005% discount?
9, we focused on finding the amount. In
this module, we will practice finding the percentage rate and the base.

We can translate from words into algebra.
        · "is" means equals
        · "of" means multiply
        · "what" means a variable

                                                                                       81
82 Morgan Chase

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Rate

Suppose you earned points on a -point quiz. To figure out your grade as

a percent, you need to answer the question " is what percent of ?" We can

translate this sentence into the equation   .

Exercises

    1. is what percent of ?
   2. What percent of is ?

Be aware that this method gives us the answer in decimal form and we must
move the decimal point to convert the answer to a percent.
Also, if the instructions don't explicitly tell you how to round your answer, use
your best judgment: to the nearest whole percent or nearest tenth of a percent,
to two or three significant figures, etc.

Solving Percent Problems: Finding the Base

Suppose you earn cash rewards for the amount you charge on your credit

card. If you want to earn in cash rewards, how much do you need to charge

on your card? To figure this out, you need to answer the question " is of

what number?" We can translate this into the equation  .

Exercises

3.  is of what dollar value?

4.  of what number is ?
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 83

Solving Percent Problems: Using Proportions

Recall that a percent is a ratio, a fraction out of 100. Instead of translating word
for word as we just were, we can set up a proportion with the percentage rate over
100. Because the base is the original amount, it corresponds to 100%.

Let's try Exercises 1 through 4 again, using proportions.
   Exercises

5. is what percent of ?

6. What percent of is ?

7.  is of what dollar value?

8.  of what number is ?

Now that we have looked at both methods, you are free to use whichever method
you prefer: percent equations or proportions.

   Exercises

 9. The University of Oregon women's basketball team made 13 of the 29 three-
      points shots they attempted during a game against UNC. What percent of their
      three-point shots did the team make?

10. A bottle of Dr. Pepper contains 65 grams of added sugars, which is 129% of the
      recommended daily intake.1 What is the recommended daily intake?
84 Morgan Chase

Solving Percent Problems: Percent Increase

When a quantity changes, it is often useful to know by what percent it changed. If
the price of a candy bar is increased by 50 cents, you might be annoyed because
it's it's a relatively large percentage of the original price. If the price of a car is
increased by 50 cents, though, you wouldn't care because it's such a small per-
centage of the original price.

        To find the percent of increase:
         1. Subtract the two numbers to find the amount of increase.
        2. Using this result as the amount and the original number as the base,

             divide and find the unknown percent.

Notice that we always use the original number for the base, the number that
occurred earlier in time. In the case of a percent increase, this is the smaller of
the two numbers.

   Exercises

11. The price of a candy bar increased from  to  . By what percent did
     the price increase?

12. Your author bought an overpriced t-shirt at a Seattle Kraken hockey game with

a retail price of        . Including sales tax, the actual cost was  . What

was the sales tax rate?
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 85

Solving Percent Problems: Percent Decrease

Finding the percent decrease in a number is very similar.

        To find the percent of decrease:
         1. Subtract the two numbers to find the amount of decrease.
        2. Using this result as the amount and the original number as the base,

             divide and find the unknown percent.

Again, we always use the original number for the base, the number that occurred
earlier in time. For a percent decrease, this is the larger of the two numbers.

   Exercises

13. During a sale, the price of a candy bar was reduced from     to  . By
      what percent did the price decrease?

14. The estimated population of Portland, Oregon in April 2020 was

. The estimated population in July 2022 was  . Find the percent of

decrease in the population, to the nearest tenth of a percent.2

To summarize, we can determine the percent change using the following for-
mula, which works whether we're finding a percent increase or a percent
decrease.
86 Morgan Chase

Relative Error

In Module 5, we said that a measurement will always include some error, no mat-
ter how carefully we measure. It can be helpful to consider the size of the error
relative to the size of what is being measured. As we saw in the examples above,
a difference of cents is important when we're pricing candy bars but insignif-
icant when we're pricing cars. In the same way, an error of an eighth of an inch
could be a deal-breaker when you're trying to fit a screen into a window frame,
but an eighth of an inch is insignificant when you're measuring the length of your
garage.

The expected outcome is what the number would be in a perfect world. If a window
screen is supposed to be exactly inches wide, we call this the expected out-
come, and we treat it as though it has infinitely many significant digits. In theory,
the expected outcome is

To find the absolute error, we subtract the measurement and the expected out-
come. Because we always treat the expected outcome as though it has unlimited
significant figures, the absolute error should have the same precision (place
value) as the measurement, not the expected outcome.

To find the relative error, we divide the absolute error by the expected outcome.
We usually express the relative error as a percent. In fact, the procedure for find-
ing the relative error is identical to the procedures for finding a percent increase
or percent decrease!

        To find the relative error:

         1. Subtract the two numbers to find the absolute error.

        2. Using the absolute error as the amount and the expected outcome as
             the base, divide and find the unknown percent.
                                                           Tech Math, 2e 87

Exercises

15. A window screen is measured to be  inches wide instead of the advertised

inches. Determine the relative error, rounded to the nearest tenth of a per-

cent.

16. The contents of a box of cereal are supposed to weigh  ounces, but they

are measured at       ounces. Determine the relative error, rounded to the

nearest tenth of a percent.

The following formula has the same structure as the percent change formula we
saw earlier.

Tolerance

The tolerance is the maximum amount that a measurement is allowed to differ

from the expected outcome. For example, the U.S. Mint needs its coins to have a

consistent size and weight so that they will work in vending machines. A dime (10

cents) weighs  grams, with a tolerance of  grams.3 This tells us that the

minimum acceptable weight is               grams, and the maximum

acceptable weight is                   grams. A dime with a weight outside

of the range                  would be unacceptable.
88 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

A U.S. nickel (5 cents) weighs    grams with a tolerance of  grams.

17. Determine the lowest acceptable weight and highest acceptable weight of a
     nickel.

18. Determine the relative error of the weight of a nickel with an absolute error of
               grams.

A U.S. quarter (25 cents) weighs  grams with a tolerance of  grams.

19. Determine the lowest acceptable weight and highest acceptable weight of a
      quarter.

20. Determine the relative error of the weight of a quarter with an absolute error

of               grams.

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source (PDF file): https://www.fda.gov/media/135299/download
   2. Source: https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/portlandcityoregon/PST045222
   3. Sources: https://www.usmint.gov/learn/coin-and-medal-programs/coin-specifications

        and https://www.thesprucecrafts.com/how-much-do-coins-weigh-4171330
                                                            Tech Math, 2e 89

[13]

The US Measurement System

You may use a calculator throughout this module if needed.

The U.S. customary system of measure-

ment developed from the system used in
England centuries ago.1 To convert from

one unit to another, we often have to per-

form messy calculations like dividing by

or multiplying by  .

We could solve these unit conversions
using proportions, but there is another
method that is more versatile, especially
when a conversion requires more than
one step. This method goes by various
names, such as dimensional analysis or the
factor label method. The basic idea is to Robin the cat has the spirit of '76.
begin with the measurement you know,
then multiply it by a conversion ratio that will cancel the units you don't want
and replace it with the units you do want.

It's okay if you don't have the conversion ratios memorized; just be sure to have
them available. If you discover other conversion ratios that aren't provided here,
go ahead and write them down!

                      89
90 Morgan Chase

U.S. System: Measurements of Length

foot = inches

yard = feet

mile =       feet

Let's walk through two examples to demonstrate the process.

Suppose you're a fan of Eminem2 or the Byrds3 and you're curious about how

many feet are in miles. We can start by writing  as a fraction over 1 and

then use the conversion ratio             to cancel the units.

Now suppose that you want to convert a measurement from feet to miles. (Maybe
you're watching The Twilight Zone episode "Nightmare at 20,000 Feet"4 and won-

dering how many miles high that is.) We'll start by writing     as a fraction

over 1 and then use the conversion ratio         to cancel the units.

As it happens, the first situation became a multiplication problem but the second
situation became a division problem. Rather than trying to memorize rules
about when you'll multiply versus when you'll divide, just set up the conversion
ratio so the units will cancel out and then the locations of the numbers will tell
you whether you need to multiply or divide them.

   Exercises

    1. How many inches are in feet?
   2. How many feet make up yards?
   3. yard is equal to how many inches?
                                                   Tech Math, 2e 91

4. mile is equivalent to how many yards?

5. How many feet is inches?

6. feet is what length in yards?

7. Convert  feet into miles.

8. How many yards are the same as         inches?

Notice that Exercises 3 & 4 give us two more conversion ratios that we could add
to our list.

U.S. System: Measurements of Weight or Mass

pound =     ounces
ton =       pounds

The procedure is the same; start with the measurement you know and write it
as a fraction over 1. Then write the conversion factor so that the units you don't
want will cancel out.

   Exercises

   9. How many ounces are in pounds?
  10. How many pounds are equivalent to tons?
  11. Convert ounces to pounds.
  12. ton is equivalent to what number of ounces?
92 Morgan Chase

U.S. System: Measurements of Volume or Capacity

          cup = fluid ounces
          pint = cups
          quart = pints
          gallon = quarts

There are plenty of other conversions that could be provided, such as the num-
ber of fluid ounces in a gallon, but let's keep the list relatively short.

   Exercises

13. How many fluid ounces are in cups?

14. How many pints are in quarts?

15. gallon is equal to how many pints?

16. How many cups equal  quarts?

17. Convert cups into gallons.

18. How many fluid ounces are in one half gallon?

U.S. System: Using Mixed Units of Measurement

Measurements are frequently given with mixed units, such as a person's height
being given as ft in instead of in, or a newborn baby's weight being given as

  lb oz instead of oz. This can sometimes make the calculations more com-
plicated, but if you can convert between improper fractions and mixed numbers,
you can handle this.
                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 93

Exercises

19. A bag of apples weighs ounces. What is its weight in pounds and ounces?

20. A carton of orange juice contains  fluid ounces. Determine its volume in
       cups and fluid ounces.

21. A hallway is inches long. Give its length in feet and inches.

22. The maximum loaded weight of a Ford F-150 pickup truck is      lb. Con-
      vert this weight into tons and pounds.

We'll finish up this module by adding and subtracting with mixed units. Again, it
may help to think of them as mixed numbers, with a whole number part and a
fractional part.

   Exercises

 Comet weighs lb oz and Fred weighs lb oz.

23. Comet and Fred are being put into a cat carrier together. What is their com-
       bined weight?

24. How much heavier is Fred than Comet?
94 Morgan Chase

   Two tables are ft in long and ft in long.
 25. If the two tables are placed end to end, what is their combined length?
 26. What is the difference in length between the two tables?

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Want some Wikipedia rabbit holes? Visit https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
        United_States_customary_units and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_units.

   2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/8_Mile_(film)
   3. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eight_Miles_High
   4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nightmare_at_20,000_Feet
                                                    Tech Math, 2e 95

[14]

The Metric System

You will NOT need a calculator for this module.

The metric system was first implemented follow-
ing the French Revolution; if we're overthrowing
the monarchy, why should we use a unit of a "foot"
that is based on the length of a king's foot?

The metric system was designed to be based on the

natural world, and different units are related to

each other by powers of instead of weird num-

bers like , , , and  ... This makes convert-

ing between metric units incredibly easy because

all we need to do is move the decimal point.

The table below shows the most common metric prefixes. The prefixes are
arranged in order so that we can convert between them simply by moving the
decimal point the same number of places shown in the table.

kilo- (k) hecta- (h) deka- (da) [base unit] deci- (d) centi- (c) milli- (m)

Because deka- and deci- both start with d, the abbreviation for deka- is da.

                                                                                       95
96 Morgan Chase

Metric System: Measurements of Length

The base unit of length is the meter, which is a bit longer than a yard (three

feet). Because the prefix kilo- means one thousand, kilometer is          meters.

(One kilometer is around six tenths of a mile.) Similarly, because the prefix centi-

means one hundredth, centimeter is of a meter, or meter is centime-

ters. (One centimeter is roughly the thickness of a pen.) And because the prefix

milli- means one thousandth, millimeter is    of a meter, or meter is

millimeters. (One millimeter is roughly the thickness of a credit card.)

Exercises

From each of the four choices, choose the most reasonable measure.

1. The length of a car:
       kilometers, meters, centimeters, millimeters

2. The height of a notebook:    centimeters,  millimeters
         kilometers, meters,

3. The distance to the next town:             millimeters
          kilometers, meters, centimeters,

4. An adult woman's height:     centimeters,  millimeters
          kilometers, meters,

5. An adult woman's height:     centimeters,  millimeters
           kilometers, meters,

6. The thickness of a pane of glass:
       kilometers, meters, centimeters, millimeters

kilo- (km) hecta- (hm) deka- (dam) meter (m) deci- (dm) centi- (cm) milli- (mm)
                                                                                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 97

To convert metric units, you can simply move the decimal point left or right the
number of places indicated in the table above. No calculator required!

Exercises

A 2024 Chevrolet Silverado 1500 pickup truck is  meters long.1

7. Convert   meters to centimeters.

8. Convert   meters to millimeters.

One mile is approximately 1.609 kilometers.

9. Convert   kilometers to meters.

10. Convert  kilometers to centimeters.

A sheet of A4 paper2 is 297 millimeters long.

11. Convert  millimeters to meters.

12. Convert  millimeters to centimeters.

The Burj Khalifa in Dubai is the world's tallest building, with a height of 828 meters.3

13. Convert meters to kilometers.

14. Convert meters to dekameters.

Metric System: Measurements of Weight or Mass

The base unit for mass is the gram, which is about the mass of a paper clip. A kilo­-

gram is      grams; as we'll see in the next module, this is around pounds.

The active ingredients in medicines may be measured using the milligram.

Exercises

From each of the three choices, choose the most reasonable measure.
98 Morgan Chase

15. The mass of an apple:      milligrams
            kilograms, grams,

16. The mass of an adult man:
           kilograms, grams, milligrams

17. The amount of active ingredient in a pain relief pill:
            kilograms, grams, milligrams

18. The base vehicle weight of a Chevrolet Silverado 1500 pickup truck:

kilograms,       grams,                    milligrams

kilo- (kg) hecta- (hg) deka- (dag) gram (g) deci- (dg) centi- (cg) milli- (mg)

This table is identical to the previous table; the only difference is that the base
unit "meter" has been replaced by "gram". This means that converting metric
units of mass is exactly the same process as converting metric units of length.

   Exercises

A five-pound bag of flour weighs about     kilograms.
                                           grams of sugars.
19. Convert      kilograms to grams.

20. Convert      kilograms to milligrams.

A 20-ounce bottle of Dr. Pepper contains

21. Convert grams to centigrams.

22. Convert grams to milligrams.

23. Convert grams to kilograms.
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 99

 A 20-ounce bottle of Dr. Pepper contains  milligrams of sodium.
24. Convert milligrams to centigrams.
25. Convert milligrams to grams.

Metric System: Measurements of Volume or Capacity

The base unit of volume is the liter, which is slightly larger than one quart. The

milliliter is also commonly used; of course, there are   milliliters in liter.

                                                  10 cm

10 cm                                      10 cm

                                          1 liter is equivalent to a cube with sides of 10
                                          centimeters. Image adapted by Cristianrodenas
                                          on Wikimedia Commons.

In case you were wondering, the units of volume, length, and mass are all con-
nected; one cubic centimeter (a cube with each side equal to cm) has the same
volume as one milliliter, and one milliliter of water has a mass of one gram.

Image by nclm on Wikimedia Commons.
100 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   From each of the two choices, choose the more reasonable measure.
 26. The capacity of a car's gas tank: liters, milliliters
  27. A dosage of liquid cough medicine: liters, milliliters

             kilo- (kL) hecta- (hL) deka- (daL) liter (L) deci- (dL) centi- (cL) milli- (mL)

Again, this table is identical to the previous tables; just move the decimal point
left or right to convert the units.

   Exercises

 28. A bottle of sparkling water is labeled 50 cl. Convert 50 centiliters to liters.
 29. A "1-liter" bag of saline solution for intravenous use actually contains about

        1.05 liters of solution.4 How many deciliters is this?
 30. A carton of orange juice has a volume of 1.75 liters. Convert this into mL.
  31. One cup (8 fluid ounces) is approximately 250 milliliters. Convert 250 milli-

        liters into liters.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 101

 32. While being served drinks on IcelandAir, you notice that one mini bottle is
        labeled 50 mL, but another mini bottle is labeled 5 cL. How do the two bottles
        compare in size?

 33. The engine displacement of a Yamaha Majesty scooter is 125 cc (cubic cen-
        timeters), and the engine displacement of a Chevrolet Spark automobile is 1.4
        L (liters). What is the approximate ratio of these engine displacements?

 34. How many 500-milliliter bottles of Coke are equivalent to one 2-liter bottle?

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://www.caranddriver.com/chevrolet/silverado-1500/specs
   2. A4 is a bit narrower and a bit longer than standard letter paper that we use in the U.S.

        and Canada.
   3. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burj_Khalifa
   4. Source: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11096388/
102 Morgan Chase

[15]

Converting Between Systems

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

Converting between the U.S. system and metric system is important in today's
global economy; like it or not, the metric system is infiltrating our lives.

The numbers in these conversion ratios are usually difficult to work with, so we
will use a calculator whenever necessary and pay attention to rounding. If you
discover other conversion ratios that aren't provided here, write them down!

Converting Measurements of Length

Some of these conversion ratios are exact, because a yard is defined to be exactly

meters, which means that a foot is exactly  meters and an inch is

exactly  centimeters.1 The conversions that are not exact are rounded to four

significant figures.

                                   102
                                                                               Tech Math, 2e 103

        in =  cm            ft
        ft =   cm            yd
        ft =                       mi
        yd =     m or m
        mi        m or m
                  km or km

Let's verify that  is actually         . We can start by writing                   as a

fraction over 1 and then use the conversion ratio                           to cancel the

units.

Rounding to three sig figs,2 that's    , which of course is                 .

Let's verify that again using the approximate conversion ratio                     .

Okay, everything looks good; both conversions give us a result that rounds to
          . As long as we don't try to keep more than four sig figs in our result, we

can use either conversion ratio and get the same result.

   Exercises

1. In Canada, if a road in a city does not have a speed limit posted, the default

speed limit is     per hour.3 Convert  into miles.

2. A Star Wars clone trooper is 6.00 feet tall. Convert this height to cm.

3. An Olympic-size swimming pool is    meters in length.4 How many feet
    is this?

4. A 4-inch paintbrush is labeled    millimeters. Verify the accuracy of this
     conversion.
104 Morgan Chase

5. An electric fan has an advertised diameter of  inches, or  centimeters.
    Verify the accuracy of this conversion.

6. Is kilometers equivalent to miles? If not, what is the percent error?
                                               Tech Math, 2e 105

Converting Measurements of Weight or Mass

These conversions are approximate. (Technically, one pound is exactly
0.45359237 kilograms5, but we'll stick to four significant figures.)

oz           g

kg           lb or lb          kg

Exercises

As shown in the picture, a shelving system is rated to hold a total weight of

pounds, or   pounds on each of its five shelves. The metric equivalents printed on

the box are     kilograms and      kilograms.

7. Convert pounds into kilograms. Does your answer agree with the number
    printed on the box?

8. Convert      pounds into kilograms. Does your answer agree with the num-

ber printed on the box?

 9. A hand weight weighs 5 kilograms. Convert 5 kilograms to pounds.
10. How many grams is a half pound of ground beef?
11. A gravy recipe calls for 4 ounces of flour. Convert 4 ounces into grams.
12. A smoothie recipe has grams of protein. Convert grams to ounces.
106 Morgan Chase

13. In around 2010, the National Collector's Mint (not affiliated with the U.S. Mint)

ran a TV commercial selling an imitation gold coin modeled after the U.S.

"buffalo" nickel. The commercial made the following claims. This replica coin is

coated in milligrams of pure gold! And the price of gold keeps going up; gold is worth

about             per ounce! But you can order these fake coins for only    apiece!

What was the approximate dollar value of the gold in one of these coins?

14. In 2023, the National Collector's Mint was still selling the imitation  gold

"buffalo" nickel, but had cut the price to  . This version of the coin was

coated in milligrams of pure gold.6 The price of gold in 2023 was

per ounce. What was the approximate dollar value of the gold in one of these

coins?

Converting Measurements of Volume or Capacity

These conversion ratios are approximations rounded to four significant figures.

fl oz                 mL
L                 fl oz
L                 qt
gal
                    L

 Exercises

15. Stephanie lives in Vermont and buys her home renovation supplies at Réno-
      Dépôt in Quebec. She buys a toilet that uses 4.8 L of water per flush. How many
      gallons is this?

16. How many milliliters of drink are in a 12-ounce can?
17. TSA airline regulations limit liquids in carry-on luggage to 100 milliliters.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 107

        How many fluid ounces is this? (Round your answer to the nearest tenth.)
  18. If you visit an oil change shop, you may notice large boxes of motor oil. (If

        you teach math, you may even take a picture of one so you can use it in your
        course materials.) Verify that 6 gallons of motor oil is equivalent to 22.7 liters.

Converting Measurements: Extensions

Let's finish up with some rates that require conversions.
   Exercises

   Maxine is driving across Canada. Her car has a 14.2-gallon gas tank and gets an average
   of 26 miles per gallon.
  19. Approximately how many kilometers--actually, the Canadian spelling is kilo-

        metres. Approximately how many kilometres can she travel on a full tank of
        gas?
 20. Of course, Canada measures gas in liters. Actually, litres. Convert Maxine's
        mileage rate, 26 miles per gallon, to kilometres per litre.
108 Morgan Chase

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_yard_and_pound
   2. We round to three sig figs because the measurement 1.98 meters has only three sig figs.
   3. Source: https://niagarafalls.ca/city-hall/transportation-services/traffic/speed-limits.aspx
   4. Source: https://swimswam.com/how-big-is-an-olympic-sized-swimming-pool/
   5. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_yard_and_pound
   6. Source: https://ncmint.com/2023-buffalo-tribute-proof/
                                                    Tech Math, 2e 109

[16]

Other Conversions

You may use a calculator in this module as needed.

Converting Measurements of Time

You probably know all of the necessary conver-
sions for time: seconds in a minute, hours
in a day, etc.

When we get to units of time larger than weeks,

however, we encounter problems because not

all months have the same number of days, a

year is not exactly weeks, and the time it

takes for the Earth to orbit the Sun is not

exactly  days. Therefore, it doesn't make

sense to expect an exact answer to a question

like "how many minutes are in one month?" We will have to use our best judg-

ment in situations such as these.

min = sec
hr = min

                                   109
110 Morgan Chase

          day (dy) = hr
          week (wk) = dy
          year (yr) = dy

Exercises

1. How many minutes is one standard -day year?
2. Have you been alive for one billion seconds? Is this even possible?

Converting Rates

Previously when we were converting units, we began with units in the numerator
only. If we need to convert a rate, however, we'll begin with units in both the
numerator and denominator.

   Exercises

Usain Bolt holds the world record time for the -meter dash,  seconds.
3. What was his average speed in kilometers per hour?
4. What was his average speed in miles per hour?

The more information we know, the more things we can figure out.
                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 111

Exercises

An F- fighter jet can reach a sustained top speed of roughly Mach      ; this is
times the speed of sound, which is miles per hour.1

5. What is the jet's top speed in miles per hour?

6. At this speed, how many miles would the jet travel in one minute?

7. The jet's range at this speed before it runs out of fuel is around  miles. If

the jet flies miles at top speed, for how many minutes will it fly?

8. The jet's maximum fuel capacity is    gallons. If the jet flies miles and

burns      gallons of fuel, find the jet's fuel efficiency, in miles per gallon.

9. Rewrite the jet's fuel efficiency, in gallons per mile.

10. How many gallons of fuel does the jet consume in one minute?

Measurement Prefixes: Larger

Now let's turn our attention to converting units based on their prefixes. We'll start
with large units of measure.

           tera- (T)          giga- (G)  mega- (M)          kilo- (k) [base unit]
            trillion           billion     million
                                                            thousand   one
112 Morgan Chase

Notice that the powers of these units are multiples of , just as with the engineer-

ing notation we saw at the end of Module 11. Each prefix is  times the next

smaller prefix, so moving one place in the chart is equivalent to moving the dec-

imal point three places. Also notice that capitalization is important; megagram

(which is also called a metric ton) is Mg with a capital M, but milligram is mg with

a lowercase m.

Using computer memory as an example:

kilobyte =        bytes

megabyte =        kilobytes =         bytes

gigabyte =        megabytes =         kilobytes, etc.

terabyte =        gigabytes =         megabytes, etc.

Note: There can be inconsistencies with different people's understanding of

these prefixes with regards to computer memory, which is counted in powers

of , not . Computer engineers originally defined kilobyte as  bytes

because           , which is very close to       . However, we will consider

these prefixes to be powers of  , not            . There is an explanation at

https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/binary.html.

Exercises
                                                         Tech Math, 2e 113

11. A inch floppy disk from the 1980s could store about  kB; a inch

floppy disk from the 1990s could store about  MB. By what factor was the

storage capacity increased?

12. How many times greater is the storage capacity of a  TB hard drive than a
            GB hard drive?

13. In an article describing small nuclear reactors that are designed to be retro-

      fitted into coal plants, Dr. Jose Reyes of Oregon State University says "One

      module will produce megawatts of electricity. That's enough for about
      thousand homes."2 How much electricity per home is this?

14. In the same article, Dr. Reyes says "a megawatt module could produce
      about million gallons of clean water per day using existing technologies in
      reverse osmosis." What is the rate of watts per gallon?

15. The destructive power of nuclear weapons is measured in kilotons (the equiv-

alent of  tons of TNT) or megatons (the equivalent of                tons of

TNT). The first nuclear device ever tested, the US's Trinity, was measured at

roughly kilotons on July 16, 1945. The largest thermonuclear weapon ever
detonated, at megatons, was the USSR's Tsar Bomba, on October 31, 1961.3

(Video of Tsar Bomba was declassified in 2020.) How many times more power-

ful was Tsar Bomba than Trinity?

Measurement Prefixes: Smaller

Now we'll go in the other direction and look at small units of measure.

[base unit] milli- (m) micro- ( or mc)        nano- (n)   pico (p)
                                              billionth  trillionth
one       thousandth           millionth

The symbol for micro- is the Greek letter  (pronounced "myoo"). Because this
character can be difficult to replicate, you may see the letter "u" standing in for
"" in web-based or plaintext technical articles... or you may see the prefix "mc"
instead.

Again, the powers are multiples of ; each prefix gets smaller by a factor of .
114 Morgan Chase

The negative exponents can sometime be complicated to work with, and it may
help to think about things in reverse.

  meter =      millimeters =   micrometers =     nanometers =       picome-
ters

  second =     milliseconds =  microseconds =    nanoseconds =      picosec-
onds

...and so on.

See https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/prefixes.html for a list of more prefixes.

Exercises

16. An article about network latency compares the following latency times: "So a

Mbps link adds milliseconds to the RTT, a Mbps link                 ms and

a Gbps link just microseconds."4 Rewrite these times so that they are all in

terms of milliseconds, then rewrite them in terms of microseconds.

17. The wavelength of red light is around nm. Infrared radiation has a wave-
     length of approximately m.5 Find the ratio of these wavelengths.

18. Nuclear radiation is measured in units called Sieverts, but because this unit is

too large to be practical when discussing people's exposure to radiation, mil-

liSieverts and microSieverts are more commonly used. In 1986, workers clean-

ing up the Chernobyl disaster were exposed to an estimated dose of mSv.6

A typical chest x-ray exposes a person to  Sv.7 How many chest x-rays'

worth of radiation were the workers exposed to?
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 115

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. My sources for the following set of questions are a combination of former students in
        the Air National Guard and people who sound like they know what they're talking about
        on the internet, particularly in this Quora discussion.

   2. Source: https://www.kgw.com/article/news/local/oregon-company-get-approval-to-
        build-nuclear-power-plants/283-7b26b8cd-12d5-4116-928a-065731f7a0f6

   3. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_weapon_yield
   4. Source: https://www.noction.com/blog/network-latency-effect-on-application-perfor-

        mance
   5. Source: http://labman.phys.utk.edu/phys222core/modules/m6/The%20EM%20spec-

        trum.html
   6. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chernobyl_disaster
    7. Source: https://www.cancer.org/treatment/understanding-your-diagnosis/tests/under-

        standing-radiation-risk-from-imaging-tests.html
116 Morgan Chase

[17]

Angles

You will need a calculator near the end of this module.

Angle Measure

Angle measurement is important in
construction, surveying, physical ther-
apy, and many other fields. We can
visualize an angle as the figure formed
when two line segments share a com-
mon endpoint.

We can also think about an angle as a

measure of rotation. One full rotation

or a full circle is , so a half rotation

or U-turn is , and a quarter turn is

. We often classify angles by their

size relative to these  and

benchmarks.                               Photo by Rangga Cahya Nugraha on Unsplash

Acute Angle: between and
Right Angle: exactly

                                          116
                                   Tech Math, 2e 117

    Obtuse Angle: between and

    Straight Angle: exactly

    Reflexive Angle: between  and

Exercises

Identify each angle shown below as acute, right, obtuse, straight, or reflexive.

1.

2.

3.
118 Morgan Chase

   4.
   5.

Lines that form a angle are called perpendicular. As shown below, the needle
should be perpendicular to the body surface for an intramuscular injection.

                                   Image by British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) on
                                   Wikimedia Commons
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 119

When lines cross, they form angles. No surprises there. If we know the measure
of one angle, we may be able to determine the measures of the remaining angles
using a little logic.

   Exercises

   Find the measure of each unknown angle.

6.

Angles in Triangles

If you need to find the measures of the angles in a triangle, there are a few rules
that can help.

    The sum of the angles of every triangle is  .

    If any sides of a triangle have equal lengths, then the angles opposite those sides
    will have equal measures.

Exercises

Find the measures of the unknown angles in each triangle.
120 Morgan Chase

    7.
   8.
   9.
  10.
  11.
                                                             Tech Math, 2e 121

Angles and Parallel Lines

Two lines that point in the exact same direction and
will never cross are called parallel lines. If two parallel
lines are crossed by a third line, sets of equally-sized
angles will be formed, as shown in the following dia-
gram. All four acute angles will be equal in measure,
all four obtuse angles will be equal in measure, and
any acute angle and obtuse angle will have a combined
measure of .

Exercises

12. Find the measures of angles , , and .
122 Morgan Chase

Degrees, Minutes, Seconds

It is possible to have angle measures that are not a whole

number of degrees. It is common to use decimals in these

situations, but the older method--which is called the

degrees-minutes-seconds or DMS system--divides a degree

using fractions out of : a minute is of a degree, and a

second is of a minute, which means a second is                   of a

degree. (Fortunately, these units work exactly like time;

think of degree as hour.) For example,                        .

We will look at the procedure for converting between systems, but there are
online calculators such as the one at https://www.fcc.gov/media/radio/dms-dec-
imal which will do the conversions for you.

If you have latitude and longitude in DMS, like N                      W  , and

need to convert it to decimal degrees, the process is fairly simple with a calcula-

tor.

      Converting from DMS to Decimal Degrees

      Enter                                                   in your calculator. Round

      the result to the fourth decimal place, if necessary.1

 Exercises

Convert each angle measurement from degrees-minutes-seconds into decimal form.
Round to the nearest ten-thousandth, if necessary.
13.
14.
15.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 123

Going from decimal degrees to DMS is a more complicated process.

    Converting from Decimal Degrees to DMS

    1. The whole-number part of the angle measurement gives the number of
        degrees.

    2. Multiply the decimal part by     . The whole number part of this result
         is the number of minutes.

    3. Multiply the decimal part of the minutes by . This gives the number of
        seconds (including any decimal part of seconds).

For example, let's convert           .

1. The degrees part of our answer will be .

2. The decimal part times is                      minutes. The minutes part of
    our answer will be .                     seconds. The seconds part of our

3. The decimal part times is
    answer will be .

So                          .

Exercises

Convert each angle measurement from decimal into degrees-minutes-seconds form.
16.
17.
18.

                               Exercise Answers
124 Morgan Chase

Notes

1. We round to four decimal places because second of angle is  of a degree. This is a

smaller fraction than  so our precision is slightly better than the thousandths place.
           Tech Math, 2e 125

[18]

Triangles

                           Triangular supports hold a boat in the air while it undergoes repairs at
                           the Front Street Shipyard in Belfast, Maine.

Classifying Triangles

We can classify triangles into three categories based on the lengths of their sides.
        · Equilateral triangle: all three sides have the same length
        · Isosceles triangle: exactly two sides have the same length
        · Scalene triangle: all three sides have different lengths

                                                                                      125
126 Morgan Chase

We can also classify triangles into three categories based on the measures of their
angles.

        · Obtuse triangle: one of the angles is an obtuse angle
        · Right triangle: one of the angles is a right angle
        · Acute triangle: all three of the angles are acute
   Exercises

   Classify each triangle by angle and side. For example, "acute scalene".)

    1.

   2.

   3.

You may use a calculator for the remainder of this module.
                   Tech Math, 2e 127

Similar Triangles

In one of the diagrams in Module 17, the parallel lines included two similar tri-
angles, although they may be hard to see.

Two triangles are similar if the three angles of one triangle have the same mea-
sure as the three angles of the second triangle. The lengths of the sides of similar
triangles will be in the same proportion. The triangles will have the same shape
but the lengths will be scaled up or down.

   Exercises

   Assume that each pair of triangles are similar. Use a proportion to find each unknown
   length.

   4.
128 Morgan Chase

   5.

Recognizing corresponding sides can be more difficult when the figures are ori-
ented differently.

   Exercises

   Assume that each pair of triangles are similar. Use a proportion to find each unknown
   length.

   6.

    7.
                         Tech Math, 2e 129

The Pythagorean Theorem

In a right triangle, the two sides that form the right angle are called the legs. The
side opposite the right angle, which will always be the longest side, is called the
hypotenuse.

The Pythagorean theorem says that the sum of the squares of the lengths of the legs
is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse.

        The Pythagorean Theorem
        In a right triangle with legs and and hypotenuse ,

If you know the lengths of all three sides of a triangle, you can use the
Pythagorean theorem to verify whether the triangle is a right triangle or not.
The ancient Egyptians used this method for surveying when they needed to
redraw boundaries after the yearly flooding of the Nile washed away their previ-
ous markings.1

   Exercises

   Use the Pythagorean theorem to determine whether either of the following triangles
   is a right triangle.
130 Morgan Chase

8.

9.

Before we continue, we need to briefly discuss square roots. Calculating a square

root is the opposite of squaring a number. For example,  because

. If the number under the square root symbol is not a perfect square like , then

the square root will be an irrational decimal that we will round off as necessary.

Exercises

 Use a calculator to find the value of each square root. Round to the hundredths place.
10.
11.
12.

We most often use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate the length of a missing
side of a right triangle. Here are three different versions of the Pythagorean the-
orem arranged to find a missing side, so you don't have to use algebra with

                  .
                                               Tech Math, 2e 131

The Pythagorean Theorem, three other versions

 Exercises

Find the length of the missing side for each of these right triangles. Round to the near-
est tenth, if necessary.

13.

14.

15.
132 Morgan Chase

16.

                   Exercise Answers

Notes

1. The surveyors were called "rope-stretchers" because they used a loop of rope units
    long with equally-spaced knots. Three rope-stretchers each held a knot, forming a tri­
    angle with lengths , , and units. When the rope was stretched tight, they knew that

     the angle between the -unit and -unit sides was a right angle because              .

     From Discovering Geometry: an Inductive Approach by Michael Serra, Key Curriculum

     Press, 1997.
                                                                                Tech Math, 2e 133

[19]

Area of Polygons and Circles

You may use a calculator in this module as needed.

We have seen that the perimeter of a poly-   Photo by Paolo Macorig on flickr.
gon is the distance around the outside.
Perimeter is a length, which is one-
dimensional, and so it is measured in lin-
ear units (feet, centimeters, miles, etc.).
The area of a polygon is the amount of
two-dimensional space inside the poly-
gon, and it is measured in square units:
square feet, square centimeters, square
miles, etc.

You can always think of area as the number of squares required to completely fill
in the shape.

133
134 Morgan Chase

Area: Rectangles and Squares
   Exercises

    1. Find the area of this rectangle.

   2. Find the area of this square.

There are of course formulas for finding the areas of rectangles and squares; we
don't have to count little squares.

        Area of a Rectangle
                    1 or

        Area of a Square
                               Tech Math, 2e 135

Exercises

Find the area of each figure.

3.

   4.

Area: Parallelograms

Another common polygon is the parallelogram, which looks like a tilted rectangle.
As the name implies, the pairs of opposite sides are parallel and have the same
length. Notice that, if we label one side as a base of the parallelogram, we have a
perpendicular height which is not the length of the other sides.

The following set of diagrams shows that we can cut off part of a parallelogram
and rearrange the pieces into a rectangle with the same base and height as the
136 Morgan Chase

original parallelogram. A parallelogram with a base of units and a vertical
height of units is transformed into a by rectangle, with an area of square
units.

Therefore, the formula for the area of a parallelogram is identical to the formula
for the area of a rectangle, provided that we are careful to use the base and the
height, which must be perpendicular.

        Area of a Parallelogram

   Exercises

   Find the area of each parallelogram.

   5.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 137

   6.

Area: Triangles

When we are finding the area of a triangle, we need to identify a base and a height
that is perpendicular to that base. If the triangle is obtuse, you may have to imag-
ine the height outside of the triangle and extend the base line to meet it.

As shown below, any triangle can be doubled to form a parallelogram. Therefore,
the area of a triangle is one half the area of a parallelogram with the same base
and height.
138 Morgan Chase

        Area of a Triangle
                         or

As with a parallelogram, remember that the height must be perpendicular to the
base.

   Exercises

   Find the area of each triangle.

    7.

   8.

   9.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 139

  10.

Area: Trapezoids

A somewhat less common quadrilateral is the trapezoid, which has exactly one
pair of parallel sides, which we call the bases. The first example shown below is
called an isosceles trapezoid because, like an isosceles triangle, its two nonparal-
lel sides have equal lengths.

There are a number of ways to show where the area formula comes from, but the
explanations are better in video because they can be animated.234

        Area of a Trapezoid
                                      or

Don't be intimidated by the subscripts on and ; it's just a way to name two
different measurements using the same letter for the variable. (Many people call
the bases and instead; feel free to write it whichever way you prefer.) What-
140 Morgan Chase

ever you call them, you just add the two bases, multiply by the height, and take
half of that.

   Exercises

  11. The soaking tubs at Hot Lake Springs in La Grande, Oregon have benches
        formed by seven trapezoids. Each bench has an outer edge inches long, an
        inner edge inches long, and the edges are inches apart. How much seat-
        ing area do the benches provide? (Ignore the gaps between the boards.)

   Find the area of each trapezoid.

  12.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 141

  13.

  14.

                                              Rocky the cat lounges at Hot Lake Springs.

Area: Circles

The area of a circle is times the square of the radius:
            . The units are still square units, even though a circle

is round. (Think of the squares on a round waffle.) Because
we can't fit a whole number of squares--or an exact fraction
of squares--inside the circle, the area of a circle will be an
approximation.
142 Morgan Chase

If your calculator doesn't have a key, use the approximation  .

     Area of a Circle

Exercises

Find the area of each circle. Round each answer to the appropriate number of signifi-
cant figures.

15.

16.

17.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 143

  18.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. You might choose to use capital letters for the variables here because a lowercase letter
        "l" can easily be mistaken for a number "1".

   2. https://youtu.be/yTnYRpcZA9c
   3. https://youtu.be/WZtO3oERges
   4. https://youtu.be/uLHc6Br2veg
144 Morgan Chase

[20]

Composite Figures

You may use a calculator in this module as needed.

Many objects have odd shapes made up of simpler
shapes. A composite figure is a geometric figure which is
formed by--or composed of--two or more basic geomet-
ric figures.

We will look at a handful of fairly simple examples, but   This sunburst design is
this concept can of course be extended to much more        composed of 276 tiles.
complicated figures.

Composite Figures with Polygons

To find the area of a composite figure, it is generally a good idea to divide it into
simpler shapes--rectangles, triangles, etc.--and either add or subtract their areas
as necessary. You may need to figure out some unmarked dimensions during the
process.

   Exercises

A floor plan of a room is shown. The room is a -foot by    -foot rectangle, with a
-foot by -foot rectangle cut out of the south side.

                   144
                                                                                                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 145

 1. Determine the amount of molding required for the perimeter of the room.
2. Determine the amount of flooring required to cover the entire area.
A trapezoid is formed by removing two right triangles from a rectangle, as shown.

3. Determine the area of the trapezoid without using the trapezoid formula from
     Module 19.

4. Determine the area of the trapezoid using the trapezoid formula from Module
     19. Does this agree with your previous answer?
146 Morgan Chase

   A plan for an irregular parking lot is shown.

   5. Calculate the perimeter.
   6. Calculate the area.

Composite Figures with Circles

If a composite figure includes parts of circles, you'll need to approximate you
answer because your calculation will have in it.

   Exercises

   A high school is building a track at its athletic fields. The track, which is formed by two
   straight sides and two semicircles as shown in the plans below, is supposed to have a
   total length of meters.
                                                   Tech Math, 2e 147

7. Determine the distance around the track. Will the track be the right length?

8. After the new track is built, landscapers need to lay sod on the field inside the
    track. What is the area of the field inside the track?

The radius of the quarter circle is  centimeters.

 9. Calculate the area.
10. Calculate the perimeter.

 A quarter circle has been removed from a circle with a diameter of feet.

11. Calculate the area.
12. Calculate the perimeter.
148 Morgan Chase

If we need to determine a fraction or percent out of the whole, we may be able
to solve the problem without knowing any actual measurements.

   Exercises

  13. Circular disks are being cut from squares of sheet metal, with the remainder
        around the corners being discarded. Assuming that the circles are made as
        large as possible, what percent of the sheet metal will be discarded?

  14. A log with a circular cross-section is being planed to create a beam with a
        square cross-section. Assuming that the beam is made as large as possible,
        what percent of the log will be removed?

                                                Exercise Answers
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 149

[21]

Converting Units of Area

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

When we are converting between units of area, we need to be aware that square
units behave differently than linear units. We'll begin by using our knowledge of
linear units to investigate how area conversions are different.

U.S. System: Converting Measurements of Area
   Exercises

1. A hallway's floor is yards long and yards wide. Convert each measurement
    to feet, then determine the area of the floor in square feet.

2. A hallway's floor has an area of      square yards. Determine the area of the
     floor in square feet.

3. A tabletop measures        inches by  inches. Convert each measurement

to feet, then determine the area of the tabletop in square feet.

4. A tabletop has an area of  square inches. Determine the area of the table-
     top in square feet.

It may help to visualize the relationship between square yards and square feet.
Consider a square yard; the area of a square with sides yard long.

                                                                                      149
150 Morgan Chase

We know that yard = feet, so we can divide the square into three sections ver-
tically and three sections horizontally to convert both dimensions of the square
from yards to feet.

This forms a by grid, which shows us visually that square yard equals
square feet! Instead of to , the conversion ratio for the areas is to , or to .

Here's another way to think about it without a diagram:  , so

. To remove the parentheses, we must square the number and

square the units:  .

More generally, we need to square the linear conversion factors when converting
units of area. If the linear units have a ratio of to , the square units will have a
ratio of to .

Here are the conversion ratios for area in the U.S. system. As always, if you dis-
cover other conversion ratios that aren't provided here, it would be a good idea
to write them down so you can use them as needed.
                                                   Tech Math, 2e 151

If you're curious, an acre is defined as the area of a foot by foot rectangle.
(That's a furlong by a chain. Why? Because that's the amount of land that a
medieval farmer with a team of eight oxen could plow in one day.)1 An acre is
defined as a unit of area; it would be wrong to say "acres squared" or put an expo-
nent of on the units.

   Exercises

5. A rectangular sheet of fabric has an area of    square yards. Find its area in
     square inches.                                feet by feet. Determine its

6. A proposed site for an elementary school is
     area in acres, rounded to the nearest tenth.
152 Morgan Chase

Metric System: Converting Measurements of Area

Now let's take a look at converting area using the metric system.
   Exercises

7. A hallway's floor is meters long and meters wide. Convert each measure-
    ment to centimeters, then determine the area of the floor in square centime-
    ters.

8. A hallway's floor has an area of     square meters. Determine the area of the
    floor in square centimeters.

9. A sheet of A4 paper measures         by  . Convert each measure-

ment to centimeters, then determine the area in square centimeters.

10. A sheet of A4 paper has an area of  square millimeters. Determine the
      area in square centimeters.

As shown below, the conversions in the metric system are all powers of ten,
which means they are all about moving the decimal point.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 153

A hectare is defined as a square with sides meters long. Dividing a square kilo-
meter into ten rows and ten columns will make a by grid of hectares. As
with acres, it would be wrong to say "hectares squared" or put an exponent of
on the units.

   Exercises

11. A rectangular sheet of fabric has an area of         square centimeters. Find
      its area in square meters.                  meters by meters. Find its

12. A proposed site for an elementary school is
      area, in hectares.

Both Systems: Converting Measurements of Area

Converting between the U.S. and metric systems will involve messy decimal val-

ues. For example, because             , we can square both numbers and find

that                                  . The conversions are rounded to five sig-

nificant figures in the table below.

      or
154 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

13. The area of Portland, Oregon is     . Convert this area to square kilome-
      ters.

14. How many hectares is a              acre ranch?

15. A standard sheet of paper measures  inches by        inches. What is the
      area in square centimeters?

16. A football pitch (soccer field) is  meters long and  meters wide. What
      is its area in square feet?

Before the Denmark v Germany match, Rotterdam, Women's Euro 2017.

Areas of Similar Figures

Earlier in this module, it was stated that if the linear units have a ratio of to ,
the square units will have a ratio of to . This applies to similar figures as well.
                                                                                                                                             Tech Math, 2e 155

If the linear dimensions of two similar figures have a ratio of to , then the
areas will have a ratio of to .

This is true for circles, similar triangles, similar rectangles, similar hexagons, you
name it. We'll verify this in the following exercises.

   Exercises

A personal pizza has a -inch diameter. A medium pizza has a diameter twice that of
a personal pizza.

17. Determine the area of the medium pizza.

18. Determine the area of the personal pizza.

19. What is the ratio of the areas of the two pizzas?

A right triangle has legs  and           long. A larger right tri-

angle has legs triple these dimensions.

20. Determine the area of the larger triangle.

21. Determine the area of the smaller triangle.

22. What is the ratio of the areas of the two triangles?

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acre
156 Morgan Chase

[22]

Surface Area of Common Solids

You may use a calculator throughout this module.
We will now turn our attention from two-dimensional figures to three-dimen-
sional figures, which we often call solids, even if they are hollow inside.
In this module, we will look the surface areas of some common solids. (We will
look at volume in a later module.) Surface area is what it sounds like: it's the sum
of the areas of all of the outer surfaces of the solid. When you are struggling to
wrap a present because your sheet of wrapping paper isn't quite big enough, you
are dealing with surface area.
There are two different kinds of surface area that are
important: the lateral surface area (LSA) and total surface
area (TSA).
To visualize the difference between LSA and TSA, con-
sider a can of food. The lateral surface area would be used
to measure the size of the paper label around the can. The
total surface area would be used to measure the amount of
sheet metal needed to make the can. In other words, the
total surface area includes the top and bottom, whereas
the lateral surface area does not.

                                                                                      156
                                                    Tech Math, 2e 157

Surface Area: Rectangular Solids

A rectangular solid looks like a rectangular box. It has three pairs of equally sized
rectangles on the front and back, on the left and right, and on the top and bot-
tom.

A cube is a special rectangular solid with equally-sized squares for all six faces.

The lateral surface area is the combined total area of the four vertical faces of the
solid, but not the top and bottom. If you were painting the four walls of a room,
you would be thinking about the lateral surface area.

The total surface area is the combined total area of all six faces of the solid. If you
were painting the four walls, the floor, and the ceiling of a room, you would be
thinking about the total surface area.

For a rectangular solid with length , width  , and
height ...
158 Morgan Chase

        For a cube with side length ...

Note: These dimensions are sometimes called base, depth, and height.
   Exercises

    1. Find the lateral surface area of this rectangular solid.
   2. Find the total surface area of this rectangular solid.

Surface Area: Cylinders

As mentioned earlier in this module, the lateral surface area of
a soup can is the paper label, which is a rectangle. Therefore,
the lateral surface area of a cylinder is a rectangle; its width is
equal to the circumference of the circle, , and its height is
the height of the cylinder.
Since a cylinder has equal-sized circles at the top and bottom,
its total surface area is equal to the lateral surface area plus
twice the area of one of the circles.
                                                       Tech Math, 2e 159

For a cylinder with radius and height ...

Be aware that if you are given the diameter of the cylinder, you will need to cut
it in half before using these formulas.

   Exercises

A cylinder has a diameter of       and a height of  .

3. Find the lateral surface area.

4. Find the total surface area.

Surface Area: Spheres

The final solid of this module is the sphere, which can be
thought of as a circle in three dimensions: every point on the
surface of a sphere is the same distance from the center.
Because of this, a sphere has only one important measure-
ment: its radius. Of course, its diameter could be important
also, but the idea is that a sphere doesn't have different
dimensions such as length, width, and height. A sphere has
the same radius (or diameter) in every direction.

We would need to use calculus to derive the formula for the surface area of a
sphere, so we'll just assume it's true and get on with the business at hand. Notice
that, because a sphere doesn't have top or bottom faces, we don't need to worry
about finding the lateral surface area. The only surface area is the total surface
area.
160 Morgan Chase

        For a sphere with radius or diameter ...
                             or

Coincidentally, the surface area of a sphere is times the area of the cross-sec-
tional circle at the sphere's widest part. You may find it interesting to try to visu-
alize this, or head to the kitchen for a demonstration: if you cut an orange into
four quarters, the peel on one of those quarter oranges has the same area as the
circle formed by the first cut.

   Exercises

   5. Find the surface area of this sphere.

   6. Find the surface area of this sphere.

                                                Exercise Answers
                                                                      Tech Math, 2e 161

[23]

Area of Regular Polygons

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

The Pentagon building spans

acres (     ), and includes an

additional  acres (  ) as a

central courtyard.1 (That's roughly 25

American football fields... or 23 Cana-

dian football fields.) In this module, we

will focus on calculating the area of

regular polygons such as this one.

                                           "The Pentagon" by David B. Gleason is licensed under

A regular polygon has all sides of equal CC BY-SA 2.0

length and all angles of equal measure.

Because of this symmetry, a circle can be inscribed--drawn inside the polygon

touching each side at one point--or circumscribed--drawn outside the polygon

intersecting each vertex. We'll focus on the inscribed circle first.

                                           161
162 Morgan Chase

Using the Distance from the Center to an Edge

                                                        inscribed circle

Let's call the radius of the inscribed circle lowercase ; this is the distance from
the center of the polygon perpendicular to one of the sides. (The inner radius is
more commonly called the apothem and labeled , but we are trying to keep the
jargon to a minimum in this textbook.)

We can derive a formula for the area of a regular polygon by dividing the poly-

gon into equally-sized triangles and combining the areas of those triangles. If the

length of each side of is , each triangle's area is its base times its height divided

by 2, or  . If the polygon has sides, then there are of these triangles,

and the total combined area is  .

Area of a Regular Polygon (with a radius drawn to the center of one side)
For a regular polygon with sides of length , and inscribed (inner) radius ,
                                                                Tech Math, 2e 163

Note: This formula is more commonly written as one-half the apothem times

the perimeter:       . The apothem is what we're calling , and the perimeter

is , so         and             are equivalent formulas.

Exercises

1. Calculate the area of this regular hexagon.

2. Calculate the area of this regular pentagon.

3. A stop sign has a height of  inches, and each edge measures  inches. Find
    the area of the sign.
164 Morgan Chase

Using the Distance from the Center to a Vertex

Okay, but what if we know the distance from the center to a vertex (a corner of
the polygon) instead of the distance from the center to an edge? We'll need to
imagine a circumscribed circle.

                                                        circumscribed circle

Let's call the radius of the circumscribed circle capital ; this is the distance from
the center of the polygon to one of the vertices (corners).

Area of a Regular Polygon (with a radius drawn to a vertex)

For a regular polygon with  sides of length , and circumscribed (outer) radius
   ,

or
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 165

Your author created this formula because every other version of it uses
trigonometry, which we haven't covered yet. 2

   Exercises

   4. Calculate the area of this regular hexagon.

   5. Calculate the area of this regular octagon.

   6. Calculate the area of this regular pentagon.
166 Morgan Chase

Fun fact: In a regular hexagon, the radius to a vertex is always equal to the side
length. If you divide the hexagon into six equilateral triangles, you'll see why.

Composite Figures with Regular Polygons

As you know, a composite figure is a geometric figure which is formed by joining
two or more basic geometric figures. Let's look at a composite figure formed by
a circle and a regular polygon.

   Exercises

7. The hexagonal head of a bolt fits snugly into a circular cap with a circular hole

with inside diameter     as shown in this diagram. Opposite sides of the

bolt head are         apart. Find the total empty area in the hole around the

edges of the bolt head.

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Pentagon
   2. This formula is derived from dividing the polygon into n equally-sized triangles and

        combining the areas of those triangles; it includes a square root because it involves the
        Pythagorean theorem.
                                                        Tech Math, 2e 167

[24]

Volume of Common Solids

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

Note: Some of the diagrams in this module have
dimensions with only one significant figure, but we
would lose a lot of information if we rounded the
results to only one sig fig. Therefore, we will not
necessarily follow the accuracy-based rounding
rules in the answer key for this module.

The surface area of a solid is the sum of the areas of  Wanda Ortiz of The Iron Maidens
all its faces; therefore, surface area is two-dimen-    turns up the volume. Photo by
sional and measured in square units. The volume is      Alejandro Páez on flickr.
the amount of space inside the solid. Volume is
three-dimensional, measured in cubic units. You
can imagine the volume as the number of cubes
required to completely fill up the solid.

Volume: Rectangular Solids

                            167
168 Morgan Chase

        Volume of a Rectangular Solid
        For a rectangular solid with length , width , and height :
        For a cube with side length :

   Exercises

   Find the volume of each solid.

    1.

   2.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 169

Volume: Rectangular Prisms

A solid with two equal sized polygons as its bases and rectangular lateral faces
is called a right-angle prism. Some examples are shown below. We will refer to
them simply as prisms in this textbook. (We will not be working with oblique
prisms, which have parallelograms for the lateral faces.)

If you know the area of one of the bases, multiplying it by the height gives you
the volume of the prism. In the formula below, we are using a capital to repre-
sent the area of the base.

Volume of a Prism           and height :
For a prism with base area

If the prism is lying on its side, the "height" will look like a length. No matter
how the prism is oriented, the height is the dimension that is perpendicular to
the planes of the two parallel bases.
170 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Find the volume of each prism.

   3.

   4.

   5.
        The area of the pentagon is 55 square inches.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 171

Volume: Cylinders

A cylinder can be thought of as a prism with bases that are circles, rather than
polygons. Just as with a prism, the volume is the area of the base multiplied by
the height.

        Volume of a Cylinder
        For a cylinder with radius (or diameter ) and height :

                         or

   Exercises

   Find the volume of each cylinder.

   6.

    7.
172 Morgan Chase

Volume: Spheres

As with surface area, we would need to use calculus to derive the formula for the
volume of a sphere. Just believe it.

        Volume of a Sphere
        For a sphere with radius or diameter :

                                or

   Exercises

   Find the volume of each sphere.

   8.

   9.
                          Tech Math, 2e 173

Volume: Composite Solids

Of course, not every three-dimensional object is a prism, cylinder, or sphere. A
composite solid is made up of two or more simpler solids. As with two-dimen-
sional composite figures, breaking the figure into recognizable solids is a good
first step.

Exercises

10. A rivet is formed by topping a cylinder with a hemisphere. The width of the
      cylindrical part (the rivet pin) is cm and the length is cm. The width of
      the hemisphere-shaped top (the rivet head) is cm. Find the rivet's volume.

                                           Casper relaxes in the shadow of the propane tank.
                                           Photo by David Dodge on flickr.

A -gallon propane tank is roughly in the shape of a cylinder with a hemisphere on
each end. The length of the cylindrical part is feet long, and the cross-sectional
diameter of the tank is feet.
11. Calculate the volume of the tank in cubic feet.
12. Verify that the tank can hold gallons of liquid propane.

                                              Exercise Answers
174 Morgan Chase

[25]

Converting Units of Volume

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

Just as we saw with area, converting between
units of volume requires us to be careful
because cubic units behave differently than lin-
ear units.

Quantities of mulch, dirt, or gravel are often
measured by the cubic yard. How many cubic
feet are in one cubic yard?

  yard = feet, so we can divide the length into
three sections, the width into three sections, and
the height into three sections to convert all
three dimensions of the cube from yards to feet. This forms a by by cube,
which shows us that cubic yard equals cubic feet. The linear conversion ratio
of to means that that the conversion ratio for the volumes is to , or to .

Here's another way to think about it without a diagram:  , so

            . To remove the parentheses, we must cube the number and cube

the units:  .

More generally, we need to cube the linear conversion factors when converting
units of volume. If the linear units have a ratio of to , the cubic units will have
a ratio of to .

               174
                                                               Tech Math, 2e 175

U.S. System: Converting Measurements of Volume

Exercises

1. True story: A friend at the National Guard base gave us three long wooden

crates to use as raised planting beds. (The crates probably carried some kind of

weapons or ammunition, but our friend wouldn't say.) Henry, who was taking

geometry in high school, was asked to measure the crates and figure out how

much soil we needed. The inside dimensions of each crate were  inches

long, inches wide, and inches deep. We wanted to fill them most of the

way full with soil, leaving about inches empty at the top. How many cubic

yards of soil did we need to order from the supplier?

2. True story, continued: We decided to check our answer and did a rough esti-
     mate by rounding each dimension to the nearest foot, then figuring out the
     volume from there. Did this give the same result?

           This is one of the three crates.
176 Morgan Chase

We can convert between units of volume and liquid capacity. As you might
expect, the numbers are messy in the U.S. system.

Exercises

3. A circular wading pool has a diameter of roughly 5 feet and a depth of 6

inches. How many gallons of water are required to fill it about  of the way

full?

4. A standard U.S. soda pop can has a diameter of inches and a height of
     inches. Verify that the can is able to hold fluid ounces of liquid.

5. A water jug that is roughly cube-shaped is advertised with dimensions

inches deep,  inches wide, and  inches high. How many gallons is its

capacity?

              Tiger the cat couldn't jump onto the storage
              container, so I made him a staircase. He didn't
              understand the concept.
                                                             Tech Math, 2e 177

Metric System: Converting Measurements of Volume

It's no surprise that the metric conversion ratios for volume are all powers of

... but they are actually powers of  , or , because the linear conversions get

cubed when we go three-dimensional.

Exercises

6. The circular soaking tubs at Hot Lake Springs in La Grande, Oregon have an inner

diameter of  meters, and the water has a depth of            meters. What is the

approximate volume of water, in liters, in one of the tubs?
178 Morgan Chase

7. A  carton of orange juice has a square base centimeters on each side, and

the height of the rectangular section is centimeters. (Ignore the triangular sec-

tion at the top.) Verify that the carton holds liters of juice.

8. A  carton of POG juice has a square base centimeters on each side, and

the height of the rectangular section is  centimeters. This is not enough vol-

ume to hold       liters of juice unless the sides of the carton bulge out. If you

unfold the triangular top section to make a rectangular column and squeeze the

sides of the carton so they aren't bulging out, what height will the juice rise to?

Both Systems: Converting Measurements of Volume

Converting volumes between the U.S. and metric systems will of course involve

messy decimal values. For example, because                       , we can cube both

numbers and find that                                            . The conversions in

the table below are rounded to five significant figures.
                                                Tech Math, 2e 179

Exercises

9. A large dumpster in Iceland has a volume of  cubic meters. Convert this to
    cubic yards.

10. Suppose you need to know the volume of an Icelandic dumpster in cubic feet.

Convert    to .

                                           Hvaða rusl!

11. A "two yard" dumpster at a campground in Washington has a volume of
     cubic yards. Convert this to cubic meters.

                 What rubbish!

12. The engine of a 1964 Corvette has 8 cylinders with a bore (diameter) of

inches and a stroke (height) of  inches. Find the total displacement (vol-

ume) of the cylinders in this engine, rounded to the nearest cubic inch.1
180 Morgan Chase

  13. Convert the displacement of the Corvette engine into cubic centimeters.
  14. Convert the displacement of the Corvette engine into liters.

Photo by Chevrolet via Wikimedia Commons

15. A hardware store sells pea gravel in  bags. The bags are also marked

. Verify that these two measures are equivalent.
                                                 Tech Math, 2e 181

Density

The density of a material is its weight per volume such as pounds per cubic foot,
or mass per volume such as grams per cubic centimeter. Multiplying the volume
of an object by its density will give its weight or mass.

   Exercises

16. A  bag of pea gravel weighs approximately 50 pounds. Determine the

density of pea gravel in pounds per cubic foot.

17. The standard size of a gold bar in the U.S. Federal Reserve is inches by

inches by inches.2 The density of gold is        pounds per cubic inch. How

much does one gold bar weigh?

18. A cylindrical iron bar has a diameter of centimeters and a length of

centimeters. The density of iron is  grams per cubic centimeter. What is

the bar's mass, in kilograms?

Volumes of Similar Solids

Earlier in this module, it was stated that if the linear units have a ratio of to ,
the cubic units will have a ratio of to . This applies to similar solids as well.

        If the linear dimensions of two similar solids have a ratio of to , then the vol-
        umes will have a ratio of to .

We'll verify this in the following exercises.
182 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   A table tennis (ping pong) ball has a diameter of centime-
   ters. A wiffle® ball has a diameter twice that of a table tennis
   ball.
  19. Determine the volume of the wiffle® ball.
 20. Determine the volume of the table tennis ball.
  21. What is the ratio of the volumes of the two balls?
   Rectangular solid has dimensions inches by inches by

     inches. Rectangular solid has dimensions triple those of 's.
 22. Determine the volume of the larger solid, .
 23. Determine the volume of the smaller solid, .
 24. What is the ratio of the volumes of the two solids?

                                    Exercise Answers

Notes

1. The formula is often written as  , where is the number of cylinders.

2. Source: https://www.usmint.gov/about/mint-tours-facilities/fort-knox
                                                  Tech Math, 2e 183

[26]

Pyramids and Cones

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

Pyramids

                                 The pyramid complex at Giza, Egypt. Photo by Ricardo Liberato
                                 on Wikipedia

A pyramid is a geometric solid with a polygon base and triangular faces with a
common vertex (called the apex of the pyramid). Pyramids are named accord-
ing to the shape of their bases. The most common pyramids have a square or
another regular polygon for a base, making all of the faces identical isosceles tri-
angles. The height, , is the distance from the apex straight down to the center of
the base. Two other measures used with pyramids are the edge length , the sides
of the triangular faces, and the slant height , the height of the triangular faces.

                                                                                      183
184 Morgan Chase

Volume of a Pyramid
In general, the volume of a pyramid with base of area and height is

                 or
If the base is a square with side length , the volume is

                 or

Interestingly, the volume of a pyramid is the volume of a prism with the same
base and height.

   Exercises

1. A pyramid has a square base with sides     centimeters long, and a height of

centimeters. Find the volume of the pyramid.

2. The Great Pyramid at Giza has a height of  meters and a square base with

sides             meters long.1 Find the volume of the pyramid.
The lateral surface area (                                                                                           Tech Math, 2e 185
triangular face.
                               ) of a pyramid is found by adding the area of each

Lateral Surface Area of a Pyramid

If the base of a pyramid is a regular polygon with  sides each of length , and
the slant height is , then

or

If the base is a square, then

The total surface area ( ) is of course found by adding the area of the base
to the lateral surface area. If the base is a regular polygon, you will need to use
the techniques we studied in Module 23.

        Total Surface Area of a Pyramid

        If the base is a square, then
186 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

3. A pyramid has a square base with sides  centimeters long, and a slant

height of         centimeters. Find the lateral surface area and total surface area

of the pyramid.

4. The Great Pyramid at Giza has a slant height of meters and a square base

with sides        meters long. Find the lateral surface area of the pyramid.

Cones

                                    A large cone-shaped pile of grain in Eastern Oregon.

A cone is like a pyramid with a circular base. You may be able to determine the
height of a cone (the altitude from the apex, perpendicular to the base), or the
slant height (which is the length from the apex to the edge of the circular base).
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 187

Note that the height, radius, and slant height form a right triangle with the slant
height as the hypotenuse. We can use the Pythagorean theorem to determine the
following equivalences.

The slant height , height , and radius of a cone are related as follows:

Just as the volume of a pyramid is    the volume of a prism with the same base
and height, the volume of a cone is  the volume of a cylinder with the same base
and height.

Volume of a Cone
The volume of a cone with a base radius and height is

                   or
188 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

5. The base of a cone has a radius of centimeters, and the vertical height of

the cone is       centimeters. Find the volume of the cone.

   6. The base of a cone has a diameter of feet, and the slant height of the cone
        is feet. Find the volume of the cone.

For the surface area of a cone, we have the following formulas.

        Surface Area of a Cone
                                                                     Tech Math, 2e 189

It's hard to explain the  formula in words, but here goes.

The lateral surface of a cone, when flattened out, is a circle with

radius that is missing a wedge. The circumference of this par-

tial circle, because it matched the circumference of the circular

base, is . The circumference of the entire circle with radius

would be , so the part we have is just a fraction of the entire

circle. To be precise, the fraction is , which reduces to . The area of the entire

circle with radius would be . Because the partial circle is the fraction of the

entire circle, the area of the partial circle is  .

Exercises

7. The base of a cone has a diameter of feet, and the slant height of the cone
    is feet. Find the lateral surface area and total surface area of the cone.

8. The base of a cone has a radius of centimeters, and the vertical height of

the cone is   centimeters. Find the lateral surface area and total surface area

of the cone.

                          Exercise Answers
190 Morgan Chase

Notes

    1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Pyramid_of_Giza
                 Tech Math, 2e 191

[27]

Percents Part 3

                                          Photo by Karim Manjra on Unsplash

You may use a calculator throughout this module.
There is one more situation involving percents that often trips people up: work-
ing backwards from the result of a percent change to find the original value.

                                                                                      191
192 Morgan Chase

Finding the Base After a Percent Increase

Suppose a        tax is added to a price; what percent of the original is the new
amount?

Well, the original number is                      of itself, so the new amount must be
                                of the original.

As a proportion,    .

As an equation,           .

A very common error is to find                    of the new amount and subtract that from

the new amount. However, this doesn't give the correct result. Instead, we must

divide the new amount by       .

If an unknown number is increased by a percent, add that percent to  and

use that result for the rate.

Exercises

1. A sales tax of   is added to the selling price of a lawn tractor, making the total
    price          . What is the selling price of the lawn tractor without tax?

2. Clackamas Community College's enrollment in Fall 2023 was         stu-

dents, which was an increase of                   from Fall 2022. What was the enroll-

ment in Fall 2022?

3. While your author and his children were stuck overnight at the Seattle airport,

they bought three 20-ounce bottles of Sprite for  , but the prices weren't

shown and they weren't given a receipt. Suspecting that the sales tax rate was

           from previous experience, your author was able to figure out the cost

of one Sprite. Can you?
                                                                 Tech Math, 2e 193

Finding the Base After a Percent Decrease

Suppose a        discount is applied to a price; what percent of the original is the

new amount?

As above, the original number is                of itself, so the new amount must be
                              of the original.

As a proportion,  .

As an equation,          .

As above, the most common error people make is finding of the new amount
and adding that to the new amount, but this doesn't give the correct result.
Instead, we must divide the new amount by .

If an unknown number is decreased by a percent, subtract that percent from
         and use that result for the rate.

Exercises

4. A city department's budget was cut by             this year. If this year's budget is
              million, what was last year's budget?

5. The estimated population of San Francisco in July 2022 was    people,

which was a decrease of     from April 2020. What was the estimated pop-

ulation in April 2020? (Round to the nearest hundred people.)1

6. An educational website claims that by purchasing access for   , you'll save
            off the standard price. What is the standard price?

                            Exercise Answers
194 Morgan Chase

Notes

    1. Source: https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/sanfranciscocitycalifornia/
        PST045222
                    Tech Math, 2e 195

[28]

Mean, Median, Mode

You may use a calculator throughout this
module.
We often describe data using a measure of
central tendency. This is a number that we
use to describe the typical data value. In
this module, we will look at three mea-
sures of central tendency: the mean, the
median, and the mode. Each of these has
pros and cons, depending on the particu-
lar data set.

Mean

The mean of a set of data is what we commonly call the average: add up all of the
numbers and then divide by how many numbers there were.

   Exercises

    1. The table below shows the amount of time, rounded to the nearest half
        minute, it took Marty to complete the Friday crossword puzzle in the New
        York Times. Calculate the mean completion time for these thirteen puzzles.

                                                                                      195
196 Morgan Chase

                                                                  Oct 6, 2023
                                                                 Oct 13, 2023
                                                                 Oct 20, 2023
                                                                 Oct 27, 2023
                                                                 Nov 3, 2023
                                                                Nov 10, 2023
                                                                 Nov 17, 2023
                                                                Nov 24, 2023
                                                                  Dec 1, 2023
                                                                 Dec 8, 2023
                                                                 Dec 15, 2023
                                                                Dec 22, 2023
                                                                Dec 29, 2023

   2. The table below shows the average price of a gallon of regular unleaded gaso-
        line in the Seattle metro area for ten weeks in late 2023.1 Compute the mean
        price over this time period.

                                                                    Oct 23, 2023
                                                                    Oct 30, 2023
                                                                     Nov 6, 2023
                                                                    Nov 13, 2023
                                                                    Nov 20, 2023
                                                                    Nov 27, 2023
                                                                     Dec 4, 2023
                                                                     Dec 11, 2023
                                                                     Dec 18, 2023
                                                                    Dec 25, 2023
                                                                        Tech Math, 2e 197

Median

The median is the middle number in a set of data; it has an equal number of
data values below it as above it. The numbers must be arranged in order, usually
smallest to largest but largest to smallest would also work. Then we can count in
from both ends of the list and find the median in the middle.

If there are an odd number of data values, there will be one number in the mid-
dle, which is the median.

If there are an even number of data values, there will be two numbers in the mid-
dle. The mean of these two numbers is the median.

Exercises

3. Here are Marty's Friday crossword puzzle completion times again, in minutes,
    listed in order from fastest to slowest. What is the median completion time?

4. Here are the Seattle gas prices again, listed in order from lowest to highest.

What is the median price?         ,  ,     ,  ,  ,             ,        ,

,       ,

The five houses on a block have these property values:            ;                ;

        ;  ;               .

5. Find the mean property value.

6. Find the median property value.

A new house is built on the block, making the property values        ;             ;

        ;  ;               ;            .

7. Find the mean property value.

8. Find the median property value.

9. Which of these measures appears to give a more accurate representation of
    the typical house on the block?

The mean is better to work with when we do more complicated statistical analy-
sis, but it is sensitive to extreme values; in other words, one very large or very
198 Morgan Chase

small number can have a significant effect on the mean. The median is not sensi-
tive to extreme values, which can make it a better measure to use when describ-
ing data that has one or two numbers very different from the remainder of the
data.

Mode

The mode is the value that appears most frequently in the data set. On the game
show Family Feud, the goal is to guess the mode: the most popular answer.

If no numbers are repeated, then the data set has no mode. If there are two
values that are tied for most frequently occurring, then they are both considered
a mode and the data set is called bimodal. If there are more than two values tied
for the lead, we usually say that there is no mode.2 (It's like in sports: there is
usually one MVP, but occasionally there are two co-MVPs. Having three or more
MVPs would start to get ridiculous.)

   Exercises

10. Here are Marty's Friday crossword puzzle completion times one last time,
      in minutes. What is the mode of the completion times?

11. Here are the Seattle gas prices one last time. What is the mode of the prices?

,  ,        ,  ,       ,  ,          ,  ,         ,

12. One hundred cell phone owners are asked which carrier they use. What is the
      mode of the data?

   AT&T Mobility Verizon Wireless T-Mobile US Dish Wireless U.S. Cellular

13. Fifty people are asked what their favorite type of Girl Scout cookie is. What is
      the mode?

   S'Mores     Samoas     Tagalongs     Trefoils     Thin Mints
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 199

Let's put it all together and find the mean, median, and mode of some data sets.
Sportsball!

   Exercises

   From 2001-2019, these are the numbers of games won by the New England Patriots
   each NFL season.3

      ,, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .
  14. Find the mean number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
  15. Find the median number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
  16. Find the mode of the number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
  17. Do any of these measures appear to be misleading, or do they all represent the

        data fairly well?
   From 2001-2019, these are the numbers of games won by the Buffalo Bills each NFL
   season.4

     ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,, .
  18. Find the mean number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
  19. Find the median number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
 20. Find the mode of the number of games won from 2001 to 2019.
  21. Do any of these measures appear to be misleading, or do they all represent the

        data fairly well?
200 Morgan Chase

Some sets of data may not be easy to describe with one measure of central ten-
dency.

   Exercises

Thirteen clementines are weighed. Their masses, in grams, are
   ,,,,,,, , , , , , .

22. Determine the mean. Does the mean appear to represent the mass of a typical
      clementine?

23. Determine the median. Does the median appear to represent the mass of a
      typical clementine?

24. Determine the mode. Does the mode appear to represent the mass of a typical
       clementine?

Suppose that the  -gram clementine is a tiny bit heavier and the masses are actually
   , , , , ,      ,, , , , , , .

25. Determine the new mean. Is the new mean different from the original mean?

26. Determine the new median. Is the new median different from the original
       median?

27. Determine the new mode. Is the new mode different from the original mode?
      Does it represent the mass of a typical clementine?
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 201

                                          Clementine the cat weighs more than 109 grams.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Source: https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/gasdiesel/
   2. The concepts of trimodal and multimodal data exist, but we aren't going to consider

        anything beyond bimodal in this textbook.
   3. Source: https://www.pro-football-reference.com/teams/nwe/index.htm
   4. Source: https://www.pro-football-reference.com/teams/buf/index.htm
202 Morgan Chase

[29]

Probability

Probability is the likelihood that some event
occurs. If the event occurs, we call that a favor­-
able outcome. The set of all possible events (or
outcomes) is called the sample space of the
event.
We will limit our focus to independent events,
which do not influence each other. For exam-
ple, if we roll a 5 on one die, that does not affect
the probability of rolling a 5 on the other die.
(We will not be studying dependent events,
which do influence each other.)

Theoretical Probability

If we are working with something simple like dice, cards, or coin flips where we
know all of the possible outcomes, we can calculate the theoretical probability of an
event occurring. To do this, we divide the number of ways the event can occur by
the total number of possible outcomes. We may choose to write the probability
as a fraction, a decimal, or a percent depending on what form seems most useful.

                                                                                      202
                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 203

                          Theoretical probability of an event:

Suppose two six-sided dice, numbered through , are rolled. There are
               possible outcomes in the sample space. If we are playing a game where

we take the sum of the dice, the only possible outcomes are through . How-
ever, as the following table shows, these outcomes are not all equally likely. For
example, there are two different ways to roll a , but only one way to roll a .

              1              2  3         4  5                  6

           1

           2

           3

           4

           5

           6

Exercises

Two six-sided dice numbered     through   are rolled. Find the probability of each
event occurring.

1. The sum of the dice is .

2. The sum of the dice is .

3. The sum of the dice is or .

4. The sum of the dice is greater than .

5. The sum of the dice is .

Some things to notice...
204 Morgan Chase

If an event is impossible, its probability is or .    or .
If an event is certain to happen, its probability is

If it will be tedious to count up all of the favorable outcomes, it may be easier to
count up the unfavorable outcomes and subtract from the total.

   Exercises

Two six-sided dice numbered      through  are rolled. Find the probability of each
event occurring.

6. The sum of the dice is .

7. The sum of the dice is not .

8. The sum of the dice is greater than .

9. The sum of the dice is or lower.

The set of outcomes in which an event does not occur is called the complement of
the event. The event "the sum is not 5" is the complement of "the sum is 5". Two
complements complete the sample space.

If the probability of an event happening is , the probability of the comple-

ment is           .

Exercises

A bowl of Tootsie Rolls Fruit Chews contains the following:  cherry,  lemon,
lime, orange, vanilla.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 205

  10. If one Tootsie Roll is randomly selected from the bowl, what is the probability
        that it is cherry?

  11. If one Tootsie Roll is randomly selected from the bowl, what is the probability
        that it is not cherry?

  12. What is the probability that a randomly selected Tootsie Roll is either orange
        or vanilla?

  13. What is the probability that a randomly selected Tootsie Roll is not orange or
        vanilla?

Here's where we try to condense the basics of genetic crosses into one paragraph.
Each parent gives one allele to their child. The allele for brown eyes is B, and the
allele for blue eyes is b. If two parents both have genotype Bb, the table below
(which biologists call a Punnett square) shows that there are four equally-likely
outcomes: BB, Bb, Bb, bb. The allele for brown eyes, B, is dominant over the gene
for blue eyes, b, which means that if a child has any B alleles, they will have brown
eyes. The only genotype for which the child will have blue eyes is bb.

                                                                          B b
                                                                    B BB Bb
                                                                    b Bb bb

   Exercises

   Two parents have genotypes Bb and Bb. (B = brown, b = blue)
  14. What is the probability that their child will have blue eyes?
  15. What is the probability that their child will have brown eyes?

Now suppose that one parent has genotype Bb but the other parent has genotype
bb. The Punnett square will look like this.
206 Morgan Chase

                                       B b
                                   b Bb bb
                                   b Bb bb

Exercises

Two parents have genotypes Bb and bb. (B = brown, b = blue)
16. What is the probability that their child will have blue eyes?
17. What is the probability that their child will have brown eyes?

Empirical Probability

The previous methods work when we know the total number of outcomes and

we can assume that they are all equally likely. (The dice aren't loaded, for exam-

ple.) However, life is usually more complicated than a game of dice or a bowl of

Tootsie Rolls. In many situations, we have to observe what has happened in the

past and use that data to predict what might happen in the future. If someone

predicts that an Alaska Airlines flight has an  of arriving on time1, that is

of course based on Alaska's past rate of success and this number will vary from

month to month. When we calculate the probability this way, by observation, we

call it an empirical probability.

                       Empirical probability of an event:

Although the wording may seem complicated, we are still just thinking about
       .
                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 207

Exercises

A photocopier makes       copies, but  of them are unacceptable because they have
toner smeared on them.

18. What is the empirical probability that a copy will be unacceptable?

19. What is the empirical probability that a copy will be acceptable?

20. Out of the next       copies, how many should we expect to be acceptable?

An auditor examined tax returns and found errors on of them.

21. What percent of the tax returns contained errors?

22. How many of the next  tax returns should we expect to contain errors?

23. What is the probability that a given tax return, chosen at random, will contain
      errors?

Probability of More Than One Event

It was mentioned earlier in this module that independent events have no influence
on each other. Some examples:

        · Rolling two dice are independent events because the result of the first
            die does not affect the probability of what will happen with the second
            die.
208 Morgan Chase

        · If we flip a coin ten times, each flip is independent of the previous flip
            because the coin doesn't remember how it landed before. The probabil-
            ity of heads or tails remains for each flip.

        · Drawing marbles out of a bag are independent events only if we put the
            first marble back in the bag before drawing a second marble. If we draw
            two marbles at once, or we draw a second marble without replacing the
            first marble, these are dependent events, which we are not studying in this
            course.

        · Drawing two cards from a deck of cards are independent events only
            if we put the first card back in the deck before drawing a second card. If
            we draw a second card without replacing the first card, these are depen­
            dent events; the probabilities change because there are only cards
            available on the second draw.

If two events are independent, then the probability of both events happening can
be found by multiplying the probability of each event happening separately.

If and are independent events, then  .

Note: This can be extended to three or more events. Just multiply all of the prob-
abilities together.

   Exercises

   An auditor examined tax returns and found errors on of them.
 24. What is the probability that the next two tax returns both contain errors?
 25. What is the probability that the next three tax returns all contain errors?
 26. What is the probability that the next tax return contains errors but the one

        after it does not?
  27. What is the probability that the next tax return does not contain errors but the

        one after it does?
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 209

 28. What is the probability that neither of the next two tax returns contain errors?
 29. What is the probability that none of the next three tax returns contain errors?
 30. What is the probability that at least one of the next three tax returns contain

        errors? (This one is tricky!)

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. Source (PDF file, see page 6): https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/2024-01/
        December%202023%20ATCR.pdf
210 Morgan Chase

[30]

Standard Deviation

You probably won't need a calculator for this module.

 This topic requires a leap of faith. It is one of the rare times when this textbook

will say "don't worry about why it's true; just accept it."

Normal Distributions & Standard Deviation

A normal distribution, often referred to as a bell
curve, is symmetrical on the left and right, with
the mean, median, and mode being the value in
the center. There are lots of data values near the
center, then fewer and fewer as the values get
further from the center. A normal distribution
describes the data in many real-world situations.

                                                                                                  This normal distribution of Wordle

One of the best ways to demonstrate the normal scores is formatted horizontally.
distribution is to drop balls through a board of
evenly spaced pegs, as shown here. (The Plinko game on The Price Is Right is a
well known example of this.) Each time a ball hits a peg, it has a fifty-fifty chance
of going left or right. For most balls, the number of lefts and rights are roughly
equal, and the ball lands near the center. Only a few balls have an extremely lop-
sided number of lefts and rights, so there are not many balls at either end. As you
can see, the distribution is not perfect, but it is approximated by the normal
curve drawn on the glass.

                                                                                      210
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 211

The standard deviation is a measure of the spread of the data: data with lots of
results close to the mean has a smaller standard deviation, and data with results
spaced further from the mean has a larger standard deviation. (In this textbook,
you will be given the value of the standard deviation of the data and will never
need to calculate it.) The standard deviation is a measuring stick for a particular
set of data.

                                                     a distribution with a small
                                                     standard deviation

                              a distribution with a large standard deviation
212 Morgan Chase

The 68-95-99.7 Rule

The 68-95-99.7 rule, in Swedish. Image credit: Svjo, hosted at Wikimedia Commons.

The 68-95-99.7 rule: In a normal distribution, approximately...

·  of the numbers are within                    standard deviation above or

   below the mean

·  of the numbers are within                    standard deviations above or

   below the mean

·                    of the numbers are within  standard deviations above or

   below the mean

This is an empirical rule because it is based on observation of how the world
works, rather than being based on a formula.1
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 213

Returning to the ball-dropping experiment, let's assume that the standard devia-
tion is three columns wide.2 In the picture below, the green line marks the center
of the distribution.

First, the two red lines are each three columns away from the center, which is
one standard deviation above and below the center, so about 68% of the balls
will land between the red lines.

Next, the two orange lines are another three columns farther away from the cen-
ter, which is six columns or two standard deviations above and below the center,
so about 95% of the balls will land between the orange lines.

And finally, the two purple lines are another three columns farther away from

the center, which is nine columns or three standard deviations above and below

the center, so about 99.7% of the balls will land between the purple lines. We can

expect that out of  balls will land between the purple lines, leaving only

out of  landing beyond the purple lines on either end.
214 Morgan Chase

Okay, that was a lot of information. For our purposes, the following restatement
of the 68-95-99.7 rule may be more practical.

The 68-95-99.7 rule: In a normal distribution with mean  and standard devi-
ation ...

            ·     of the numbers are between  and

            ·     of the numbers are between  and

            ·     of the numbers are between  and

Exercises

The heights of U.S. females are normally distributed. The average height is around
       inches ( ft in) and the standard deviation is inches. Use the 68-95-99.7 rule

to fill in the blanks.

1. About          of the women should be between _______ and _______ inches
    tall.

2. About          of the women should be between _______ and _______ inches
     tall.

3. About          of the women should be between _______ and _______
    inches tall.

The heights of U.S. males are normally distributed. The average height is around
inches ( ft in) and the standard deviation is inches. Use the 68-95-99.7 rule to fill
in the blanks.

4. About          of the men should be between _______ and _______ inches
     tall.

5. About          of the men should be between _______ and _______ inches
    tall.

6. About          of the men should be between _______ and _______ inches
     tall.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 215

This graph provides another way to think about the distribution of the data.

Because  of the data are within one standard deviation of the mean, we have

of the data slightly below the mean and  slightly above. Moving outwards

one more standard deviation in each direction, we have another      below the

mean and another        above the mean, encompassing a total of     of the

data. Moving outwards one more standard deviation, we have another  far

below the mean and another     far above the mean, bringing the total up to

of the data. This leaves only  of the data more than three standard

deviations below the mean and  of the data more than three standard devi-

ations above the mean.
216 Morgan Chase

Exercises

Around            of U.S. males in their forties weigh less than  lb and  weigh more

than lb. Assume a normal distribution.3

7. What percent of U.S. males weigh between lb and lb?

8. What is the average weight? (Hint: think about symmetry.)

9. What is the standard deviation? (Hint: You have to work backwards to figure
    this out, but the math isn't complicated.)

10. Based on the empirical rule, about   of the men should weigh between
      _______ and _______ pounds.

This version of the graph can help us group the data into general categories. This
is not official terminology, but hopefully it gets the point across.

Looking at the middle  of the data,      could be considered "slightly low"

and     could be considered "slightly high". Moving outwards, we have another
                                                     Tech Math, 2e 217

that could be considered "low" and another           could be considered

"high". Moving outwards again, we have another       that could be considered

"very low" and another      that could be considered "very high". Finally,

of the data could be considered "extremely low" and  could be considered

"extremely high".

If you are asked only one question about the empirical rule instead of three in a

row ( , ,          ), you will most likely be asked about the . This is related

to the " confidence interval" that is often mentioned in relation to statistics.

For example, the margin of error for a poll is usually close to two standard devi-
ations.4

Let's finish up by comparing the performance of three NFL teams at the begin-
ning of this century.

Exercises

The numbers of regular-season games won by the New England Patriots5 each NFL
season from 2001-2019: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,

   .

The mean number of wins is  , and a spreadsheet tells us that the standard devia-
tion is wins.

11. There is a      chance of the Patriots winning between _______ and

_______ games in a season.

12. In 2020, the Patriots won games. Could you have predicted that based on the
      data? How many standard deviations from the mean is this number of wins?

The numbers of regular-season games won by the Buffalo Bills6 each NFL season
from 2001-2019: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .

The mean number of wins is  , and a spreadsheet tells us that the standard deviation
is wins.

13. There is a     chance of the Bills winning between _______ and _______

games in a season.

14. In 2020, the Bills won games. Could you have predicted that based on the
      data? How many standard deviations from the mean is this number of wins?
218 Morgan Chase

The numbers of regular-season games won by the Denver Broncos7 each NFL season
from 2001-2019: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , .

The mean number of wins is    , and a spreadsheet tells us that the standard deviation
is wins.

15. There is a    chance of the Broncos winning between _______ and

_______ games in a season.

16. In 2020, the Broncos won games. Could you have predicted that based on
      the data? How many standard deviations from the mean is this number of
      wins?

                              Exercise Answers

Notes

1. Well, there is a formula,  , but it was discovered after the fact.

2. I eyeballed it and it seemed like a reasonable assumption.
3. Source (PDF file): https://www2.census.gov/library/publications/2010/compendia/statab/

     130ed/tables/11s0205.pdf
4. Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation
5. Source: https://www.pro-football-reference.com/teams/nwe/index.htm
6. Source: https://www.pro-football-reference.com/teams/buf/index.htm
7. Source: https://www.pro-football-reference.com/teams/den/index.htm
                                                                    Tech Math, 2e 219

[31]

Right Triangle Trigonometry

Bob Brown and Morgan Chase

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

The word "trigonometry" essentially means the measure-
ment of triangles. In this module, we will focus on right tri-
angles. If we know some information about a right triangle,
such as the measure of one side and one angle, we can use
trigonometry to determine the measure of another side.

Sine, Cosine, Tangent                                           Photo by Georgios
                                                                Karamanis on flickr.

Consider one of the acute angles in a right triangle.

· The sine of the angle is the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse.

· The cosine of the angle is the ratio of the adjacent side to the
   hypotenuse.

· The tangent of the angle is the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent
   side.

                            219
220 Morgan Chase

                                                      SOHCAHTOA
                                                     sine =
                                                   cosine =
                                                    tangent =

Exercises

In relation to , identify which side of the triangle is the adjacent side, the opposite
side, and the hypotenuse.

1.

2.

Now let's look at a specific example, a right triangle with sides of length 3, 4, and

5. Measuring the angles with a protractor will show us that the smaller acute angle

is approximately and the larger acute angle is ; to the nearest hundredth

of a degree, these values are  and  .
                                                              Tech Math, 2e 221

Exercises

Use the diagram to determine each of the following, first as a fraction and then as a
decimal (rounded to four significant figures, if necessary).

3. sin
4. cos
5. tan
6. sin
7. cos
8. tan

Note that we would have gotten the same results for any right triangle whose

sides are in the ratio 3:4:5. If the sides had been 6, 8, 10, the angles measures

would still be        and       . If the sides had been 30, 40, 50, the angles mea-

sures would still be       and  .

Or to look at it another way, any right triangle with angles  and         will

have these relationships: the shorter leg is the hypotenuse, the longer leg is

the hypotenuse, and the shorter leg is the longer leg. Your scientific calculator

knows this and is programmed with all the trigonometric values you need.
222 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Use your calculator to determine each of the following as a decimal (rounded to four
   significant figures, if necessary). Be sure that your calculator is in degree mode, not
   radian mode, before you begin.
   9. sin
  10. cos
  11. tan
  12. sin
  13. cos
  14. tan

You may notice some repeated answers here, which makes sense because, for

example, the side opposite the  angle is adjacent to the  angle, which

means that sin  must be equal to cos  .

Trigonometry Applications

The sine, cosine, and tangent ratios apply to any right triangle, not just a 3-4-5
triangle, which is what makes trigonometry so useful. If we know the measure
of one side and one acute angle in a right triangle, we can use SOHCAHTOA to
find the length of another side of the triangle. For each of the following exercises,
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 223

we'll need to decide whether the parts we're dealing with will require us to use
sine, cosine, or tangent.

   Exercises

   Determine the length of the labeled unknown side of each right triangle. Round each
   answer appropriately.

  15.

  16.

  17.

  18.
224 Morgan Chase

  19.

 20.
  21. A guy wire is attached to a utility pole. The wire is anchored to the ground

        15 feet from the base of the pole, forming a angle with the level ground.
        What is the length of the wire, to the nearest foot?
 22. A 19-foot ladder is leaning against a wall, forming a angle with the level
        ground. What is the vertical height of the place where the ladder contacts the
        wall?
 23. During intermission of a hockey game, one lucky fan gets to shoot a puck
        from the blue line at the goal, 64 feet away, for the chance to win a team jersey.
        Actually, there is a sheet of fabric blocking the entire goal except for a 6-inch
        wide hole in the bottom center. If the fan shoots the puck hard enough, aim-
        ing directly at the center of the hole, they win. If their aim is off by , will they
        still win the jersey? (If it helps, a hockey puck is 3 inches in diameter.)
                                                                     Tech Math, 2e 225

Inverse Sine, Inverse Cosine, Inverse Tangent

Okay, we now know how to find the length of a side if we know an angle and
another side. But what if we know the lengths of the sides and want to determine
a missing angle? Rather than carefully making a scale drawing and using a pro-
tractor, we can use a calculator.

Your calculator's SIN, COS, and TAN keys take an angle measure for the input

and give a ratio (in decimal form) as the output. Your calculator's  ,              ,

and  keys allow you to work backwards; they take a ratio for the input and

give an angle measure for the output.

Exercises

 Use your calculator to determine each of the following angle measures (rounded to
 the nearest hundredth of a degree, if necessary).
24.

25.

26.
226 Morgan Chase

Inverse Trigonometry Applications
   Exercises

   Determine the measure of the marked angle. Round each answer to the nearest hun-
   dredth of a degree.

  27.

 28.
 29.

 30.
                                                       Tech Math, 2e 227

31.

32.

33. A rule of thumb for ladder safety is that the vertical height where the ladder

      touches the wall should be four times the horizontal distance from the base of
      the ladder to the wall.1 To the nearest degree, what is the angle between the

      ladder and the floor in this scenario?

34. The entrance to a public building is 2 feet higher than the courtyard in front

     of the entrance. A ramp is being constructed, continuous with no switchbacks
     or level platforms, with a surface length of 25 feet. ADA regulations2 limit the

     angle of elevation to a maximum of approximately  . Does the ramp's

     design meet ADA standards?

     Photo by UNDP in Europe and
     Central Asia on flickr.
228 Morgan Chase

Using Multiple Methods

In Module 18, we used the Pythagorean Theorem,            , to determine the

length of an unknown side in a right triangle. We can use the Pythagorean Theo-

rem in conjunction with trigonometry to solve a problem in more than one way

or to double-check our results.

Exercises

35. First, use inverse tangent to determine the value of  . Round to the nearest
      tenth of a degree.

36. Next, use sine with    to determine the value of . Round to the nearest
       tenth.

37. Next, use cosine with  to determine the value of . Round to the nearest
      tenth.

38. Finally, use the Pythagorean Theorem to determine the value of . Round to
      the nearest tenth.

39. Compare your answers for Exercises 36-38. Are they the same or are they dif-
      ferent?
                                              Tech Math, 2e 229

40. The Wallowa Lake Tramway in Eastern Oregon carries passengers along a

cable, with a vertical rise of                . Although the cable is not

straight along its entire length, let's assume that it is. To the nearest degree,

what is the angle of elevation of the cable?

41. What is the approximate horizontal run covered by the tramway cable?

Exercise Answers
230 Morgan Chase

Notes

    1. Source: https://www.americanladderinstitute.org/page/Ladders101
   2. This is implied at https://www.ada-compliance.com/ada-compliance/ada-ramp but not

        directly stated. We'll verify this angle measure in the next module.
                                                      Tech Math, 2e 231

[32]

Slope

Bob Brown and Morgan Chase

You may use a calculator throughout this mod­
ule.

The slope of a surface is a measure of its steep-
ness. In some cases, such as a walkway or ramp
or street, a shallow slope is safer than a steep
slope. In other cases, such as a roof, a steep slope
may be preferred because it allows rainwater or
accumulated snow to move off the roof surface
more easily than a shallow slope.1

We will first look at slope in terms of vertical      This section of Kearney Street in San
and horizontal distances, and we will then look       Francisco is too steep for a sidewalk and
at slope in terms of angles. Come on, let's hit the   has stairs instead. Photo by Marcus Lenk
slopes!                                               on Unsplash.

                            231
232 Morgan Chase

Slope as a Ratio

Slope is defined as the ratio of the vertical rise to the horizontal run.

        · A line that is increasing in height has a positive slope.
        · A line that is decreasing in height has a negative slope.2
        · The slope of a horizontal line is 0; it is not increasing or decreasing.
A slope may be expressed as a ratio, a decimal, or a percent grade. For example,
consider this loading ramp with a vertical rise of 23.5 inches and a horizontal run
of 132 inches.

As a ratio, the slope is 23.5 : 132. Dividing the rise by the run gives a decimal value
of approximately 0.18. Moving the decimal point two places to the right gives a
grade of approximately 18%.
                                                                                                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 233

Exercises

Express each slope in three ways: as a ratio, a decimal, and a percent grade.

 1.
     (This is the preferred maximum slope for sidewalks.)

2.
     (This is the maximum allowed slope for sidewalks.)3

3.
     (This is the maximum allowed slope for ADA-accessible ramps.)4

4.
     (This is the preferred maximum slope for open pit mines.)
234 Morgan Chase

Slope as an Angle

The steepness of a line may also be described by its angle of elevation above the
horizontal (or its angle of depression below the horizontal).

Notice that the vertical rise is the side opposite the angle, and the horizontal
run is the side adjacent to the angle. Therefore, trigonometry tells us that

                                    . The tangent of the angle is equal to the slope.

Or, thinking about it in reverse, the inverse tangent of the slope is the angle.

   Exercises

   Determine the angle of elevation for each slope. Round to the nearest hundredth of a
   degree.
                                                                                                                                                    Tech Math, 2e 235

 5.

 6.

  7.

 8.
 For proper drainage, the ground around a building should slope downwards, away
 from the building.
 9. The minimum downward grade of the ground is 1%. Assuming this grade, if a

      point on the ground is 50 feet horizontally from the base of the house, how
      much lower is the ground at that point?
10. The preferred minimum downward grade of the ground is 2%. Assuming this
      grade, if a point on the ground is 50 feet horizontally from the base of the
      house, how much lower is the ground at that point?
11. The maximum acceptable downward grade of the ground is 10%. Assuming
      this grade, if a point on the ground is 50 feet horizontally from the base of the
      house, how much lower is the ground at that point?
12. A motion sensor needs to be installed on the outside of a warehouse door 12
      feet above the ground. The sensor should go off if anyone approaching the
      warehouse gets within 20 feet of the door. What angle from vertical should
236 Morgan Chase

        the sensor point away from the building to detect someone at the appropriate
        distance from the warehouse? Round your answer to the nearest degree.
  13. A ramp is being constructed to the entrance to a public building that is 2.5
        feet higher than the level courtyard in front of the entrance. Assuming that
        the ramp will be continuous with no switchbacks or level platforms,5 what is
        the minimum horizontal distance required for the ramp so that it will comply
        with ADA regulations?

                        Photo by Forest Service Pacific Northwest Region on flickr.

                                                Exercise Answers
Notes

    1. Source: https://www.nachi.org/roof-slope-pitch.htm
   2. We won't worry about negative slopes in this textbook, because we can always express a

        negative slope using a word like "decrease", "decline", or "depression" in combination with
        a positive number.
   3. Source: https://www.ada-compliance.com/ada-compliance/403-walking-surfaces
   4. Source: https://www.ada-compliance.com/ada-compliance/405-ramps
   5. If you were curious, this is the maximum rise allowed for this situation; a rise of more
        than 2.5 feet would require a switchback or a level platform.
                                                     Tech Math, 2e 237

[33]

Non-Right Triangle Trigonometry

You may use a calculator throughout this module.

Basic trigonometry applies to right triangles, but
there are two useful formulas that can be used with
non-right triangles; these are known as the Law of
Sines and the Law of Cosines.

The Law of Sines allows you to use a proportion to
solve for a missing value in a triangle.

The Law of Cosines is essentially the Pythagorean
Theorem with an extra twist that makes it work
with any kind of triangle.

These formulas have applications in many fields,     Your author among the California
most obviously in surveying and forestry where       Redwoods.
distances cannot be measured directly.

237
238 Morgan Chase

Law of Sines

Suppose we have a triangle with its vertices labeled A, B, C, and the sides opposite
each vertex labeled a, b, and c.

The Law of Sines is useful when you are dealing with two sides and two angles;
if you know three of those values, you can use the formula to figure out the
fourth value. Depending on which sides and angles you know, you'll use one of
these three versions:

   Exercises

   Determine the unknown value(s) in each triangle.

 1.
                                                                Tech Math, 2e 239

2.

3.

4. A utility pole is supported by two guy wires as shown in the figure below. The

    shorter wire makes a  angle with the sidewalk, the longer wire makes a

    angle with the sidewalk, and the wires meet the sidewalk a distance of 6 feet from

    each other. Determine the approximate length of each wire.
240 Morgan Chase

When we need to determine an angle measure, we sometimes have a situation
with two possible results: the angle could be acute or obtuse. (For this ambiguous
situation to arise, we must know the lengths of two sides and the measure of an
acute angle that is not between those two sides.) The inverse sine function on
a calculator will always be programmed to give an acute angle measure for the
result. If it is clear that the angle should be obtuse, simply subtract the calcula-
tor's result from 180 degrees.

   Exercises

   Determine the unknown angle measure in each triangle.
   5. Assume that n represents an acute angle.

   6. Assume that n represents an obtuse angle.
                                                                                                                                                       Tech Math, 2e 241

Law of Cosines

Again, suppose we have a triangle with its vertices labeled A, B, C, and the sides
opposite each vertex labeled a, b, and c.

The Law of Cosines is useful when you are dealing with three sides and one
angle; if you know three of those values, you can use the formula to figure out
the fourth value.
If you're trying to determine one of the side lengths, use this version.

If you're trying to determine an angle measure, use this version.

In either case, the side you name c must be opposite the angle you name C.
242 Morgan Chase

   Exercises

   Determine the unknown value in each triangle.

 7.

8.
9.
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 243

10. Amateur surveyors have determined that the distance from to is 53 meters,

the distance from to is 75 meters, and the measure of             is , as shown in

the figure below. What is the length of the pond?

11. Determine the measure of each angle.

                                                Exercise Answers
244 Morgan Chase

[34]

Radian Measure

You may use a calculator as needed in this module.

In everyday life, we measure angles in degrees. However, degrees are an arbitrary
unit of measure; why is a right angle 90 degrees and a full circle 360 degrees?1

Another unit that is used in surveying is the gradian; a right angle is equal to 100
gradians. Using gradians makes some calculations easier, but this is still an arbi-
trary unit of measure.

In this module, we will focus on a third unit of angle measure known as radians.

Radian Measure

To explain radian measure, we can visualize
a circle. Next, let's measure a length along the
circumference of a circle that is equal to the
radius. Finally, let's draw an angle with its
vertex at the center of the circle, intersecting
the circle at the endpoints of this arc. The
measure of this angle is defined to be 1
radian.

In fewer words, a radian is the measure of the    Image by Adrignola on Wikimedia Commons.
central angle that forms an arc equal to the
circle's radius.

                  244
Tech Math, 2e 245

Because the circumference of a circle is times the radius, there are  radians
in one full circle, and therefore radians are equivalent to .

                                    Animation by Lucas Vieira on Wikimedia Commons.

We can convert between degrees and radians using the conversion factor
                   .

   Exercises

   Convert each degree measure into radian measure. Leave your answers in terms of .
    1.
   2.
   3.
246 Morgan Chase

   4.
   5.
   6.
    7.
   8.
   Convert each radian measure into degree measure.
   9.
  10.
  11.
  12.
  13.

                                                Exercise Answers

Notes

    1. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degree_(angle)#History for some theories.
                                                                                                Tech Math, 2e 247

 Exercise Answers

   Module 1: Order of Operations

  1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

                                                                                           247
     248 Morgan Chase  °F
                             °C
 17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

   Module 2: Negative Numbers

  1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9. °F
10.
11.
                                                                                                                                                             Tech Math, 2e 249

12.
13.
14.
 15.
16.
 17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
      250 Morgan Chase

35.
36.
37. undefined
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

   Module 3: Decimals

    If you've seen Modules 5 & 6, don't worry about accuracy or precision on these
    exercises.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
  7.
  8.
  9.
10.
                      Tech Math, 2e 251

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.  per month

24. miles per hour

 Module 4: Fractions

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
  252 Morgan Chase

8. undefined

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15. at least questions

16.

17.

18. scoops

19. A requires cup more than B

20. of the pizza

21. more

22. inches combined

23. inches difference

24. combined

25. more

26.

27.

28. or

29.  or
                                            Tech Math, 2e 253

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37. cup

Module 5: Accuracy and Significant Figures

1. exact value

2. approximation

3. exact value

4. approximation

5. exact value

6. approximation

7. three significant figures

8. four significant figures

9. five significant figures

10. two significant figures

11. three significant figures

12. four significant figures

13. two significant figures; the actual value could be anywhere between  and
     254 Morgan Chase

14. three significant figures; the actual value could be anywhere between
       and

 15. four significant figures; the actual value could be anywhere between
       and

16. five significant figures; the actual value could be anywhere between
       and

 17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
                                                Tech Math, 2e 255

34.

Module 6: Precision and GPE

1. thousands

2. hundreds

3. tens

4. thousandths

5. ten thousandths

6. hundred thousandths

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.      lb

14. lb

15.

16.

17. thousands place; the nearest  people

18.      people

19. hundred thousandths place; the nearest  in

20.           in
256 Morgan Chase

21. hundredths place; the nearest   mil

22.  mil

23.  miles

24. ones place; the nearest mile

25.  mi

26. ones place; the nearest minute

27.  min

28. two sig figs

29. three sig figs

30. mi/hr

31. When dividing, we must round the result based on the accuracy; i.e., the num-
      ber of significant figures.

 Module 7: Formulas

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6. representatives
7. representatives
8. representatives
9. electoral votes
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 257

10. electoral votes

11. electoral votes

12.          °F; the official record high in the city was 116°F.

13. °C

14.      °F

15. °C

16. mm Hg

17. around mm Hg

18. in

19. in

20. yes

21. no; too large

22. no; too small

23. yes

Module 8: Perimeter and Circumference

1. ft

2. cm

3. cm

4.       ft

5.       ft

6. ft

7. in
  258 Morgan Chase

8. cm

9.   in

10.  cm

11.  ft

12. m

   Module 9: Percents Part 1

  1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
                                                Tech Math, 2e 259

 17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Module 10: Ratios, Rates, Proportions

1.

2.

3.    or      miles per hour

4.        /oz, or ¢/oz

      Carmella Creeper parties like it's 1995.

5.    /oz, or ¢/oz

6.    /oz, or ¢/oz

7.    ; true
260 Morgan Chase

8.   ; false

9.          ; true

10.         ; false

11.  ; false

12.  ; true

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.  miles

20. hours

21.  miles (rounding to one sig fig seems like a good idea here)

22.  pixels wide

Module 11: Scientific Notation

1. Earth's mass is larger because it's a -digit number and Mars' mass is a
    -digit number, but it might take a lot of work counting the zeros to be sure.

2. Earth's mass is about ten times larger, because the power of  is higher than
    that of Mars.

3. A chlorine atom's radius is larger because it has zeros before the significant
    digits begin, but a hydrogen atom's radius has zeros before the significant
    digits begin. As above, counting the zeros is a pain in the neck.
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 261

4. The chlorine atom has a larger radius because its power of is  higher than
                                                                    because
     that of the hydrogen atom. (Remember that   is larger than

     is farther to the right on a number line.)

5.   ;

6.   ;

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.  people per square mile

20.  people per square mile

21. the proton's mass is roughly  or             times larger

22.     ;

23.     ;

24.     ;
262 Morgan Chase

25.               per person

Module 12: Percents Part 2 and Error Analysis

1.   or

2.

3.

4.

5.   or

6.

7.

8.

9.   or

10. grams of added sugars is the recommended daily intake for a  calorie
      diet.

11.  increase

12.  sales tax

13.  decrease

14.  decrease

15.

16.

17.  g;           g

18.

19.  g;           g
                                                            Tech Math, 2e 263

20.

Module 13: The US Measurement System

We generally won't worry about significant figures in these answers; we'll proba-

bly say " miles" even if "  miles" is technically correct.

1. in

2. ft

3. in

4.      yd

5.      ft or ft in

6. yd

7. mi

8. yd

9. oz

10.     lb

11. 18.75 lb

12.           oz

13. fl oz

14. pt

15. pt

16. c

17.     gal

18. fl oz
     264 Morgan Chase

19. lb oz
20. c fl oz
21. ft in
22. t lb
23. lb or lb oz combined
24. lb oz heavier
25. ft in combined
26. ft in longer

Module 14: The Metric System

1. m

2. cm

3. km

4. m

5.   cm

6. mm

7.    cm

8.     mm

9.     m

10.       cm

11.   m

12.   cm

13.   km
                            Tech Math, 2e 265

14.    dam

15.  g

16. kg

17.  mg

18.       kg

19.       g

20.            mg

21.       cg

22.        mg

23.     kg

24. cg

25.     g

26. L

27. mL

28. L

29.    dL

30.       mL

31.    L

32. they are equal in size

33. about to

34. bottles; this is easier if you know that a 500-milliliter bottle of Mexican Coke
      is called a medio litro.
266 Morgan Chase

    Doce litros de Coca-Cola

Module 15: Converting Between Systems

We may round some of these answers to three significant figures even if the given
number has fewer than three sig figs. On the other hand, you'll see that some of
these answers include a critique of a manufacturer's decision to round numbers
a certain way.

1.

2.

3.

4. yes,                       according to the conversion, but is it really      to

    begin with? Rounding the result to       or               seems reasonable.

5. in converts to around      cm, and        cm converts to around            in. It

    looks like somebody used the conversion                   , which is fine if you're

    estimating but not if you're going to report a number to three sig figs.

6. not exactly but they're pretty close; the error is around  .

7. yes; using either conversion gives a result of   kg, rounded to the nearest

    tenth. However, it doesn't make sense for this to be accurate to four sig figs. It

    would be best to round to or perhaps even kg.

8. not exactly; using 1 kg    lb gives a result of            kg, and using 1 lb
                                                                    Tech Math, 2e 267

           kg gives a result of     kg. Again, the accuracy here doesn't make

     sense, especially when you consider that the numbers on the box don't agree

     with each other:            .

9.

10.

11.

12.

13. about

14. about

15.

16.

17.

18. no matter which conversion you use, the result should round to  liters.

19. a bit less than

20.

Module 16: Other Conversions

We will generally round these answers to three significant figures; your answer
may be slightly different depending on which conversion ratio you used.

1.         min; if you're familiar with the musical Rent, then you already knew

     the answer.

2. this is roughly     years, which is indeed possible

3.   km/hr

4.   mi/hr
268 Morgan Chase

5.   mi/hr

6.   mi in min

7.   min

8.   mi/gal

9. gal/mi

10.  gal in min

11. the capacity increased by a factor of

12. times greater

13.  megawatts per home

14. watt per gallon

15.  times more powerful

16.  ms,          ms,      ms; s, s, s

17. the ratio of the wavelengths of red and infrared is to ;
     the ratio of the wavelengths of infrared and red is around to

18. this is equivalent to  chest x-rays

Module 17: Angles

1. right angle

2. obtuse angle

3. reflexive angle

4. straight angle

5. acute angle

6.        ;            ;
                                                Tech Math, 2e 269

7.

8.

9.   each

10.  each

11.  each

12.  ;        ;

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Module 18: Triangles

1. right isosceles triangle

2. obtuse scalene triangle

3. acute equilateral triangle (yes, an equilateral triangle will always be acute)

4.

5.         ;

6.

7.

8. this is a right triangle, because      .

9. this is not a right triangle, because     .
     270 Morgan Chase

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

   Module 19: Area of Polygons and Circles

   We may occasionally include extra sig figs in these answers so you can be sure
   that your answer matches ours.
  1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.
                                                                                                                                                            Tech Math, 2e 271

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Module 20: Composite Figures

1.

2.

3.         ; the area of the rectangle is     and the areas of the triangles are

           and  .

4.         ; hey, that's what we got for #3!

5.

6.

7. Based on the stated measurements, the distance around the track will be 401
    meters, which appears to be 1 meter too long. In real life, precision would be
    very important here, and you might ask for the measurements to be given to
    the nearest tenth of a meter.

8. around

9.

10.

11.

12.
    272 Morgan Chase  (Hint: Make up an easy number for the side of the square, like 2
                      (Hint: The diagonals of the square are equal to the circle's diam-
13. around
      or 10.)

14. around
      eter.)

Module 21: Converting Units of Area

We may occasionally include extra sig figs in these answers so that you can be
sure that your answer matches ours.

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.  , rounded to two sig figs

15.

16.  , rounded to three sig figs
                                                                                                                                                             Tech Math, 2e 273

 17.
18.
19. to ; if we double the linear measurement, we get four times the area.
20.
21.
22. to ; if we triple the linear measurement, we get nine times the area.

   Module 22: Surface Area of Common Solids

  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.

   Module 23: Area of Regular Polygons

    All answers have been given to two or three significant figures.
  1.
  2.
  3.
  4.
  5.
  6.
274 Morgan Chase

7.           (the area of the circle        and the area of the hexagon is

                  )

Module 24: Volume of Common Solids

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.   or

10.          (the cylinder's volume           and the hemisphere's volume
                                            and the two hemispheres' combined
             .)
                                                 .
11.          (the cylinder's volume

     volume          )

12.                  , which is more than

 Module 25: Converting Units of Volume

1. the result is very close to cubic yard:

2. this estimate is also cubic yard:
3. around gallons
4. yes, the can is able to hold                                                                                         Tech Math, 2e 275
                                   .
                                      fluid ounces; the can's volume is roughly

5. gallons

6. around         to   liters; a calculator says  liters which should techni-

    cally be rounded up to            liters, but it would be reasonable to round down

    to     liters instead if you considered the volume of the benches and the

    fact that the sides might slope inwards near to bottom of the tub.

7. the rectangular section of the carton has a volume of  liters, which is larger

    than the required       .

8.          high

       Independent verification from my kitchen.

 9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
    276 Morgan Chase  ; assuming that it's  , these measures are equivalent to

15.
     two sig figs.

16.

17.     ; now you can laugh whenever you see someone in a heist movie load a

     cheap duffel bag with gold bars and carry it out of the vault.

18.

19.

20.

21. to

22.

23.

24. to

Module 26: Pyramids and Cones

1.

2.

3.         ;

4.

5.         (if we had greater accuracy, the result would be 314.16 because it's 100

     times .)

6.

7.      ;

8.         ;
                                                                   Tech Math, 2e 277

Module 27: Percents Part 3

1.

2.  students; notice that if the percent had fewer than five sig figs, we

    wouldn't have been able to get an answer that was accurate to the nearest

    whole number.

3. Yes, you can! Each bottle cost                   .

    Real time screenshot of my phone's calculator.

4.  million

5.  people

6. ; the percent has only two sig figs, so it doesn't make sense to assume that

    the price was  . They probably rounded the percent from        to

    make the numbers in the advertisement seems less complicated.

Module 28: Mean, Median, Mode

1.

2.

3.  (because it is the seventh value in the list of thirteen)

4.

5.

6.
 278 Morgan Chase

7.

8.

9. the median is more representative because the mean is higher than five of the
    six home values.

10.        (because it appears four times in the list)

11. no mode (there are no repeated values)

12. AT&T Mobility

13. Samoas and Thin Mints

14.  games

15. games

16. games

17. they all represent the data fairly well;  wins represents a typical Patriots sea-
     son.

18. games

19. games

20. games

21. they all represent the data fairly well; or wins represents a typical Bills sea-
      son.

22.  grams; the mean doesn't seem to represent a typical clementine because

     there is a group of smaller ones (from to grams) and a group of larger

     ones (from to grams) with none in the middle.

23. grams; for the same reason, the median doesn't represent a typical clemen-
      tine, but you could say it helps split the clementines into a lighter group and a
      heavier group.

24. no mode; too many values appear twice.
                                                              Tech Math, 2e 279

25.  grams; this is a small increase over the previous mean.

26. grams; the median does not change when one of the highest numbers
      increases.

27.  grams; you might say it represents the mass of a typical large clementine,

     but it doesn't represent the entire group.

   Module 29: Probability

  1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
     280 Morgan Chase  copies to be acceptable
                       tax returns to have errors
 17.
18.
19.
20. we should expect
21.
22. we should expect
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Module 30: Standard Deviation

1.  ;

2.  ;

3.  ;

4.  ;

5.  ;

6.  ;

7.     because
                                                                     Tech Math, 2e 281

8.     lb because this is halfway between and lb

9. lb because      lb and                 lb encompasses      of the data

10. ;

11. ;

12. You would not have predicted this from the data because it is more than two

    standard deviations below the mean, so there would be a roughly          chance

    of this happening randomly. In fact,          is slightly larger than ,

    so this is more than three standard deviations below the mean, making it even

    more unlikely. (You might have predicted that the Patriots would get worse

    when Tom Brady left them for Tampa Bay, but you wouldn't have predicted

    only wins based on the previous nineteen years of data.)

13. ;

14. You would not predict this from the data because it is more than two standard

    deviations above the mean, so there would be a roughly    chance of this

    happening randomly. In fact,               , so this is more than three

    standard deviations above the mean, making it even more unlikely. This

    increased win total is partly due to external forces (i.e., the Patriots becoming

    weaker and losing two games to the Bills) but even wins would have been a

    bold prediction, let alone .

15. ;

16. The trouble with making predictions about the Broncos is that their standard

    deviation is so large. You could choose any number between and wins and

    be within the  interval.                   , so this is around standard

    deviations below the mean, which makes it not very unusual. Whereas the

    Patriots and Bills are more consistent, the Broncos' win totals fluctuate quite a

    bit and are therefore more unpredictable.

 Module 31: Right Triangle Trigonometry

1. the adjacent side is e, the opposite side is f, and the hypotenuse is d.
  282 Morgan Chase

2. the adjacent side is x, the opposite side is y, and the hypotenuse is r.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21. the wire is approximately  long

22.      , which is roughly

23. No;  , so the puck will hit the fabric over 1 foot away from

     the center of the hole. (The person in the photo was given a bunch of pucks
                                                                                                                                                        Tech Math, 2e 283

     and 30 seconds to score, but he scored on his first shot. Boston Bruins at Van-
     couver Canucks, February 24, 2024.)

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.              ;

33.                 angle of elevation

34. Yes;            , which is less than  .

35.

36.

37.

38.

39. All three answers are the same rounded to three significant figures. This is true

     because we rounded to the nearest tenth; if we had rounded it to

     instead of     , we would have decreased the accuracy of #36 & #37 to only

     two sig figs and the three results all would have been slightly different.

40.

41.
284 Morgan Chase

Module 32: Slope

1.        , ,

2.        , ,

3.        ,          ,

4.        , ,

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.                     from vertical. (this would be an angle of depression of
      .)

13.       ; the proportion      gives a result of exactly      .
                                                           gives a result very
     Using the result from #7, the equation

     close to        .

Module 33: Non-Right Triangle Trigonometry

1.

2.             ;

3.                ;

4. the shorter wire is roughly  feet; the longer wire is roughly  feet.
                                                      Tech Math, 2e 285

     Exercise 4 is based on actual events!

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10. the distance across the pond is roughly  meters.

11.  ;  ;

 Module 34: Radian Measure

1.
     286 Morgan Chase

 2.
 3.
 4.
 5.
 6.
  7.
 8.
 9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
               Tech Math, 2e 287

Accessibility

This section would normally belong in the front matter, but that would cause
inconsistencies between the page numbering of the two PDF versions because I
didn't include this section in the print textbook. Please don't assume that its posi-
tion at the back of the book indicates that it is merely an afterthought.

Accessibility Statement

Open Oregon and your author believe that use of open educational resources can
make content more accessible and more universally usable for students. Acces-
sible content meeting the requirements of the ADA (Americans with Disabilities
Act) removes barriers for everyone, not just those with documented disabili-
ties. When resources are not accessible, however, they are not truly "open" to all
because some students may not be able to use them.

Our aim is for the electronic version of this textbook to align with known web
content accessibility guidelines, ensuring that most of the time, for most peo-
ple, there will be enough flexibility in how to access the files so that accessibility
needs can be met.

Accessibility features of the web version of this textbook

The web version of this resource has been designed to meet Web Content Acces-
sibility Guidelines 2.0, level AA, incorporating the following basic features:

        · Document structures use headings, lists, and other formatting styles to
            support navigation.

                                                                                      287
288 Morgan Chase

        · All content can be navigated using a keyboard.

        · There is an option to increase font size.

        · Images have alt tags.

        · Tables have header rows and columns when appropriate.

        · Links are anchored to descriptive text rather than the word "here".

        · Information is not conveyed by color alone, text colors have acceptable
            contrast with the background color, and color combinations that cause
            difficulty for people experiencing colorblindness have been avoided.

Accessibility was checked with the WAVE Web Accessibility Evaluation Tool.

Other file formats available

In addition to the web version, this textbook is available as a PDF for printing
(without active links) and a PDF for electronic use (with clickable links). You can
download this book in another file format from the textbook's main page. Look
for the "Download this book" drop-down menu to select the file type you want.

This book links to a number of external websites, and there are numerous inter-
nal links as well. All links are programmed to open in a new tab of your browser.
Your author did not realize until the very end of this project that the preferred
method for accessible content is to open in the same tab. He has marked it as a
known issue below and will correct the issue when he has some free time.

Known accessibility issues and areas for improvement

While your author tried to ensure that this resource is as accessible and usable as
possible, he worked on this entire project essentially by himself and surely made
mistakes. He did his best but has a rudimentary knowledge of html and can't
always make things function the way he'd prefer. Any issues that are identify will
be listed below.
                                                                  Tech Math, 2e 289

List of Known Accessibility Issues

Location    Issue                 Timeline Explanation

Web         Kurzweil              Unknown   Math expressions are rendered using QuickLaTeX
version     3000 text                       integration with Pressbooks, which is not fully accessible
            to speech                       to screen reader software. (For some examples, it
            can't read                      interprets some things correctly, such as square meters,
            the math                        but not others, such as square centimeters. It also reads
            text                            out the underlying QuickLaTeX coding, which means it
            correctly
                                            says "backslash" quite a bit and reads 6 squared, , as "6
                                            circumflex 2".) It may not be possible to fix this, but I
                                            have reached out for help.

PDF         Kurzweil              Unknown   Math expressions are rendered using QuickLaTeX
versions    3000 text                       integration with Pressbooks, which is not fully accessible
            to speech                       to screen reader software. (The results are different in
            can't read                      many ways from what happens in the web version. It
            the math
            text                            reads 6 squared, , as "sixty-two". It frequently ignores
            correctly                       symbols. It reads the starting page number in Spanish
                                            and "Exercises" in French.) It may not be possible to fix
                                            this, but I have reached out for help.

Modules 17  Poor                  Unknown   I tried a few things but I'm not sure whether the link
and 19      contrast                        color to a footnote can be adjusted because they are
            with blue                       programmed differently from other links. (This is minor
            link on                         compared to the screenreader issues mentioned above.)
            gray
            background

Module 30   Three                 N/A       This is intentional.
            tables have
            an empty
            cell in the
            upper left
            corner

Throughout Links open in new tab  March 31  Be aware that this is the default. It will take time to either
                                            change this behavior sitewide or add "new tab" to each
                                            link.

Let us know if you are having problems accessing this textbook

If you have problems accessing this textbook, please contact the author to let him
know so he can try to fix the issue.
Please include the following information:

        · The location of the problem by providing a web address or page
            description

        · A description of the problem
        · The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are
290 Morgan Chase

            using that can help us diagnose and solve your issue: e.g., Windows 11,
            Google Chrome Version 122.0.6261.112 (Official Build) (64-bit), NVDA
            screen reader

Email the author at morganc[at]clackamas.edu or morganchase64[at]gmail.com
to report an issue. Apologies for the non-clickable email addresses, but I am ner-
vous about receiving spam if I make these addresses readable by malicious bots.

This statement was last updated on March 12, 2024.

Content on this page was adapted from Accessibility Toolkit - 2nd Edition by
BCcampus, as well as from Open Oregon Educational Resources, both of which
are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
