Effective Professional Communication: A
               Rhetorical Approach
Effective Professional
 Communication: A
Rhetorical Approach

  REBEKAH BENNETCH; COREY
 OWEN; AND ZACHARY KEESEY

             DAYNE GAWLEY

                  UNIVERSITY OF SASKATCHEWAN
                                    SASKATOON
Effective Professional Communication: A Rhetorical Approach by Rebekah
Bennetch; Corey Owen; and Zachary Keesey is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.

Photo #1 by ThisisEngineering on Unsplash

Photo #2 by Campaign Creators on Unsplash

Photo #3 by Alejandro Escamilla on Unsplash
Contents

Land Acknowledgment                              xiii

Introduction                                     1

Introduction to Communication

Chapter 1: What is Communication?                5

Technical and Transactional Communication        6

Communication Can Be Complicated                 10

Effective Listening Strategies in the Classroom  12

Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of            15

Communication

What is Communication?                           16

Accidental Communication                         17

Expressive Communication                         19

Rhetorical Communication                         21

Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication      27

What are the Nine Axioms of Communication?       28

The Axioms, in general                           29

Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle               53

The Shannon-Weaver Model of Communication        54

The Rhetorical Triangle                          56
Rhetorical Theory

Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal    61

What is the Art of Rhetoric?                    62

The Three Modes of Appeal                       64

Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation  75

What is a Rhetorical Situation?                 76

Rhetorical Exigence                             78

Rhetorical Audience                             82

Constraints                                     83

Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance      90

A Professional Hazard                           91

The Rhetorical Stance                           92

Technical Writing Essentials

Chapter 8: Technical Writing Resources          101

Technical Writing Resources                     101

Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence     102

Clauses and Phrases                             104

Sentence Structures                             108

Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments                  117

The Basics                                      118

Identifying Sentence Fragments                  120

Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences                    130

The Basics                                      131

Fixes for Run-on Sentences                      133
Chapter 12: Verb Tense                144

The Basics                            145

Maintaining Consistent Verb Tense     146

Simplifying Verbs                     149

Chapter 13: Punctuation               155

The Basics                            156

The Comma (,)                         158

The Semicolon (;)                     168

The Colon (:)                         172

Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness     177

The Basics                            178

Technical Correspondence

Chapter 15: Memos and Letters         195

Professional Correspondence           196

Memos                                 197

Letter                                201

Types of Messages                     205

Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails  213

Digital Communication                 214

Texting                               217

Email                                 220
Applying for a job

Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search   229

Applying the Rhetorical Situation to Job  232

Applications

Reading the Job Ad                        236

Chapter 18: Application Preparation       241

Finding a Job                             243

Conducting a Self-Inventory               245

Researching Your Potential Employer       248

Researching the Potential Job             250

Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters     256

Outline for Cover Letters                 258

Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé            263

What is a Résumé?                         264

Types of Résumés                          267

Targeted (Hybrid) Résumé Format           271

The Main Parts of a Résumé                272

Résumé Guidelines                         278

Chapter 21: Interview Strategies          286

Preparing for the Interview               288

During the Interview                      292

Interview Questions                       295

After the Interview                       300
Writing a Report

Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports       305

What is a Report?                                  306

Types of Reports                                   307

Kinds of Reports                                   309

Reports and Rhetoric                               312

Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic   317

Writing as Process                                 318

Choosing Your Topic                                319

Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your  330

Report

"The Rhetorical Situation" (Bitzer)                331

"The Modes of Appeal" (Aristotle)                  343

Using Theory to Establish Credibility              357

Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research        360

Sources

Finding and Evaluating Research Sources            361

Popular vs Scholarly Sources                       361

Critically Evaluating Sources                      363

Chapter 26: Strategies For Conducting Research     367

What is Research?                                  370

Primary v. Secondary Research                      371

Where Do I Look?                                   375

The End of the Planning Phase                      379
Chapter 27: Quoting, Paraphrasing, and                381

Summarizing Sources

Integrating Materials Into Your Report                384

Direct Quotes, Paraphrasing, and Summary              389

Paraphrase and Summary                                397

Chapter 28: How to Use APA Style                      415

Why Did We Pick APA Specifically?                     418

How to Use APA                                        421

References Page                                       422

In-Text Citations                                     427

Chapter 29: Formatting the Report                     441

Front Matter                                          443

Report Body                                           446

Back Matter                                           450

A Sample Report                                       452

Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images              455

Deciding Which Graphics to Include                    457

Formatting Graphics                                   458

Placement and Context                                 459

Putting Graphics in Context                           462

Using Graphics Ethically                              466

Public Speaking

Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking  473

Public Speaking in the Technical Professions          474

The Modes of Appeal & Your Speech                     476

How is your Speech Different from your Report?        484
Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery      487

The Four Methods of Speech Delivery         488

Extemporaneous Speeches                     498

Chapter 33: Speech Structure                503

Using Cue Cards                             506

Setting Up Your Speech                      511

Chapter 34: Delivery                        526

Visual Delivery                             527

Verbal Delivery                             537

Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation  544

During the Presentation                     545

Coping with Mistakes and Surprises          549

Evaluating a Speech                         554

Appendices

Appendix A: What is Rhetoric?               565

What is Rhetoric?                           565

Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing         570

Professional Tone                           572

Writing Constructively                      572

Appendix C: The Seven Cs                    579

Polishing the Report                        579

The 7 Cs of Professional Writing            579

Sentence Variety and Length                 583

Precise Wording                             584

Image descriptions                          590
Appendix D: Understanding and Documenting            592

Information

Appendix E: Academic Integrity and the Professional  601

Space

Appendix F: Presentation Aids                        605

Appendix G: Stages of Listening                      628

Stages of the Listening Process                      628

The Challenges of Reception                          631

The Understanding Stage                              631

The Evaluating Stage                                 633

Conclusion                                           636

Appendix H: Intercultural Communication              637

                                                     637

Common Cultural Characteristics                      643

Divergent Cultural Characteristics                   649

Glossary                                             659

About the Authors                                    680
Land
Acknowledgment

Photo #1: Saskatchewan Prairie

The authors of Effective Professional Communication wish to
begin this text by paying our respects to the land and place
where this text was created and starting with a traditional Land
Acknowledgment.

   This text was a collaborative effort by many people working
at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, Canada. The
University of Saskatchewan campus is located on Treaty Six
Territory-home of the Cree, Saulteaux, Nakota, and Dene
Peoples-and the homeland of the Métis Peoples. We pay our
respects to the Indigenous Peoples that are on this land and
acknowledge our responsibility to seek out and learn from

                                                               Land Acknowledgment | xiii
them. Together, we will engage in truth telling and building
reconciliation as well as the need to engage in the ongoing
work of decolonizing our campus community both inside and
outside the classroom.

   In acknowledging that we are seeking "all" truths, we
recognize that the content of this textbook is firmly rooted in
Western traditions of knowledge, which risks re-enforcing it
as the "standard" and alienating other cultural approaches to
knowledge.

   As a result, we have striven to include appendices that
address these different styles in order to provide students with
a broader view of the world and how their own approaches to
knowledge fall within it. As this text is a living document, we
plan to add more of this content when possible to approximate
a stronger truth for all.

Photo #2: The Treaty Six Territory Flag                           Photo #

Attributions

   Photo #1: "Saskatchewan Prairie" by extension 504 (on

xiv | Land Acknowledgment
Creative Commons) is used under the Creative Commons By-
Non-Commerical-Share Alike 2.0

   Photo #2: "The Treaty Six Territory Flag" by Worrypower (on
Wikimedia Commons) is used under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International. This photo
was modified through cropping.

   Photo #3: "The Métis Flag" by Lexicon (on Wikimedia
Commons) is used under Public Domain

                                                                Land Acknowledgment | xv
Introduction

Welcome to Effective Professional Communication, your text
book for the RCM 200 course at the University of Saskatchewan
in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

   As you already know, this course focuses on communicating
in professional environments. Even if you haven't held a job
before, you know-at least on a basic level-that how you
communicate changes depending on the context of your
situation; specifically, you talk differently when you speak to
customers/clients versus your co-workers versus your
supervisors.

   Our goal in this text is to break down the communication
process in professional environments so you can maximize
your chance to get hired and retain your job once you graduate
from university. We will do this by looking at communication
through political, rhetorical, ethical, and interpersonal lenses
and applying this knowledge to your future career.

   This text has seven main sections:

 1. Introduction to Communication: What is
      communication? Is it as a simple as one person
      transferring information to another? This section will
      provide a comprehensive overview of the communication
      process and give us some definitions to work from.

2. Rhetorical Theory: How do you connect with an audience
      and make them care about your message? What are
      some common challenges that communicators encounter
      in professional spaces? Rhetorical theory will answer these
      questions and give you a framework for any messages you
      craft in the future, whether in written or spoken form.

 3. Technical Writing Essentials: We all have blind spots in
      our writing. What are yours? This self-guided collection of

                                                                                  Introduction | 1
      chapters will help you identify and improve any
      weaknesses you have in your writing.
4. Technical Correspondence: You are going to write many
      memos and emails in your professional career. Do you
      know how to format and organize them in a way that is
      both professional and concise? We will cover that here.
 5. Applying for a Job: You may think that you still have time
      until you need to apply for jobs, but it will come sooner
      than you expect. This section will walk you through how to
      develop a stellar job application package to improve your
      chances of getting a job right out of university.
6. Writing a Report: Many students falsely assume that they
      can write a report because they have written essays
      before. That is not necessarily true. A written report is a
      much larger undertaking that takes meticulous planning,
      organization, and research. We will break down this
      complex process here.
 7. Public Speaking: Have you ever been in a presentation or
      class where you feel lost or like the material is not relevant
      to you at all? Odds are that's because the presenter has
      not done a good job building a relationship with their
      audience or making the content relevant. We will walk you
      through how to do this very thing in this final section.

Hopefully you can begin to see how this content will help you in
your professional career. If at any point you have any questions,
please don't hesitate to reach out to your instructor.

2 | Introduction
INTRODUCTION TO
COMMUNICATION

                                                                                    Introduction to
                                                                            Communication | 3
Chapter 1: What is
Communication?

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Describe at least three examples of technical
             communication and explain how they are
             transactional in nature.
          · Explain why miscommunication sometimes
             occurs in communication and how your own
             perceptual filters can be the cause.
          · Identify and apply two active listening
             strategies you can use in this course.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · Communication
          · Technical communication
          · Transactional communication
          · Active listening

                                                                               Chapter 1: What is
                                                                          Communication? | 5
Think about communication in your

daily life. When you make a phone       Communication can
call, send a text message, or like      be defined as "the
something on social media, what is      process of one person
the purpose of that activity? Have you  stimulating meaning
ever felt confused by what someone      in the mind of another
is telling you or argued over a         by means of a
                                        message (McCroskey,
                                        2016, pp. 20-21).

misunderstood  email?         The

underlying issue may very well be a communication deficiency.

There are many current models and theories that explain,

plan, and predict communication processes and their

successes or failures. In the workplace, we might be more

concerned about practical knowledge and skills than theory.

However, good practice is built on a solid foundation of

understanding and skill. For this reason this textbook will help

you develop foundational skills in key areas of communication,

with a focus on applying theory and providing opportunities for

practice.

Technical and Transactional
Communication

                                       What comes to mind

                              when you hear the term

                              technical communication?

                              Perhaps you think of

                              scientific reports,

                              specifications, instructions,

                              software documentation, or

Photo: Communicating complex  technical manuals. And you
ideas                         would be correct.

                                       However, technical

communication is so much more than that. Technical Writing

6 | Chapter 1: What is Communication?
is a genre of non-fiction writing that certainly encompasses all
of the above examples, but it also includes writing produced in
day-to-day business operations such as correspondence,
proposals, internal communications, media releases, and
many kinds of reports. It includes the communication of
specialized technical information, whether relating to
computers and scientific instruments or the intricacies of
meditation. And because oral and visual presentations are
such an important part of professional life, technical
communication also encompasses these as well.

   These are just some of the many types of technical
communication you will encounter in your career. With that
in mind, how much time do you predict you will devote to
communicative tasks as a technical professional? Do you think
it is more or less than problem solving?

   In a recent presentation on the topic of Co-op Work Term
Reports, the Engineering co-op coordinator for the University
of Victoria presented the following statistics regarding the
importance of communication skills in the professional world
of engineering:

          The Reality: Technical Writing and
       Communication

            · How graduate engineers spend their time:

                     25-50% Problem solving of some kind
                     50-75% Communicating (Writing and

                        reading reports, letters, memos,
                        proposals, presentations, discussions w/
                        colleagues, managers, clients)

                                              Chapter 1: What is Communication? | 7
· Performance evaluations and job
   advancement usually depend more on
   communications skills than on technical skills

                                                 (McConkey, 2017)

This data shows that engineers are spending at least half-if

not more-of their time on communicative tasks instead of the

technical problem solving that is more commonly associated

with the field. The research also found that professionals who

are more advanced in their careers, such as those in

management positions, spend only 5-10% of their time

engaged in problem solving of some kind and 90-95% of their

time engaging in related communications tasks.

Similarly, in a recent survey of over 1000 professionals from

various professions, over 70% of engineers and almost 50% of

programmers rated the quality of their writing as either "very

important" or "extremely important" to the performance of

their jobs (Swarts et al., 2018). Clearly, as Hyman (2002) asserts

in Fundamentals of Engineering Design, "the stereotype that

engineering is for inarticulate nerds is way off base" (p. 42).

                       So how are these technical

Transactional model    professionals
of communication is
                       communicating? Is it one-
   the exchange of
 messages between      sided where they just share
sender and receiver
                       the information they have
   where each take
   turns to send or    with a client or colleague and
  receive messages
(Businesstopia, 2018)  then walk away?

                       No, of course not. In

                       reality technical

                       communication                               is

                       transactional in nature: it

8 | Chapter 1: What is Communication?
entails a purposeful transaction between sender and receiver
that provides specific information for practical and specific
purposes (informing, instructing, persuading) and is usually
geared towards the needs of a specific audience. Technical
communicators produce a wide variety of documents and
other products, such as:

  · Proposals and requests for proposals (RFPs)
  · Technical or research reports
  · Documentation records and product specifications
  · User guides (step-by-step instructions, procedures,

      manuals)
  · Online help, technical support
  · Reference information (encylopedia-style information)
  · Consumer literature (information for the public about

      regulations, safety issues, etc.)
  · Marketing literature (product specifications, brochures,

      promotional literature)
  · Technical journalism (found in trade magazines, media

      releases, etc.)

Thus, technical communication is a highly "designed" form of
communication that requires practitioners to have a
heightened awareness of the conventions (rules and
expectations) and rhetorical situations (audience, purpose,
context) in which they are communicating.

   This textbook aims to provide you with that heightened
awareness-that is, to introduce you to the basic conventions of
technical communications, and to train you to take a rhetorical
approach to communication tasks, to find the tools and
methods that will work best to communicate your ideas to your
target audience, and to achieve the desired results.

                                              Chapter 1: What is Communication? | 9
Communication Can Be Complicated

Clearly, getting your point across requires more than simply
speaking in front of a crowd or writing words on a page. How
we are understood is due to the context of the communication,
along with the relational qualities of who we are
communicating with. That context, however, will be different
from situation to situation and- most importantly-from person
to person.

     Exercise: Interactive Video

        In the TED Talk below, Hampsten (2016) describes
     why miscommunication occurs so frequently, and how
     we can minimize frustration while expressing ourselves
     better.

        This video is the first of many interactive activities
     that you will encounter through out this textbook. It
     will stop at different points and give you questions to
     check your understanding through out. The activities
     are also bookmarked if you want to go back and try
     them again.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You

10 | Chapter 1: What is Communication?
        can view it online here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=331#h5p-17

   If the above activity does not work, here is a link to
the original video: tinyurl.com/whatiscomm

   Now that you've watched the video, answer the
following questions:

                    An interactive H5P element has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You
        can view it online here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=331#h5p-11

   Finally, reflect on the following questions:
   1. What are the perceptual filters that affect how

        you communicate? Can you identify at least
        three?
   2. How do these filters help or harm how you
        interpret communication?

                                        Chapter 1: What is Communication? | 11
Effective Listening Strategies in the
Classroom

How will you navigate how you use communication in our
course?

   Getting the most out of class time involves active listening,
which means more than simply hearing what your instructors
say. It involves engaging with the speaker and the material you
hear in an active way. To maximize the benefit you get from
attending class, try to use the following active listening skills:

  · focus your full attention on the speaker
  · ask questions, either out loud or internally, in response to

      what is being said
  · paraphrase ideas in notes
  · listen without judgment
  · show empathy for the speaker

Restating what you hear is a powerful strategy for being an
active listener, but it's obviously impractical in a roomful of
other students. That's why taking notes is so important. Think
of it as a "silent" way to restate what you're taking in. Focus on
capturing the key ideas and on paraphrasing what you hear
(rather than writing things down verbatim). Putting ideas into
your own words will deepen your understanding and
strengthen your ability to recall the information later.

   Preparing ahead of time will also make listening more useful
and engaging. Do any assigned reading before coming to class,
using effective reading strategies discussed elsewhere in this
course.

     Key Takeaways

12 | Chapter 1: What is Communication?
· Technical communication is more than just a
   written report or technical manual: it includes any
   communication on a specialized, technical topic.

· Professionals in technical professions spend
   half, if not a majority, of their work time on
   communicative tasks such as writing reports and
   memos, giving presentations, and speaking with
   clients.

· These communicative tasks are transactional in
   nature, in that they are highly designed to create
   a purposeful exchange between the sender and
   receiver of a message.

· Using active listening strategies will help you
   understand and get the most out of the content
   in this course.

References

Businesstopia. (2018, February 15). Transactional model of

communication.        https://www.businesstopia.net/

communication/transactional-model-communication

Hampsten, K. (2016, Feb 26). How miscommunication

happens         (and  how                      to      avoid

it). [YouTube]. https://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=gCfzeONu3Mo

Hyman, B. I. (2002). Chapter 2: Problem formulation.

In Fundamentals of engineering design. Prentice Hall.

McConkey, S. (2017, March 17). Writing a term report [ENGR

120 Plenary Lecture]. University of Victoria.

McCroskey, J. C. (2016). An introduction to rhetorical

                      Chapter 1: What is Communication? | 13
communication: A western rhetorical perspective. Pearson
Education.

   Swarts, J., Pigg, S., Larsen, J., Helo Gonzalez, J., De Haas, R., &
Wagner, E. (2018). Communication in the workplace: What can
NC state students expect? Professional Writing Program, North
Carolina State University. https://docs.google.com/document/
d/1pMpVbDRWIN6HssQQQ4MeQ6U-oB-sGUrtRswD7feuRB0/
edit#

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from Technical Writing Essentials by
Suzan Last (on BCcampus). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

   This chapter is also adapted from College Success by Jolene
Carr (on Lumen Learning). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

   Photo by Headway on Unsplash

14 | Chapter 1: What is Communication?
Chapter 2: McCroskey
and the Types of
Communication

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between the three types of
             communication discussed by McCroskey:
             accidental, expressive, and rhetorical.
          · Reflect on how the three types of
             communication have occurred in your own
             personal experience.
          · Analyze how the three types of communication
             impact the message in a student e-mail.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · accidental communication
          · expressive communication

                                                             Chapter 2: McCroskey and the
                                                              Types of Communication | 15
· rhetorical communication
· non-verbal communication
· tone
· audience

What is Communication?

Humans, like many other animals, are social creatures: we like
to live in groups and work together. Because of this, humans
are almost always communicating, sometimes without even
knowing it.

   In the previous chapter, we provided a general definition of
communication, but let's take a step back and look at some
others.

   In The Nature of Rhetorical Communication, McCroskey
(2016) divides communication into three categories:

Communication is    "a substitute for the
Communications are  word message"
Communication is
                    "the process of transferring
                    messages from one place to
                    another"

                    "the process of one person
                    stimulating meaning in the
                    mind of another by means of a
                    message"

                                                            (McCroskey, 2016, p. 20)
   In RCM 200 we are concerned with the third definition. As
you will see, the material in this course focuses on the meaning
of messages and not on the media efforts/tools of
communications. Specifically, our goal is to help you develop

16 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
your communicative judgement as you create various
messages to be used in technical communication.

   With that in mind, let's break down that third definition even
more. McCroskey (2016) identifies three types of
communication that can fall under the third definition:

  · accidental,
  · expressive,
  · and rhetorical communication.
How do these three types of communication impact our
messages? How have they occurred in your own life? The
followings sections will answer these two questions.

Accidental Communication

Has your communication ever gotten you in trouble by
mistake? Do you sometimes feel like your communication is
misunderstood (or misinterpreted) by your audience? Your
communication may have some traits of what McCroskey
identifies as accidental communication. Accidental
communication occurs "when one person stimulates meaning
in the mind of another without having any intention of doing
so and without necessarily knowing that he or she has done so"
(McCroskey, 2016, p. 21).

               Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication | 17
                         Two words to associate

          "People        with           accidental
 communicate their
interests, their needs,  communication  are:
  their backgrounds,
and sometimes their      unaware and unintended.
weaknesses without
 having the slightest    Whenever a speaker uses this
 desire to do so, and
   often in spite of a   type of communication, they
definite desire not to
 communicate these       often do not realize the
 things" (McCroskey,
                         impact of the messages they
        2016, p. 21)
                         are sending to their

                         audience.

                         Think about the times

                         when your words were taken

                         to be more negative than you

                         intended--perhaps there was

                         a non-verbal element in your

message's tone that caused your audience to perceive you

differently than what you intended.

Non-verbal communication can play a large role in

accidental communication. For example, McCroskey (2016)

discusses the impact of how some North Americans

inadvertently expressed unfriendliness in a Latin American

context, due to the cultural differences of what constitutes as

personal space.

      Characteristics of Accidental
   Communication:

    · the speaker is unaware of the message being sent
    · the speaker may be unintentionally sending messages

        for the audience to interpret
    · can be a result of a cultural "blindspot"

18 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
     Reflection Questions: Accidental Communication

        Reflect on the following questions regarding your
     own personal experience with accidental
     communication. Identify at least two examples of each.

         1. What ways have you accidentally
             communicated in your personal life?

        2. What ways have you accidentally
             communicated in the classroom?

        3. What ways have you accidentally
             communicated at work?

As you can see, our aim as professional communicators is to
identify and avoid any accidental communication in our lives.
It's important you understand what this kind of unintentional
communication looks like so that you can avoid it in your own
professional life.

Expressive Communication

Expressive communication "arises from the emotional, or
motivational, state of the individual" (McCroskey, 2016, p. 21).
This definition tells us that this form of communication is
primarily speaker-focused. As discussed in Chapter 1, there is
a transactional element involved whenever we communicate,

               Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication | 19
with the audience playing a key role in the communicative
process. In expressive communication, the emphasis is more
on the speaker, and less on the audience and how they receive
the message.

      Characteristics of Expressive
   Communication:

          · Focuses on primarily on addressing the
             speaker's needs, not the audiences'

          · Appears as emotional venting in some cases
          · Relies upon speaker's impulse rather than their

             rational choice
          · Little concern for meeting the audience's

             specific needs/values/expectations
          · Can be selfish and impulsive
          · Often damaging to the speaker's credibility and

             the audience relationship

     Reflection Questions: Expressive Communication

        Reflect on the following questions regarding your
     own personal experience with expressive

20 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
communication. Identify at least two examples of each.

   1. What ways have you used expressive
        communication in your personal life?

   2. What ways have you used expressive
        communication in the classroom?

   3. What ways have you used expressive
        communication at work?

As with accidental communication, we will want to avoid using
expressive communication in our professional lives. Technical
communication has both purpose and a connection to
audience-both of which are missing in expressive
communication.

Rhetorical Communication

Rhetorical                             "Rhetorical
communication will be the      communication is the
primary focus of RCM 200.
McCroskey (2016) defines          primary tool with
rhetorical communication as     which we influence
"the process of a source
stimulating a source-selected       and control the
meaning in the mind of a       thoughts and actions
receiver by means of verbal
and non-verbal messages" (p.     of other people, as
21). The "source" is another           well as the
term for the speaker; the
"source-selected meaning"           environment in
                                    which we live"
                                (McCroskey, 2016, p.

                                             19).

Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication | 21
implies that the source has the intention to create a specific
meaning in the mind of the audience. McCroskey's (2016)
definition of rhetorical communication emphasizes the need
for meaning to be created in the mind of the audience. He
writes that this type of communication is "goal-directed"
(McCroskey, 2016, p. 22, emphasis in original) and that it's
always purposefully directed to an audience.

      Characteristics of Rhetorical
   Communication:

          · Intentional communication with a purpose
          · Success depends on the speaker adapting the

             message for the audience
          · Creates understanding and connection
          · Always ethical
          · Speaker is aware and purposive in their

             communication
          · Includes deliberate and conscientious choices

             when addressing an audience
          · Relies on the speaker's respect for the audience,

             their belief in the message's purpose, and their
             own sincerity

     Reflection Questions: Rhetorical Communication

22 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
        Reflect on the following questions regarding your
     own personal experience with rhetorical
     communication. Identify at least two examples of each.

         1. What ways have you used rhetorical
             communication in your personal life?

        2. What ways have you used rhetorical
             communication in the classroom?

        3. What ways have you used rhetorical
             communication at work?

By the time you finish this course, you will see how rhetorical
communication can help you in your career, as well know how
to apply these principles in day-to-day job duties such as
writing reports and giving presentations.

     Exercise #1: Reading Quiz

        Answer the questions below to check your
     understanding of this chapter. The questions are
     mixture of multiple choice and true/false.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You

               Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication | 23
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=686#h5p-12

     Exercise #2: Case Study Application

        Read the following email and think about the type
     (or types) of communication it uses. Also, pay attention
     to your first impressions as you read.

                                                     Before reading
                                                  McCroskey (2016), you
                                                  would have probably
                                                  identified this email as a
                                                  poorly-written one, but
                                                  would not necessarily be
                                                  able to articulate why.
     Now that you know some rhetorical theory, you can
     provide a more detailed answer as to why this email
     fails in its purpose.
        Use the questions below to guide you analysis.

24 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
                    An interactive H5P element has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You
         can view it online here:
         https://openpress.usask.ca/
         rcm200/?p=686#h5p-13

Key Takeaways

     · McCroskey's (2016) defines communication as
        "the process of one person stimulating meaning
        in the mind of another by means of a message"
        (p. 20-21). He further explains that this definition
        covers three types of communication: accidental,
        expressive, and rhetorical.

     · Accidental communication can occur when
        the speaker is unaware that they are sending a
        message at all. Even if they don't mean for their
        message to be interpreted a certain way, things
        like their body language or tone can impact how
        their message is interpreted.

     · Expressive communication occurs primarily
        from the speaker themselves. This type of
        communication has little regard for the needs

         Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication | 25
             and interests of the audience. As a result, this kind
             of impulsive communication can break audience
             connection.
          · Rhetorical communication is the focus of this
             course. It uses strategies to intentionally craft a
             message so that it appeals to the audience and
             helps the speaking create a connection with
             them.

References

McCroskey, J. C. (2016). An introduction to rhetorical
communication: A western rhetorical perspective. Pearson
Education.

26 | Chapter 2: McCroskey and the Types of Communication
Chapter 3: The Nine
Axioms of
Communication

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between the Nine Axioms of
             Communication.
          · Apply each axiom to professional and personal
             situations and articulate how an axiom is--or is
             not--being used.
          · Explain how your personal footing and face can
             positively or negatively impact a given
             communication situation.

Key Terms and Concepts

· axiom
· footing

                        Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of
                                     Communication | 27
          · credibility
          · face
          · face loss
          · ambiguity

What are the Nine Axioms of
Communication?

All of us have received a message, either in text or spoken form,
that either made us feel something. Maybe it made you excited
or annoyed, happy or sad. But what specifically made you feel
that way? Could you specifically articulate why the message
made you respond in the way you did?

   This is where MacLennan's (2009) Nine Axioms of
Communication come in. They can help us understand how
communication works, and they can help us identify effective
communication strategies and diagnose problems.

   Here are all Nine Axioms listed out.

     The Nine Axioms of Communication

         1. Communication is not simply an exchange of
             information, but an interaction between people.

        2. All communication involves an element of

28 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
             relation as well as content.
        3. Communication takes place within a context of

             `persons, objects, events, and relations'.
        4. Communication is the principal way by which

             we establish ourselves and maintain credibility.
        5. Communication is the main means through

             which we exert influence.
        6. All communication involves an element of

             interpersonal risk.
        7. Communication is frequently ambiguous: what

             is unsaid can be as important as what is said.
        8. Effective communication is audience-centred,

             not self-centred.
        9. Communication is pervasive: you cannot not

             communicate

                                                            (MacLennan, 2009)

Most importantly, these axioms help you design effective
messages, so that you better understand what you should say
and how you should say it. Just as importantly, the Axioms tell
you what you should not say and what you should avoid when
designing and delivering a message.

   We will now go over each of these axioms in detail. After each
one, you will have an opportunity to apply your understanding
to personal experiences and real world scenarios.

The Axioms, in general

MacLennan (2009) defines an axiom as "a universal principle
or foundational truth that operates across cases or situations"

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 29
(p. 8). In other words, the axioms of communication are
inescapable principles, and we must always strive to be
conscious of them, whenever we engage in any sort of
communication.

   Bear in mind that, while each axiom emphasizes a specific
aspect of communication, the axioms are interconnected;
therefore, attempting to ignore or downplay the importance
of any of them can indeed impair your ability to communicate
effectively.

Axiom 1

          "Communication is not simply an exchange of
       information, but an interaction between people"
       (MacLennan, 2009, p. 9).

Every time we communicate there is a personal dimension, a
personal impact. We must always think about who is going to
be reading our email, letter, or report, who is going to listen to
our presentation. Understanding that communication involves
interaction really forces us to be conscious of the personal
dimension whenever we communicate, and to remember that
communication is a complicated, dynamic process, and not a
simple transfer of data from one individual to another.

   To be a good technical communicator, you should always try
to include a personal connection. You do not need to sound
like a robot. You can still share elements of your personality and
show the person on the other end of your communication that
you recognize their shared humanity.

   When we communicate, it's not just the facts that matter.
What matters most is how we communicate those facts and

30 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
how the audience might receive those facts. Regardless of the
result of that communication (whether it is positive or
negative), an interaction always happens.

     Reflection Questions

        Read the scenarios below. How would these
     situations make you feel? How is the first axiom at play
     in these interactions?

         1. You are using a dating app and someone
             messages you with the word "hey." Several
             minutes pass and they say nothing else.

        2. You are at work trying to finish a project when a
             co-worker comes up to and immediately asks you
             to do something for them without even saying
             hello.

        3. A supervisor asks you to put together a graph
             for a report as soon as possible. Even though you
             are in the middle of something else, you stop
             what you are doing, make the graph, and send it
             off to them. The supervisor does not thank you or
             even acknowledge that they received the graph.

Axiom 2

          "All communication involves an element of
       relation as well as content" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 10).

                             Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 31
When we think about relation or relationships in
communication, we are not thinking in terms of romance, but
we are considering the role of connection. Ultimately, our
connection with an audience should influence how we
communicate our ideas.

   There are three ways that relation comes into play when we
communicate:

 1. Establishing a relationship: You are connecting with
      someone for the first time and introducing yourself
      because you've never met before.

2. Maintaining a relationship: You will make conscious
      choices about what you say and how you say it to ensure a
      relationship keeps going into the future.

 3. Harming a relationship: This obviously causes negative
      repercussions. As a technical communicator, we want to
      try to minimize this as much as possible, even when it's
      unavoidable.

Here's an example. The first time you hand-in assignment to
a professor, whether its this class or any other, you are
developing the relationship you have with your professor. This
goes both ways since how your professor responds to your
work will also establish, maintain, or harm your relationship
with them.

   For example, let's say you receive your first assignment back
from a professor and you get a bad grade. How your professor
explains why you got a bad grade will impact your relationship
with them. The professor may harm your relationship with
them if they only give you negative feedback, or even no
feedback at all. As a result, you may feel dejected and not
capable in the class.

   Unfortunately for the professor, it's their job to provide
negative feedback on student assignments so this is always a
risk for them. However, in order to mitigate the potential harm,

32 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
a good professor will also try to suggest ways you can revise
their work to make it stronger. In this way, a professor can
manage a potentially negative interaction without harming
their relationship with students.

   A concept that will directly impact your relationship with
someone is your footing, which is the "foundation up on which
your credibility rests in a given interaction" (MacLennan, 2009,
p. 10). Here's an example. Who would you prefer to receive
feedback on technical writing from, an RCM 200 professor or
your friend who is unemployed and plays video games all day?
You may certainly value your friend, but the professor clearly
has more credibility than they do.

   Ultimately, footing is about having an awareness of who you
are and what your position is in any communication situation.
It's also about appropriateness. If you can recognize your
footing, and you can respond appropriately, you will be more
successful.

   In order to determine whether the footing we've adopted is
appropriate, we need to consider:

 1. whether we have the proper credentials
2. whether our footing corresponds to our role in the

      situation
 3. and whether our audience grants it.

It's important to keep in the mind that if you only meet one
of the above considerations, that doesn't necessarily mean you
have footing in a given situation. For example, we may have
the proper credentials--such as a degree or professional
experience--that allow us to speak on a topic, but it may not
be appropriate for us to do so. There are situations that call
upon each of us in particular to draw upon our expertise, and
there are situations in which it is more appropriate for us to
refrain from using our expertise, or to allow someone else with
similar expertise to comment. Similarly, if an audience doesn't

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 33
recognize our adopted footing as appropriate, we simply don't
have the footing to make the comments we're making.

   One way to check your footing is to ask yourself:

            "What right do I have to say what I want to say?"

If you have that authority that you feel you have, if the situation
is appropriate, and if your audience also recognizes, then you
can probably say what you want to say. However, if you don't
have authority, or your footing is not appropriate to your role
in the situation, or your audience doesn't recognize your
authority, and you go through with that communication, you
risk harming your credibility.

     Reflection Questions

         1. Below are three scenarios. Using the three
             criteria discussed above, consider your footing in
             each one. After that, consider what specific
             factors might help you establish your footing in
             each scenario.
                   discussing with friends an increase of the
                      minimum wage to $15 an hour
                   applying for a management-level position
                      in your field
                   joining a student committee to make
                      recommendations on tuition costs

34 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
        2. Recall a time when you harmed your relation
             with someone due to some poor communication
             choices. What went wrong and how could it have
             been done differently?

Axiom 3

          "All communication takes place within a context
       of `persons, objects, events, and relations'"
       (MacLennan, 2009, p. 11).

This axiom reminds us that all communication takes place
within a context of a particular situation.

   Communication is situational. Whenever we wish to
understand a message properly, we need to examine the
context in which it was expressed. For instance, we might
consider:

  · who the intended audience was
  · what the audience's relationship to the speaker was
  · where and through what medium the message was

      transmitted
  · why the message was created.

When taken out of context, a message can be misunderstood
or even manipulated. Additionally, when we are designing a
message, we must be mindful of the fact that there is not one

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 35
approach to solving all communication situations; the situation
must have an impact on how we decide to design our response
to it.

   We need to develop our judgement of how to respond to a
situation properly. As a result, this course has been designed to
help you better understand how to look at a communication
situation--what questions to ask about the situation, what
elements of the situation to assess--so that you can have the
maximum amount of information available to you when you
begin to design a message to solve it.

   What are some general elements of a communication
situation that we need to think about? You may recall that
Bitzer (2009) tells us that we need to think about the exigence,
that is, the problem we're trying to solve through persuasion;
the audience, paying particular attention to what they know,
what they value, and how they feel about the topic; and the
constraints, including, of course, your footing. In short, this
axiom tells us that we need to do our research very carefully
before we develop a message.

     Reflection Questions

        Watch the video below. For both cases mentioned,
     use the four considerations to think about where the
     miscommunication occurs for the both the sender and
     receiver.

36 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=565#oembed-1

        Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/
     commgonewrong

Axiom 4

          "Communication is a principal way of establishing
       ourselves and maintaining credibility" (MacLennan,
       2009, p. 12).

Most of you are in school because you want to become a
member of a profession such as an engineer, agrologist,
agronomist, maybe a veterinarian or a physician, or perhaps
you intend to stay in school and become a professor.

   Whatever profession you choose, you are going to have some
credibility simply because you are a member of that
profession, and have thus managed to complete all the
education that is required to join the profession. However, your

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 37
success and your reputation in that profession will be based on
what you do with that education.

   As a professional, you will regularly engage in
communication as an action. Since we establish our credibility
through our actions, and since communication is the action
that underlies all other activities we engage in as professionals,
effective professional communication is crucial for establishing
our credibility. Since colleagues and clients see us engage in
communication more than anything else, and since we are
being judged on our communication, it is important that we
make our communication as effective as possible.

   All your knowledge, everything you are gaining through your
education, is not very useful if you cannot communicate it to
people. They won't understand that you have that knowledge,
or they may not believe that your knowledge is accurate or
applicable. Thus, you need to establish your credibility before
you can use what you know.

     Reflection Question

        Once you leave school, how will you establish
     credibility in your field? If communication is an action,
     what actions will you need to take? Are they any
     common mistakes people make in your field that you
     will need to avoid?

38 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
Axiom 5

          "Communication is the main means through
       which we exert influence" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 13).

Think of what you want in the world. What do you want,
beyond your degree? A career? A certain level of income? To
get married? Much of what you want to achieve comes
through successfully influencing others, and the way in which
you communicate plays a key role in this process. You're going
to earn your degree if you can convince your professors that
you know everything you need to know. Once you get your
degree, you may need to convince an employer to hire you,
through a job package and job interview. Perhaps you will start
your own company, and then you will use your communication
to raise funds and then recruit the best possible employees, as
well as loyal clients. All of these achievements come not only
through your hard work, but also through your persuasive skills.

   You are going to be an educated, engaged citizen, so you'll
need to have excellent communication skills in order to share
your skills, your knowledge, and your perspective on the world.

     Reflection Questions

        As MacLennan (2009) makes clear, influence is not all
     about getting other people to do things for you. It's

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 39
     about how influence can be used to achieve a mutually
     beneficial result.

        From a global perspective, consider the work of
     Peruvian singer Renata Flores. When she was 14, Ms.
     Flores translated the song "The Way You Make Me Feel"
     by Michael Jackson into Quechua, her Indigenous
     language which is also the language of the Incas. The
     video explains her music as well as it's impact. As you
     watch it, consider how she used the influence of a
     popular song and social media to promote
     engagement with and interest in the Quechua
     language.

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=565#oembed-2

        Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/
     langressurect

        Now lets consider this axiom from a professional
     context.

        Imagine you are a team leader for a project. In this
     role, you are in charge of directing the project, but also

40 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
addressing any challenges your team faces. Below are
two scenarios with two challenges you may encounter
in such a role.

   How might you use your influence as a team lead in
order to encourage better cooperation amongst your
team members?

   Scenario 1: Your team is feeling frustrated. Everybody
is working on their own individual part and nobody
understands how their portion will impact the larger
project. As a result, the team has lost time by making
several mistakes that need to be fixed. While such
mistakes could have been avoided by better
communication within the group, everyone is
protective of their progress, and shares only what has
been completed.

   Scenario 2: Your team has been making a lot of
progress on the project, but is not going to meet the
deadline. Your supervisor decides to give you another
team member, David, to help you out. Your supervisor
arranges a meeting in which David introduces himself,
but nobody on the team wants his help. In private,
individual members admit they're not sure how David
can help them. Additionally, several of your team
members tell you that they're worried that David will
take all the credit for doing only a little bit of work.

                      Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 41
Axiom 6

          "All communication involves an element of
       interpersonal risk" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 14).

Since all communication involves relation, then relation is at
risk whenever you are communicating. Furthermore, your
credibility, your influence, and your footing are also at risk
whenever you communicate. If you communicate poorly, then
you risk damaging these crucial elements of effective
communication, so it's important that reflect carefully on how
to communicate most effectively in every situation.

   Face is also at risk. Face is who we want the world to perceive
us as, how we want to present ourselves to the world. If the
world affirms that self-image, we are able see ourselves in the
way we want to be seen.

   In fact, for most of us, the face we project to the world is
more competent than we actually feel. We want to appear that
we have everything under control, even though it is perfectly
normal not to feel that way internally, at least not all the time.
We may not feel terribly self-confident, but we don't want to
show that anxiety about our performance to the world; we
want the world to see us as confident and competent.

   Fortunately, the world will affirm our desired self-image. We
generally accept people as they present themselves, since
doing so is part of the process of building community.

   Nevertheless, we risk our face when we are communicating
because, when we are presenting ourselves and our ideas, we
risk being judged, and there is the possibility that others will
not perceive us in the way we wish to be perceived.

   As a result we experience face loss. If you feel nervous about
participating in discussions or giving speeches in this course, it

42 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
is because of the fear of face loss, or face challenge. However,
always remember that your audience is also invested in
helping you maintain your projected sense of self--no one
wants to see you lose face, since such an occurrence would
make everyone uncomfortable, as if each person in the
audience had also lost face with you.

   It is important that we recognize face risk because we may
someday have to issue a face challenge to somebody. For
instance, we may have to design a message that corrects
somebody's behaviour in a workplace. Employees usually
prefer a boss to think of their work as excellent, so when a
boss criticizes their work, they may experience embarrassment
or humiliation. Such feelings often cause people to act
defensively--employees may look for reasons that they're
wrong, instead of accepting the feedback. Because our sense
of face exists in all interactions, we need to carefully consider
the face implications whenever we are communicating with
someone.

     Reflection Questions

        Below are three scenarios that may happen to you in
     the workplace. How might your face be affected in
     each?

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 43
          · Scenario 1: As you
             know by now, not
             all communication
             is verbal. Let's say
             you are working in
             an open-office
             space like the one pictured on the right. You have
             been working for several hours on your computer
             and decide to take a break. You decide to check
             social media at your desk, and while you do that,
             a supervisor quickly walks behind you on their
             way to a meeting and sees that you are not
             working. The supervisor doesn't know you are on
             a break, and they do not stop to ask what you are
             doing.

          · Scenario 2: Something always seems to make
             you late. At least once a week, you miss your bus
             and show up 15 to 30 minutes late to work. You
             also easily lose track of time because you are
             focused on work, so you often to show up to
             meetings a minute or two late and disrupt them.

          · Scenario 3: Right now, you are working on three
             different projects and nothing is going right. You
             are frustrated and you are happy to let everyone
             who will listen know it. You complain at your desk,
             at your coworkers' desks, and even in the
             breakroom. Your coworkers try to offer some
             solutions, but you do not listen them. Instead, you
             blow off their ideas by saying, "Yeah, maybe. I'll
             think about it."

44 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
Axiom 7

          "Communication is frequently ambiguous: what is
       unsaid can be as important as what is said"
       (MacLennan, 2009, p. 14).

This axiom helps us better understand how to interpret
messages that others send to us, and design our messages
more consciously. It reminds us that communication is
complex, and that there is often much more at work than its
verbal content.

   Ambiguous communication can complicate a message in
a couple of different ways. First, unstated assumptions can
create ambiguity. If we, either intentionally or unintentionally,
do not share information that is required to help our audience
understand our message, we are responsible for
miscommunication. Also, non-verbal cues, such as body
language and other sources of accidental communication, can
also damage the clarity of a message.

   Sometimes, such accidental communication can betray the
true purpose of a message, and, sometimes, the information
sent by the accidental communication may be completely
unrelated to the message a speaker is communicating; either
way, an audience should not be left to try to decipher the
ultimate meaning of the message.

   Thus, we must aim to have a clear understanding of all of
the ways our message can be interpreted by an audience, and
to be in control of how it could be perceived. Designing our
messages with care enables us to be responsible and
accountable for any sort of assumption that could embedded
in our communication.

   Communication is full of spaces, through which our audience

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 45
can perceive us one way or another, so it's up to us to ensure
that our audience understands what we want to say, and not
to misunderstand us. Whenever we communicate, we must do
our best to make conscious choices.

     Reflection Questions

        One form that ambiguity can take is lexcial
     ambiguity. This occurs when certain words take on
     multiple parts of speech. That is, depending on context,
     the same word could be a noun, verb, or adjective. Take
     the sentence below for example:

                Buffalo buffalo Buffalo buffalo buffalo
             buffalo Buffalo buffalo.

        Believe it or not, that is a grammatically correct
     sentence. How is that possible? It is because of lexical
     ambiguity. Check out the video below for more detail.

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:

46 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
        https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=565#oembed-3

   Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/
lexicalbuffalo

   Lexical ambiguity is just one way you may see
ambiguity in your career. Sure, a piece of writing may
make sense grammatically, but that doesn't mean it's
good writing. Can you think of writing you've seen
where you weren't clear what was being said?

   Let's look at ambiguity more generally with some
real world situations. Below are three scenarios where
ambiguity occurs. Where does the ambiguity come
from and how could the situation be made less
ambiguous?

    · Scenario #1: You are working on a group project
        with three other people. Each person decides to
        be responsible for a different section, and you
        decide to do the final portion. However, your part
        is dependent on the work of everyone else and
        you can't start until they are done. The deadline is
        coming up soon and the rest of your group still
        isn't finished. You have other projects to worry
        about, so you ask them when they will be done.
        Their response is, "we'll get it to you soon."

                      Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 47
          · Scenario #2: Your employer sends a company
             wide email that states, "There are big changes
             coming in the next couple of weeks. We have
             decided to restructure our workforce so we can
             put our company on a stronger path to grow. Our
             management team has been working around the
             clock to change how we do business and we
             know each of you will be a big part of those
             changes. It will be a difficult transition, but we will
             only succeed if we keep our heads down and
             focus on the big picture."

          · Scenario #3: You receive an assignment back
             from an instructor with a bad mark on it. You read
             over the instructor's comments and see
             comments such as "not clear enough," "this
             graphic is confusing," and "be more specific."

Axiom 8

          Effective communication is audience-centred, not
       self-centred (MacLennan, 2009, p. 15).

While MacLennan phrases this axiom differently, a re-phrasing
can help prevent any potential confusion: if you want your
message to be received and acted upon, you're going to have
to think carefully about your audience.

48 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
   Recall that a pathos appeal, when used appropriately, can
improve the connection of the person who's speaking with
the person who's listening. The better we can engage our
audience, the more likely our communication will be
successful. Understanding our audience means considering
how much they already know about your topic, how they might
react to your message, and what would best motivate them
to accept your message. Answering all of these questions is
crucial in order to improve the design of your message.

   Being audience-centred means having a good
understanding of what the audience's expectations are.
Whenever you do an assignment for RCM 200, for example,
you'll need to first consider what your audience is expecting;
that is, what are the standards and requirements that your
instructor expects you to meet? The more you're able to adhere
to those expectations, the more likely it is that you'll be
successful.

     Reflection Question

        For an example of audience-centered messaging,
     look no further than the University of Saskatchewan's
     very own College of Engineering.

        In 2020, the college unveiled it's re-designed first-
     year engineering program called Re-Engineered. The
     college promised that the new program was not only
     innovative, but would also be more accessible and
     supportive of first year students. But what did that
     mean? How would this program be different from
     other first-year engineering programs across Canada?

                            Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 49
        The College released the following video to help
     answer those questions. As you watch it, how does the
     speaker try to make connections with the audience?
     How is pathos used to show the speaker cares about
     the audience's interest? How is the speaker trying to
     get you to accept her message?

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=565#oembed-4

        Link to the Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/
     usaskeng

Axiom 9

          "Communication is pervasive: you cannot not
       communicate" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 16).

Notice the word "pervasive"--it is not "persuasive."
Communication is all around us, saturating everything. It is
unavoidable. Once we open up the door to communication,
once we start engaging someone, once we've established

50 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
relation, we cannot choose to turn it off. This is because literally
everything we do within that dynamic will be read as some
type of message.

   Think of the times when you have been upset with someone
not communicating--chances are, you were upset because
you were interpreting their silence, since silence can also be
an act of communication. Think of the times you've messaged
someone. You could see the moment someone read the
message, but they didn't respond. If you were expecting some
sort of response, wouldn't you assume they were saying
something, by not saying something? What about those times
you had interviewed for a job, and you waited anxiously to hear
whether you got it. If they didn't call, were they still sending you
a message?

   We need to recognize that once we enter a dynamic in which
we are communicating with someone in any capacity, all our
words, all our actions, all our silences, will be read as a message.
Since there is no possibility under such circumstances for non-
communication, we should always attempt to be in control of
our messages, by making choices that lead to the impact and
influence that we hope to achieve as professionals.

     Key Takeaways

          · The Nine Axioms of Communication are
             universal, interconnected principles of
             communication that are present whenever we try
             to communicate with others.

          · How we create relation with our audience --
             whether we are establishing, maintaining, or

                             Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication | 51
             harming a connection -- can have long lasting
             impact on that relationship.
          · Our connection will also be impacted by our
             footing, credibility, and face . Therefore, it is
             important that we consider these elements in
             mind when communicating.
          · Ambiguity can also complicate a message.
             Whether intentional or not, leaving information
             out can result in miscommunication.
          · By crafting messages that are audience-
             centred, we are more likely to be successful in our
             communication.

References

Bitzer, L. F. (2009). The rhetorical situation. In J.
MacLennan, Effective communication for the technical
professions (2nd ed.) (pp.18-21). Oxford University Press.
(Abridged from Bitzer, L.F. (1968). The rhetorical
situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1), 1-14.)

   MacLennan, J. (2009). Effective communication for the
technical professions (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

52 | Chapter 3: The Nine Axioms of Communication
Chapter 4: The
Rhetorical Triangle

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Differentiate between the Shannon-Weaver
             model of communication and the rhetorical
             triangle model of communication
          · Explain why Aristotle's rhetorical triangle model
             is the preferred communication model for this
             course

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · Shannon-Weaver model/transmission model
          · sender
          · receiver
          · noise
          · feedback
          · rhetorical triangle

                                                                    Chapter 4: The Rhetorical
                                                                                       Triangle | 53
The Shannon-Weaver Model of
Communication

Communication textbooks often adopt the Shannon-Weaver
model (1948)--also known as the transmission model--to
represent the linear process of communication, as shown in the
image below.

   In this linear model, a sender encodes information and,
through a transmitter, sends it to a receiver, who subsequently
decodes the message. According to this model then,
information seems to move in a simplified, linear manner, even
though the process can be complicated by noise, which is
information that is added unintentionally to a message during
transmission, and feedback, which is information that the
receiver transmits back to the sender.

   The Shannon-Weaver model does have limits though. While
this model of communication provided a fruitful basis for
information theory--a body of theory that investigates the
processes by which information is encoded and transmitted
in a digital context--it is less useful when we consider human

54 | Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle
communication. In this regard, the model fails to represent
the dynamic nature of interpersonal communication, which is
due to the complexity of people. In other words, the Shannon-
Weaver model simplistically depicts an act of communication
as though information was somehow shared through a simple,
linear action:

          sender transmits a message -> receiver receives
       the message -> transmission complete!

Unfortunately--perhaps--this is not how human
communication works.

A "Simple" Communication Example

Consider, for instance, the simplest example of human
communication: when one person greets another person. Let's
say Person A, whom we'll refer to as "the speaker," has a prior
relationship with Person B, whom we'll refer to as "the
audience." In this case, the nature of that relationship will likely
influence the type of greeting that the speaker shares. Now,
what about the speaker's relationship to their message? What
if they are uncomfortable with small talk, and feel compelled
to greet the audience, even though the speaker fears that the
greeting will invite small talk?

   However they feel about the message, the speaker's
relationship to their message will influence the way in which
their message is expressed. They may be curt in their greeting,
or create ambiguity by looking away quickly if they are anxious
to greet the audience.

   Now, let's turn to the audience: how will they interpret such

                                                Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle | 55
a message? Inevitably, the audience's understanding will
depend, in part, on the nature of their relationship with the
speaker and their prior experience with the sort of greeting the
speaker offers.

   That is just one simple example that shows just how complex
it can be to analyze communication. As we will see in this
course, communication can be much more intricate.

The Rhetorical Triangle

To account for the complexity of communication, RCM 200
uses a communication model known as the rhetorical triangle.
Through this model, we can see that each of the elements
of communication--the speaker, audience, and message--are
related to each of the others, and we can understand that
communication is a complex, dynamic system. The diagram
below shows this.

56 | Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle
   Now, let apply this model to our "simple" communication
example from earlier in the chapter:

   As the image above shows, there is a lot happening in this
one interaction, and all of it is simultaneous!

   A key to success in your communication is to recognize it
as a dynamic process, where the relationship of the speaker,
message, and audience are always impacting each other.

     Key Takeaways

          · The Shannon-Weaver model states that
             communication is a linear process where
             the sender encodes a message and a receiver
             decodes it.

                                                Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle | 57
       · While helpful for understanding
          communication at basic level, the Shannon-
          Weaver model does not account for all the
          complexities of human communication.

       · In this course, we use Aristotle's the rhetorical
          triangle model because it emphasizes that
          elements of communication--speaker, audience,
          and message--are related to each other. This
          model shows that communication is much more
          dynamic in nature.

References

Communication Theory. (n.d.) [Diagram of Shannon-Weaver's

Model       of                           Communication].

https://www.communicationtheory.org/shannon-and-weaver-

model-of-communication/

58 | Chapter 4: The Rhetorical Triangle
RHETORICAL THEORY

                                                                        Rhetorical Theory | 59
Chapter 5: Aristotle and
the Modes of Appeal

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Explain Aristotle's definition of rhetoric
          · Differentiate between the three modes of
             appeal: logos, pathos, and ethos
          · Distinguish a rhetorical model of
             communication from other communication
             models

     Key Words and Concepts

          · Aristotle's definition of rhetoric
          · Modes of Appeal
          · logos
          · pathos
          · ethos
          · rhetor

                                                      Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes
                                                                                     of Appeal | 61
          · credibility
          · character

What is the Art of Rhetoric?

Have you ever had a discussion about a controversial matter,
after which you changed your opinion? Have you ever had an
argument with a friend or family member that resulted in
either you or the other person more aggressively defending
a position that became less defensible as the argument
progressed? Have you ever found yourself carried away by
someone's bad idea, only to ask yourself later, "What was I
thinking?!"

   If you answered "yes" to any of these questions, the art of
rhetoric might help you understand exactly what happened.

   Rhetoric, defined most broadly, is the art of persuasion. Since
any type of communication can be created with the intention
of influencing opinions or behaviours, rhetorical principles can
be found in speeches, written documents, images, films, and
even gestures and other non-verbal modes of expression.

   By studying rhetorical principles, and their use by the authors
of different types of communication, we can cultivate two
important skills: recognizing how we are persuaded and using
those tools to persuade others for our own professional
purposes.

   First, we can develop a clearer understanding of how we
are persuaded to believe the messages we find convincing. As
humans, we often come to accept an idea about the world
not only on the basis of available evidence, but also because
of our trust in the source of the information. Additionally, the

62 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
way we perceive the information as fitting in with our beliefs
about the nature of reality can have an effect. By considering
the principles of rhetoric, we can isolate elements of an act
of persuasion in order to have a clearer understanding of how
reasonable a message is.

   Second, studying the art of rhetoric can help us
communicate more effectively. Because we are so frequently
using persuasion--whether we're attempting to secure a job,
trying to persuade a family member or colleague to help us
with a difficult task, or even hoping to convince a friend to
accept our opinion--the ability to be persuasive is crucial for
success in both our professional and personal life.

   Because persuasion is a universal human activity, complex
rhetorical traditions have developed among cultures
throughout the world. In this textbook, we focus on the
European tradition of rhetoric, which began to be documented
in Athens in the fifth century BCE, and which has continued
to be studied, developed, and applied for nearly two and a half
millennia.

   According to the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle
(384-322 BCE), rhetoric is an art through which one can
develop "an ability, in each [particular] case], to see the available
means of persuasion" (Kennedy, 1991, p. 36). This definition is
important for our purposes for two reasons.

   First of all, if we're not naturally charismatic, we may ask
ourselves, "can I learn to be persuasive?" Aristotle observes that
some people are persuasive by nature, while others develop
the skill through study and practice. Thus, he anticipates this
question by describing rhetoric as a techn (pronounced
"TEKH-nay,"); that is, as an art or skill with rules that can be
learned (Kennedy, 1991, p. 29). Because some people have a
knack for persuasion--others seem to accept their ideas even
when those ideas are not very good ones--we all need to hone
our persuasive skills in order to help our audience accept our
message. Otherwise, a potential audience could risk being

                               Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 63
misled by an uninformed opinion expressed by a particularly
charismatic speaker or writer.

   Second, by referring to the "available means of persuasion,"
Aristotle points to what are also known as the three modes
of appeal: ethos, pathos, and logos. The modes of appeal
are distinct ways of engaging an audience, and are particularly
useful for evaluating others' messages as well as for helping
us carefully design our own messages. Analyzing a persuasive
message using these tools can give us insight ultimately into
whether the message is actually persuasive or not. By
considering them while we are composing a document or
preparing a presentation, we can increase the likelihood that
our audience will be persuaded by our own message.

The Three Modes of Appeal

While Aristotle's approach to rhetoric informed rhetorical
training in the European tradition to varying degrees, rhetorical
scholars in the twentieth century became particularly
interested in his theories. These scholars started a movement
called the Neo-Aristotelian school of rhetoric. While the modes
of appeal began with Aristotle, their description below reflects
the influence of these more recent scholars.

   These modes of appeal are simple yet profound tools that
enable us to analyze the persuasive qualities of messages
composed by others and to design more effective messages
ourselves.

   Before we dive into each mode, watch the video below for a
brief introduction to each one.

64 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=396#oembed-1

Now that you have a general understanding of the logos,
pathos, and ethos, let's discuss each one in detail.

Logos: Appeal to Logic

Logic. Reason. Rationality. Logos is brainy, intellectual, cool,
calm, collected, and objective.

When authors or speakers rely on logos, it means that they
are using logic, careful structure, and objective evidence to
appeal to the audience. Authors or speakers can appeal to an
audience's intellect by using information that can be fact
checked (using multiple sources) and thorough explanations
to support key points. Additionally, providing a solid and non-
biased explanation of one's argument is a great way for an
author to invoke logos.

For example, let's say an instructor wants to convince their
students that they should complete their homework. The
instructor might explain that they understand everyone is busy
and they have other classes (non-biased), but the homework
will help the students get a better grade on their test
(explanation). The instructor could add to this explanation by
providing statistics showing the number of students who failed
and didn't complete their homework versus the number of

                               Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 65
students who passed and did complete their homework
(factual evidence).

Logical appeals rest on rational modes of thinking, such as:

  · Comparison - a comparison between one thing (with
      regard to your topic) and another, similar thing to help
      support your claim. It is important that the comparison is
      fair and valid--the things being compared must share
      significant traits of similarity.

  · Cause/effect thinking - you argue that X has caused Y, or
      that X is likely to cause Y to help support your claim. Be
      careful with the latter--it can be difficult to predict that
      something "will" happen in the future.

  · Deductive reasoning - starting with a broad, general
      claim/example and using it to support a more specific
      point or claim

  · Inductive reasoning - using several specific examples or
      cases to make a broad generalization

  · Exemplification - use of many examples or a variety of
      evidence to support a single point

  · Elaboration - moving beyond just including a fact, but
      explaining the significance or relevance of that fact

  · Coherent thought - maintaining a well organized line of
      reasoning; not repeating ideas or jumping around

Pathos: Appeal to Emotions

When rhetors rely on pathos, it means that they are trying to
tap into the audience's emotions to get them to agree with
a claim. Authors or speakers using pathos appeals want the
audience to feel something: anger, pride, joy, rage, or
happiness. For example, many of us have seen the ASPCA

66 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
commercials that use photographs of injured puppies, or sad-
looking kittens, and slow, depressing music to emotionally
persuade their audience to donate money.

Pathos-based rhetorical strategies are any strategies that get
the audience to "open up" to the topic, to the argument, or to
the rhetor. Emotions can make us vulnerable, and rhetors can
use this vulnerability to get the audience to believe that their
argument is a compelling one.

But pathos strategies are not only limited to using emotional
appeals in your argument. Pathos appeals might also include:

  · Expressive descriptions of people, places, or events that
      help the reader to feel or experience those events

  · Vivid imagery of people, places or events that help the
      audience to feel like they are seeing those events

  · Sharing personal stories that make the audience feel a
      connection to, or empathy for, the person being described

  · Using emotion-laden vocabulary as a way to put the
      audience into that specific emotional mindset (what is the
      author or speaker trying to make the audience feel? and
      how are they doing that?)

  · Using any information that will evoke an emotional
      response from the audience. This could involve making
      the audience feel empathy or disgust for the person/
      group/event being discussed, or perhaps connection to or
      rejection of the person/group/event being discussed.

When reading a text or listening to a speech, locate when the
speaker is trying to convince the reader using emotions in their
communication. When emotional appeals are used to excess
in an argument, this kind of rhetorical strategy can sometimes
indicate a lack of substance or emotional manipulation of the
audience.

                               Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 67
     Exercise #1: Identify Pathos Appeals

        Pathos is all about tapping into the emotions of your
     audience to get them to agree with one of your claims.
     This is done most commonly in advertisements. All
     advertisements want you to react in some way. They
     may want you to buy a specific product they are selling,
     donate to a certain charity, or even take an action that
     will benefit only yourself. The most effective
     advertisements, then, are the ones that make a pathos
     appeal to their audience.

        Watch both videos below. Each one is an
     advertisement. As you watch, consider the following
     questions:

         1. What action does the advertisement want you
             take?

        2. How is the advertisement appealing to your
             emotions?

        For the second question, see if you can identify at
     least three pathos appeals.

        Video #1: Sarah McLachlan SPCA Commercial

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:

68 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=396#oembed-2

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/sarahmclach
        Video #2: British Heart Foundation

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=396#oembed-3

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/britheartfound

  Ethos: Appeal to Values/Trust

Ethos appeals have two facets: audience values and authorial
credibility/character.
On the one hand, when rhetors make an ethical appeal, they
are attempting to tap into the values or ideologies that the
audience holds. This can include, but is not limited to, the
following:

                               Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 69
  · patriotism

  · tradition

  · justice

  · equality

  · dignity for all humankind

  · self preservation

  · specific social, religious or philosophical values (Christian
      values, socialism, capitalism, feminism, etc.).

These values can sometimes feel very close to emotions, but
they are felt on a social level rather than only on a personal
level. When authors or speakers evoke the values that the
audience cares about as a way to justify or support their
argument, we classify that as ethos. The audience will feel that
the author or speaker is making an argument that is "right" (in
the sense of moral "right"-ness, i.e., "My argument rests upon
that values that matter to you. Therefore, you should accept
my argument"). This first part of the definition of ethos, then, is
focused on the audience's values.

On the other hand, this sense of referencing what is "right"
in an ethical appeal connects to the other sense of ethos: the
author or speaker. Ethos that is centered on the author or
speaker revolves around two concepts: the credibility of the
rhetor and their character.

Credibility of speakers or authors is determined by their
knowledge and expertise in the subject at hand. For example, if
you are learning about Einstein's Theory of Relativity, would you
rather learn from a professor of physics or a cousin who took
two science classes in high school thirty years ago? It is fair to
say that, in general, the professor of physics would have more

70 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
credibility to discuss physics. To establish their credibility,
rhetors may draw attention to who they are or what kinds
of experience they have with the topic being discussed as an
ethical appeal (i.e., "Because I have experience with this
topic--and I know my stuff!--you should trust what I am saying
about this topic"). Some authors or speakers do not have to
establish their credibility because the audience already knows
who they are and that they are credible.

Character is another aspect of ethos, and it is different from
credibility because it involves personal history and even
personality traits. A person can be credible but lack character
or vice versa. For example, in politics, sometimes the most
experienced candidates--those who might be the most
credible candidates--fail to win elections because voters do
not accept their character. Politicians take pains to shape their
character as leaders who have the interests of the voters at
heart. Candidates who successfully prove to the voters (the
audience) that they have the type of character that the voters
can trust is more likely to win.

Thus, ethos comes down to trust. How can rhetors get the
audience to trust them so that they will accept their
argument? How can authors or speakers make themselves
appear as credible speakers who embody the character traits
that the audience values?

   Aristotle succinctly states that there are three things we trust
other than logical proof: good judgement (practical wisdom),
good will, and good character (virtue) (Kennedy, 1991).

   In building ethical appeals, we see authors or speakers:

  · Referring either directly or indirectly to the values that
      matter to the intended audience (so that the audience will
      trust the speaker)

  · Using language, phrasing, imagery, or other writing styles
      common to people who hold those values, thereby

                                Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 71
      "talking the talk" of people with those values (again, so
      that the audience is inclined to trust the speaker)
  · Referring to their experience and/or authority with the
      topic (and therefore demonstrating their credibility)
  · Referring to their own character, or making an effort to
      build their character in the text
  · Displaying their concern for the audience
When reading or listening, you should always think about the
rhetor's credibility regarding the subject as well as their
character.

     Exercise #2: Chapter Quiz

        Test your understanding of the material in this
     chapter with the quiz below.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=396#h5p-5

     Key Takeaways

72 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
· Rhetoric is a set of principles that allow a
   speaker or writer to persuade an audience to take
   a specific action.

· Learning these principles will help us
   understand how we are persuaded by messages
   and, most importantly, how we can use those
   principles to persuade others in professional
   contexts.

· Aristotle is the most famous teacher of rhetoric.
   He believed that anyone could learn the art of
   persuasion through practice. His three modes of
   appeal are considered one of the best ways to
   persuade others.

· The three modes of appeal are logos, pathos,
   and ethos.

· Logos occurs when authors or speakers use
   logic, careful structure and objective evidence to
   appeal to the audience.

· Pathos occurs when authors or speakers try to
   tap into an audience's emotions to get them to
   agree with a claim.

· Ethos occurs when authors or speakers appeal
   to the values of an audience and try to establish
   their own credibility and character.

· To be successful at persuasion, a person must
   use all three modes of appeal when constructing
   their message. Ignoring any one of them will
   make the message less effective at persuading an
   audience.

                    Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal | 73
References

Kennedy, G. A. (1991). Aristotle on rhetoric: A theory of civic
discourse. Oxford University Press, USA.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "A Guide to Rhetoric, Genre, and
Success in First-Year Writing" by Melanie Gagich and Emilie
Zickel (on Pressbooks@MSL). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.

74 | Chapter 5: Aristotle and the Modes of Appeal
Chapter 6: Bitzer and
The Rhetorical
Situation

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Define the elements of Bitzer's rhetorical
             situation
          · Distinguish between an exigence and a
             rhetorical exigence
          · Distinguish between an audience and a
             rhetorical audience
          · Explain how Bitzer's three
             constituents--rhetorical exigence, rhetorical
             audience, and constraints--can impact a
             rhetorical situation

     Key Terms and Concepts

                                                                    Chapter 6: Bitzer and The
                                                                     Rhetorical Situation | 75
            · Rhetorical Situation
            · Rhetoric
            · Rhetor
            · Exigence
            · Rhetorical Exigence
            · Rhetorical Audience
            · Constraints

 What is a Rhetorical Situation?

  Under what conditions does persuasion take place?
     The same question can be made for rhetoric: under what

  contexts does rhetorical discourse become possible? This
  question was the basis for Bitzer's (2009) article "The Rhetorical
  Situation." In this article, Bitzer (2009)1 defines three elements
  that are required for rhetorical discourse to exist. These
  elements are:

   1. the rhetorical exigence
   2. the rhetorical audience
   3. the rhetorical constraints

  When combined, these three elements make up what Bitzer
  (2009) calls the rhetorical situation. More broadly, Bitzer (2009)

1. Note: Bitzer's article was originally published in the inaugural issue of
  the journal Philosophy and Rhetoric in 1969. We are using the 2009
  publication date because you will be reading an abridged version of
  Bitzer's article in the Canvas module.

  76 | Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation
defines a rhetorical situation as "a complex of persons, events,
objects, and relations presenting an actual or potential
exigence which can be completely or partially removed if
discourse, introduced into the situation, can so constrain
human decision or action as to bring about the significant
modification of the exigence" (pp. 19-20).

   That's a very complex quote, so we are going to break it
down. If it helps, we can use the term "communication context"
in place of rhetorical situation as both mean the same thing.
At it's core, Bitzer (2009) tells us what is the communication
context for persuasion: what are the parts of it and what does
it look like? To answer those questions, though, we will need to
go over some terminology.

What is Rhetoric?

We use the word rhetoric a lot in this course, so it's important
that we have a clear definition of it before we go any further.
According to Bitzer (2009), "a work of rhetoric is pragmatic; it
comes into existence for the sake of something beyond itself; it
functions ultimately to produce change or action in the world;
it performs some task" (p. 19).

   In other words, rhetoric is practical, purposeful
communication that attempts to create change in the world by
enabling a rhetor to persuade people to change their beliefs or
solve problems.

   That probably sounds likes a pretty big claim! How does
rhetoric change the world? Bitzer (2009) writes, "...rhetoric is a
mode of altering reality, not by the direct application of energy
to objects, but by the creation of discourse which changes
reality through the mediation of thought and action" (p. 19).
This means that rhetors do not act directly. If they see a
problem, they are not the ones showing up, rolling up their
sleeves, and creating change themselves; rather, they create

                              Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation | 77
change through communicating messages that bring
together the thoughts and actions of an audience.

   This is the core or rhetorical discourse. It is not the rhetor
that is on the ground creating change, rather they use their
words to convince others to do it. Rhetors use communication
not only to help an audience think in a certain way, but also
to inspire the audience to act according to the ideas they've
been convinced to accept. Thus, Bitzer (2009) asserts that "the
rhetor alters reality by bringing into existence a discourse of
such a character that the audience, in thought and action, is so
engaged that [they] becomes the mediator of change" (p. 19).

   That may sound all well and good, but what does it have
to do with working in a professional setting when you leave
the university? We now know that rhetoric is communication
that persuades an audience to think in a certain way, or do
certain things. Will you be doing any of this in your career?
Most definitely! The clients or producers you work with will
have problems they need solved, and you will want to convince
them that your plans, ideas, or solutions will solve those
problems. If you can't, you may not get that important contract
for your company, or you be passed over for future projects.
Rhetorical techniques can help you be more successful.

Rhetorical Exigence

Whenever we wish to persuade an audience to take action or
change their beliefs, we must first have a clear definition of the
problem or issue we would like them to address. This problem
is what is known as exigence. A precise understanding of a
problem better equips us to find a solution, and enables the
audience to better understand how their behaviour or beliefs
could improve the situation.

78 | Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation
   Keep in mind, however, that even though we are using the
world "problem" here, that doesn't mean that an exigence is
always negative. In fact, the exigence could be something that
needs to be said or done, which don't always have a negative
connotation.

   Additionally, it's important to understand that not all
problems are rhetorical in nature. As Bitzer (2009) indicates for
an exigence to be rhetorical, it must be able to be affected by
human activity.

   Many problems we face do not have a rhetorical exigence
because of factors beyond our control: natural disasters,
diseases, and death are all examples of phenomena that
continue to exist regardless of human behaviour. However,
within these non-rhetorical exigences, one can find many
potentially rhetorical exigences since people can be
persuaded to behave in ways that minimize the harm done by
such phenomena.

   The other important distinguishing feature of a rhetorical
exigence is that it requires the use of communication (or what
Bitzer calls "discourse") in order to resolve or mitigate the issue
it is addressing. If you can solve the problem by means other
than communication, then it is not considered a rhetorical
exigence.

   This distinction is important to understand, as you will need
to pick a topic with rhetorical exigence for both your written
report and presentation in this course. Students often struggle
with picking a topic that meets this criteria, so let's look at a few
examples where we show the difference between exigence
and rhetorical exigence. We will lay out some scenarios and
explain why they do or do not have rhetorical exigence. If you
can, try to predict what would be a rhetorical exigence for the
scenario before you read further.

                              Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation | 79
          The news is reporting that a severe winter storm
       bringing 50 centimetres of snow is about to reach
       our area.

The winter storm itself has non-rhetorical exigence since no
human intervention could stop a winter storm. It will happen
regardless of what actions humans do or do not take. However,
the potential loss of power and access to grocery stores could
be examples of rhetorical exigences in the situation. People
could be persuaded to prepare for power outages by buying a
generator or buying lots of warm blankets. Alternatively, people
could be convinced stock up on supplies ahead of time like
water and non-perishable foods.

   After reading the explanation above, it may come as no
surprise to you that debates often occur about whether an
exigence is rhetorical or not. Take the following example:

          Climate change is drastically impacting our
       environment and humans need to step in to slow its
       effects.

It is widely and generally accepted that human activity
contributes to climate change, yet detractors attempt to argue
that climate change is natural process that is unresponsive to
human behaviour. As a result, they regard attempts to mitigate
or remediate its effects are potentially misguided. Potential
debates like these show that while you may feel your problem
has a clear rhetorical exigence, others may not agree with you.

   That being said, the act of telling an audience that humans
need to step in to stop climate change does not have rhetorical

80 | Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation
exigence in of itself. This is because, even if your audience
agrees, they may not know what to do, or feel like they can't
make a meaningful impact on such a global issue.

   However, according the vast majority of researchers, specific
human activities contribute significantly to climate change.
Thus, such activities can be examples of rhetorical exigences
because populations can be persuaded to change their
behaviour. They can use fewer disposable products or invest in
renewable energy and thereby mitigate the potential damage
caused by an increasing atmospheric concentration of carbon
dioxide.

   Let's look at this another way: Consider the difference
between these two statements in terms of their exigence:

          (1) "I want my audience to reduce the time they
       idle their vehicle because the earth's climate is
       heating up."

          (2) "I want my audience to reduce the time they
       idle their vehicle because vehicle emissions
       contribute to the current increase in atmospheric
       carbon dioxide, which contributes to climate
       change."

Although we understand the implied argument of the first
example due to our familiarity with this particular exigence,
the second example better establishes the credibility of the
rhetor because of the clarity of thought it expresses. It carefully
draws the connection between human behaviour and its
undesirable effects, and clearly presents the exigence as a
condition we can improve through our collective effort, as

                              Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation | 81
opposed to it being an abstract quality of nature that is only
implicitly connected to our activity.

   This distinction between exigence and rhetorical exigence
is tough. A lot of students struggle with it, so if you are still
unclear, do not hesitate to reach out to your instructor for help.

Rhetorical Audience

The goal of rhetorical discourse is to "produce change by
influencing the decision and action of persons who function as
mediators of change" (Bitzer, 2009, p. 20). Obviously, we can't
do that without an audience.

   Like with exigence though, it is important to distinguish
between an audience and a rhetorical audience as they are
not the same thing. For example, you have probably walked
by the dozens of bulletin boards on campus that advertise
different presentations that you can attend for free. In many of
those cases, the presenter is talking about their research. You
could be in the audience for any of those presentations and
learn something new and valuable about a topic, but would
they push you to make a change?

   Probably not. In those circumstances, you are part of an
audience, but not a rhetorical audience.

   According to Bitzer (2009), a rhetorical audience has two
criteria:

 1. The audience must be able to take action that can either
      solve the problem or at least improve the situation.

         This criterion might seem obvious, but it reminds us of
            the importance of finding a way for our audience to
            solve, or at least mitigate, the problem we've

82 | Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation
            identified, or of finding an audience that has the
            power to do so.

2. There must be some way for the author or speaker to
      persuade the audience to change their opinion or take
      action.

         If the audience is unwilling or unable to consider the
            rhetor's message, there is no rhetorical situation,
            since no change can happen through persuasive
            communication.

In summary, a rhetorical audience is one that can take action
to solve a problem and can be persuaded by the rhetor to take
that action.

Constraints

Obliviously, all this talk about convincing others to take action
comes with some limits. These limits are what Bitzer (2009)
calls constraints. A constraint is anything that can make it
difficult for your message to be received. Sources of constraints
include, but are not limited to:

  · beliefs
  · attitudes
  · documents
  · facts
  · traditions
  · images
  · interests
  · motives

                              Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation | 83
These constraints are what limits a rhetor`s effectiveness in
persuading their rhetorical audience. It's important to note,
however, that these constraints come from both sides.
Specifically, a rhetor's beliefs may affect how they design a
message, and similarly, an audience's beliefs will determine
how they receive that message.

   As a result, constraints cannot be simply acknowledged by
the rhetor and then subsequently ignored. Constraints must
be used as tools to help design the message itself.

   For example, let's say you want to convince your rhetorical
audience to vote in favor of a project that will create a waste-to-
energy plant as a way to generate new energy for your city. You
may personally know that process is safe for the environment,
but your rhetorical audience does not know that. Some,
maybe all, will be concerned at the idea of smoke from burned
trash getting into the atmosphere. Therefore, you must address
this constraint in your presentation by talking about how
filtering works.

   Here's another example. One of the best ways to understand
Bitzer's point about constraints is to imagine a situation in
which you wish to persuade an audience to solve an exigence,
similar to the argument you'll make in your extemporaneous
speech later this term.

   Let's return to the exigence we considered earlier in the
chapter: idling vehicles contribute significantly to increased
atmospheric carbon dioxide, which is responsible for climate
change. Some constraints in this rhetorical situation could
include:

 1. disagreement about the degree to which climate change
      is a threat to our ecosystem

2. an inclination to value our own comfort and convenience
      above the well-being of future generations

 3. the difficulty of changing one's habits in spite one's belief
      in the importance of doing so

84 | Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation
4. doubts concerning the likelihood that changing one's
      idling habits will mitigate the problem

Other types of constraints naturally arise from the medium
that you use to communicate your message; for instance, are
you delivering a speech, posting on social media, writing an
editorial, or speaking with your colleagues or family?
Constraints also arise due to your personality; for instance, what
sorts of communicative risks are your willing to take, and are
they likely to yield a positive response?

Looking Ahead

                              Chapter 6: Bitzer and The Rhetorical Situation | 85
Two of your big assignments in this course are a written report
and a persuasive speech. You will be expected to apply this
rhetorical theory (and others) into both assignments.

   For your persuasive speech at the end of term, you'll need
to find a rhetorical exigence that your audience can solve,
or at least mitigate. As you think about potential or current
problems you'd like your audience to solve, think carefully
whether the exigence exists among your audience, and
whether the action you've identified will actually solve the
exigence.

   For instance, let's pretend you are particularly interested in
dental hygiene, and you found some evidence that certain
demographics have dental hygiene habits that could be
improved. In order to solve this exigence, you decide you want
to persuade people to brush their teeth at least twice per day,
and floss at least once per day.

   As you consider whether to use this exigence and action for
your speech, you would first need to consider whether your
audience, that is, your classmates, actually fall into this
demographic, otherwise you may end up simply attempting to
persuade them to commit to an action they already engage in
regularly.

   If they already have good dental hygiene, the rhetorical
exigence you've identified would not exist in this context, and
thus you would not have a rhetorical situation. Nevertheless,
the exigence might exist among a larger demographic outside
of the classroom, in which case, in order to address the
exigence, you would need to identify an action that enables
your audience to promote good dental hygiene.

                                                                                                    | 87
Chapter Quiz

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=451#h5p-8

     Key Takeaways

          · Rhetoric is purposeful communication that
             aims to create change in the world by allowing a
             rhetor persuade an audience to change their
             beliefs or solve problems.

          · The Rhetorical Situation is a combination of
             elements that determine whether it is possible to
             persuade others in a given situation. These
             elements are rhetorical exigence, rhetorical
             audience, and constraints.

          · Exigence is a problem that needs to be
             addressed in a given situation. However, keep in
             mind that this "problem" does not have to be
             negative in nature. An exigence can be
             something that needs to be said, or a task that
             needs to be accomplished. As a result, not all
             exigences are rhetorical in nature.

          · A rhetorical exigence is one that can be

88 |
             affected by human activity. Preventing a winter
             storm is an exigence, but it is not a rhetorical
             exigence because humans can not stop it.
             However, humans can take measures to prepare
             for the storm to keep themselves safe. The act of
             persuading humans to prepare for the storm is
             rhetorical exigence.
          · A rhetorical audience is an audience who can
             take action that will either solve the problem or at
             least improve the situation.
          · Constraints are elements--such as the beliefs,
             traditions, motives of your audience or
             yourself--that can potentially hinder your
             message. As a result, constraints must be
             assessed in advance of your presentation and
             used to design your message.

References

Bitzer, L. F. (2009). The rhetorical situation. In J.
MacLennan, Effective communication for the technical
professions (2nd ed.) (pp.18-21). Oxford University Press.
(Abridged from Bitzer, L.F. (1968). The rhetorical
situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1), 1-14.)

                                                                                                    | 89
Chapter 7: Booth and
The Rhetorical Stance

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Define the rhetorical stance and the three
             corrupt stances
          · Distinguish between the three corruptions
             stances: pedant stance, advertiser stance,
             entertainer stance

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · "The Rhetorical Stance"
          · Rhetorical balance
          · Rhetorical corruptions / perversions
          · Pedant stance
          · Advertiser stance
          · Entertainer stance

90 | Chapter 7: Booth and The
Rhetorical Stance
A Professional Hazard

Let's start off with an activity.

     Exercise #1: Summarizing Technical Content

        Watch video below. Before you move on to questions
     beneath it, try and summarize the technical content.

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=398#oembed-1

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/retproturenc
         1. How easy was it to summarize the content?
        2. If it was difficult to do so, why?
        3. How could the speaker have made the content

             easier for you to understand?

Did you have difficulty understanding the innovative product
that is being described?
If you are, it's because that video is meant to be an example of
technobabble nonsense--it's actually an example of an `inside
joke' that's been circulating with engineers for the last 70

                                 Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance | 91
years.

What happens when our rhetorical communication loses its
balance? The video above is just one example of Wayne
Booth's (1963) pedant stance, or a corruption of logos appeals.
This chapter defines the rhetorical stance and explores what
happens when a mode of appeal becomes distorted or
corrupted in communication.

The Rhetorical Stance

Drawing on Aristotle, Booth defines rhetorical balance and
explores the consequences of misusing the modes of appeal:

       "The common ingredient that I find in all of the writing
       I admire...is something that I shall reluctantly call the
       rhetorical stance, a stance which depends on
       discovering and maintaining in any writing situation a
       proper balance among the three elements that are at
       work in any communicative effort: the available
       arguments about the subject itself, the interests and
       peculiarities of the audience, and the voice, the implied
       character, of the speaker" (Booth, 1963, p. 141).

This means that there are three parts we need to think about
when we consider rhetorical balance. Does this sound familiar
at all it? It should. What do these parts make you think of?
"Available arguments?" "Interests and peculiarities?" "Implied
character"?

   Booth's three elements are the same as the modes of appeal:

  · "the available arguments about the subject itself" = logos
  · "interests and peculiarities of the audience" = pathos

92 | Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance
  · "implied character of the speaker" = ethos

He finds that he admires writing that keeps these three
elements in balance, a rhetorical balance, if you will. Whenever
you craft a persuasive message, you should strive to maintain
this balance.

   However, this doesn't mean that you will always have equal
parts of ethos, pathos, logos. Depending on what scenario
you're in, you may need to emphasize one over the others,
but that doesn't mean that you neglect the others. Rather you
need to respect them properly and ensure you don't focus too
much on one at the expense of the others.

   Booth discusses rhetorical balance primarily through
rhetorical imbalance: the three corruptions or perversions of
the rhetorical stance. These rhetorical corruptions/
perversions highlight the problems that arise when one mode
of appeal is out of balance from the others. Let's look at each
one now.

The Pedant's Stance

The pedant's stance "consists of ignoring or underplaying the
personal relationship of speaker and audience and depending
entirely on statements about a subject--that is, the notion of a
job to be done for a particular audience is left out" (Booth, 1963,
p. 141).

   Booth dedicates the bulk of his discussion to the pedant's
stance professor's as an example. He recognizes that, as a
group, professors commonly fall prey to this corruption. This
is because they have a tendency to lecture students without
ensuring that their audience is understanding the information
they are attempting to convey. Thus, pedants do not bother to
adapt information carefully for a specific audience; rather, they
expect an audience to interpret and prioritize information on

                                 Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance | 93
their own, instead of targeting the information particularly for
a specific audience in a specific context.

The Advertiser's Stance

Booth (1963) indicates that the advertiser's stance
"comes from undervaluing the subject and overvaluing pure
effect: how to win friends and influence people" (p. 143).

   We can see an example of the advertiser's stance in how
companies use "greenwashing" to market their products.
Greenwashing occurs when a company markets their product
or service in such a way that it appears to be environmentally
friendly, when, in reality, the product or service does not have,
or hardly has, any environmental benefits. A good example of
this are companies that sell bottled water. Often, the images
on their labels use natural elements (mountains, rivers, lakes,
etc.) even though the bottles themselves are hazardous for the
environment.

   Another more recent example comes from Starbucks.
Starbucks recently made a commitment to banning single-
use straws from their stores in order to reduce the amount
of plastic waste. Instead, they would only use strawless lids.
However, there are concerns that the lids will use more plastic
than the original straw-lid combo. This campaign has led to
accusations of greenwashing against the company. While
Starbucks does not dispute this is an issue, they stress that
the plastic used for the new lids is much easier for recycling
infrastructure to catch and reuse, as opposed to straws which
are too small.

   Similarly, a company can also boost their own public image
by addressing the audience's concerns about the environment.
This is often done in combination with a pathos (an emotional
appeal).

94 | Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance
     Exercise #2: Advertiser's Stance in Media

        Watch the ad from Apple below.
        How is the advertisers stance being used here to
     push the company's agenda?

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=398#oembed-2

        Link to Original Video tinyurl.com/appleclimate

The Entertainer's Stance

Finally, Booth defines the entertainer's stance as the
"willingness to sacrifice substance to personality and charm"
(Booth, 1963, p. 144). In communication, entertainers prioritize
their own ego gratification over establishing appropriate
relation with an audience or delivering a coherent message.
Thus, entertainers often focus excessively on gaining their
audience's approval or admiration, or, in some cases, contempt,
while failing to establish their professional credibility and
persuade their audience.

                                 Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance | 95
     Exercise #3: Apply the Rhetorical Stance

        Did you realize that Dragon's Den is a show about
     rhetoric? It focuses on the act of persuading others to
     fund an idea/product.

        After watching the clip below, you will conduct a
     rhetorical analysis. Consider the questions below as you
     apply RCM 200 theory.

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=398#oembed-3

         1. Who is saying what to whom and for what
             purpose?

        2. Is Steven's pitch to the Dragons an example of
             effective persuasion communication?

        3. If not, which stance has Steven fallen into
             during his presentation?

        4. Considering a balanced rhetorical approach,
             how could Steven's pitch been improved?

96 | Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance
Chapter Quiz

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=398#h5p-6

     Key Takeaways

          · Booth states that rhetorical balance is essential
             in a given rhetorical situation. Specifically, he says
             that the most admirable writing is that which
             maintains a balance between three elements
             (which are the same as the modes of appeal): the
             available arguments (logos), the interests/
             peculiarities of the audience (pathos), and the
             character of the speaker (ethos).

          · Of course, it may not be possible to perfectly
             balance all three modes of appeal in a given
             rhetorical situation. Sometimes one or two
             modes may need to emphasized over another.
             What matters is that you do not overdo it at the
             expense of the other modes of appeal.

          · When the three modes are out of balance, this
             is known as a rhetorical corruption/perversion.
             He mentions three corruptions: the pedant's

                                 Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance | 97
             stance, the advertiser's stance, and the
             entertainer's stance.

References

Booth, W. C. (1963). The rhetorical situation. In College
composition and communication (pp. 139-145). National
Council of Teachers of English.

   Britschgi, C. (2018, July 12). Starbucks bans plastic straws,
winds up using more plastic. Reason. https://reason.com/2018/
07/12/starbucks-straw-ban-will-see-the-company/

   Hyatt, K. (2018, February 25). The turbo encabulator's long,
weird and very funny history. Roadshow. https://cnet.com/
roadshow/news/turbo-encabulator-history-engineers-joke/

   Mahdawi, A. (2018, July 23). Starbucks is banning straws - but
is it really a big win for the environment? The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2018/jul/23/
starbucks-straws-ban-2020-environment

98 | Chapter 7: Booth and The Rhetorical Stance
TECHNICAL WRITING
ESSENTIALS

                                                        Technical Writing Essentials | 99
Chapter 8: Technical
Writing Resources

Technical Writing Resources

As you probably know already, a lot is at stake when a
professional composes formal documents such as grant
applications, project proposals, formal reports, and cover
letters. Hiring managers will throw out an entire application
from an applicant if they see a single punctuation error.
Potential clients may think you aren't very professional if you
keep making the same grammatical errors over and over again.
Therefore, it is important to learn a few skills that will help you
to identify recurring writing errors in your work. Even experts
in the field make mistakes, but Writing Studies scholars have
demonstrated that self-awareness can be developed in order
to improve our technical writing.

   We cannot overemphasize the importance of correct
grammar, consistent use of either Canadian or American
spelling in your written assignments, and proper citation of
sources. Your ability to write well not only demonstrates your
professionalism, but also establishes your writerly ethos, which
demonstrates your credibility on the page.

   The following chapters will be a little different from the rest
in our textbook. In the next few chapters, you will explore and
reflect on common writing problems as they apply to you.
Citation is certainly an important part of this process, but we
will discuss that later in a future chapter.

   We will start by providing an overview of sentence structure,
and then you will have a chance to review a writing issue that
is relevant to you.

                                                                Chapter 8: Technical Writing
                                                                                   Resources | 101
Chapter 9: The Basic
Elements of a
Sentence

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Recognize the difference between a clause and
             phrase
          · Distinguish between an independent clause
             and a dependent clause
          · Identify and explain the four different sentence
             structures (simple, compound, complex,
             compound-complex)

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · phrase
          · clause
          · independent clause

102 | Chapter 9: The Basic
Elements of a Sentence
          · dependent clause
          · coordinating conjunction
          · subordinate conjunction

Unsurprisingly, you are required to submit written assignments
for this course. Your own level of comfort in this area will be
different from that of other students, but like all skills, writing
is improved through practice. All of us have strengths when it
comes to writing, and all of us have areas we can improve.

   We're going to start small right now and focus on sentence
level issues that can harm your writing. This way, we have a
common language as we discuss this topic. After that, you'll
have a chance to pick a common writing issue that is relevant
to you.

   Let's start by going over basic grammatical terms that you
will need to know for this section.

     Exercise #1: Grammar Vocabulary Self-Assessment

        Below you will see some flash cards with
     grammatical terms. These are all terms that we will
     mention through out this technical writing section. Try
     to predict what you think these words mean. If you
     can't define the word, can you come up with an
     example? If the definitions don't make sense yet, that's
     okay! We'll go into these things later. This assessment is
     just for your to test your own knowledge.

                              Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 103
          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=354#h5p-35

Clauses and Phrases

When building anything, be it a car, a house, or even a
sentence, it is important to be familiar with the tools you are
using. For this course, grammatical elements are the main
"tools" you use when when building sentences and longer
written works such as reports. Thus, it is critical to have some
understanding of grammatical terminology in order to
construct effective sentences. If you would like to review some
basic parts of speech (nouns, pronouns, articles, adjectives,
adverbs, prepositions, etc), see the Parts of Speech Overview
at the Purdue OWL website. Now let's get into it!

   The two essential parts of a sentence are the subject and
the verb. The subject refers to the topic being discussed while
the verb conveys the action or state of being expressed in the
sentence. When you combine these two elements, you get a
clause. All clauses must contain both a subject and a verb.

   Here are two simple examples of a clause.

          (1) I walk.
       (2) I eat food.

104 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
Both sentences have a subject and a verb, so they are clauses.
There are two types of clauses in writing: an independent
clause and a dependent clause.
There are also phrases, which lack either a subject or a verb,
or both, so they need to relate to or modify other parts of
the sentence. Don't worry about that too much about phrases
though. We are going to focus on clauses here.

   Independent clauses, also called main clauses, can stand on
their own and convey an idea. Let's look at some examples.

   Here is a sentence:

          The engineers stood around the table looking at
       schematics for the machine.

Can you identify the subject, verb, clause, and phrase in that
sentence? If not, that's okay.

   Here's a break down of the difference parts of the sentence.

   Notice the independent clause [The engineers stood around
the table] is a complete idea. If we took at the phrase, the
independent clause would work as a complete sentence. The
phrase [looking at schematics for the machine] is not. It has a
verb [looking], but not a subject, which is why it isn't a clause. It
could not be a complete sentence on its own.

   Dependent clauses rely on another part of the sentence for
meaning and can't stand on their own.

   Here's an example:

                              Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 105
          After they discussed different options, they
       decided to re-design the the components.

Can you identify the different parts we have discussed so far?
Below is a break down of the sentence.

   Sentence 2 has one dependent clause and one
independent clause, each with its own subject-verb
combination ["they discussed" and "they decided"]. The two
clauses are joined by the subordinate conjunction, "after,"
which makes the first clause subordinate to (or dependent
upon) the second one.

   Being able to identify the critical parts of the sentence will
help you design sentences that have a clear and effective
subject-verb relationship.

   If you need some more guidance on clauses, please watch
one or both of the videos below. The first video takes a
humorous approach, while the second is more formal.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=354#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/holidayclause

106 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=354#oembed-2

Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/indepclauses

     Exercise #2: Identify the Clause

        In this activity, you will identify all the words in either
     the independent clause or dependent clause in a
     sentence. You must click on all the words that are part
     of that clause to get the points.

        For example, if you are supposed to identify an
     independent clause, and your sentence is

                     I will go to work after I eat breakfast.
        you would click on "I" "will" "go" "to" and "work"
        If you are supposed to identify a dependent clause
     for the same sentence, you would click on "after" "I"
     "eat" and "breakfast".

                          An interactive H5P element has been

                              Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 107
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=354#h5p-15

Sentence Structures

Sentence structures are how we combine independent
clauses, dependent clauses, and phrases to create complete
ideas in our writing. There are four main types of sentence
structures: simple, compound, complex, and compound-
complex. In the examples above, Sentence 1 is a simple
sentence, while Sentence 2 is complex.

   We will go over each sentence structure now.
   SIMPLE SENTENCES have one main clause clause and any
number of phrases. Below is the formula for a simple sentence.

                                      subject + verb

The following are all examples of simple sentences:

108 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
          · A simple sentence can be very effective.
          · It makes one direct point.
          · It is good for creating emphasis and clarity.
          · Too many in a row can sound repetitive and

             choppy.
          · Varied sentence structure sounds more natural.

Can you identify the subject, verb, and phrases (if any) in the
above sentences?

   COMPOUND SENTENCES have two or more main clauses
joined by coordinating conjunctions (CC) such as and, but, for,
yet, nor, or, so. A common acronym for remembering all of the
conjunctions is FANBOYS. You can also connect them using
punctuation such as a semi-colon or a colon. By coordinating
the ideas, you are giving them roughly equal weight and
importance.

   Please note that these coordinating conjunctions are
different from subordinate conjunctions, which show a
generally unequal relationship between the clauses.

   Below is the formula for a compound sentence:

                      subject + verb, CC subject + verb

The following sentences are all compound. The coordinating
conjunctions are all in bold:

                              Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 109
          · A compound sentence coordinates two ideas,
             and each idea is given roughly equal weight.

          · The two ideas are closely related, so you don't
             want to separate them with a period.

          · The two clauses make up part of the same idea,
             so they should be part of the same sentence.

          · The two clauses may express a parallel idea, and
             they might also have a parallel structure.

          · You must remember to include the
             coordinating conjunction, or you may commit a
             comma splice.

In formal writing, avoid beginning a sentence with a
coordinating conjunction.

   COMPLEX SENTENCES express complex and usually
unequal relationships between ideas. One idea is
"subordinated" to the main idea by using a subordinate
conjunction (like "while" or "although"). One idea is
"dependent" upon the other one for logic and completeness.
Complex sentences include one main clause and at least one
dependent clause (see Example 2 above). Often, it is stylistically
effective to begin your sentence with the dependent clause,
and place the main clause at the end for emphasis.

             subord. conjunction + subject + verb (this is the
            dependent clause), subject + verb (this is the

                               independent clause)

110 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
The following are all examples of                 complex
sentences. Subordinate conjunctions are in bold.

· When you make a complex sentence, you
   subordinate one idea to another.

· If you place the subordinate clause first, you
   give added emphasis to the main clause at the
   end.

· Despite the fact that many students try to use
   them that way.

         x NOTE: this last bullet is a sentence
           fragment, and not a subordinate clause.
           Subordinate clauses cannot stand on their
           own.

Check out this link for a list of subordinate conjunctions if you
would like to see more examples.

   COMPOUND-COMPLEX SENTENCES have at least two
independent clauses and at least one dependent clause.
Because a compound-complex sentence is usually quite long,
you must be careful that it makes sense; it is easy for the reader
to get lost in a long sentence.

   Given the complex nature of the structure, let's look at a few
examples and break them down into their parts:

          Alphonse doesn't like action movies because they
       are so loud, so he doesn't watch them.

Independent Clause #1: Alphonse doesn't like action movies.

                                Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 111
   Dependent Clause: because they are so loud
   Independent Clause #2: he doesn't watch them.

          Although it will be close, I think we will meet the
       deadline, and we will complete the project.

Dependent Clause: Although it will be close
   Independent Clause #1: I think we will meet the deadline
   Independent Clause #2: we will complete the project.

          While our supervisor can be a bit of a jerk at times,
       he genuinely cares about the work and he wants to
       see us succeed.

Dependent Clause: While our supervisor can be a bit of a jerk
at times

   Independent Clause #1: he genuinely cares about the work
   Independent Clause #2: he wants to see us succeed

     EXERCISE #3 Identifying Sentence Types

        Read the sentences below and identify which
     sentence structure is being used.

112 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
                    An interactive H5P element has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You
         can view it online here:
         https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=354#h5p-3

EXERCISE #4: Combining sentences

   Below are two sentences separated by a line ( | ).
Combine the pair of sentences to make one idea
subordinate to the other. You can do this by either
writing them down, or thinking it in your brain. When
you have an answer, click on the sentences to see two
possible answers.

   Notice the impression you convey by how you
subordinate one idea to another. If your combined
sentence was a topic sentence for a paragraph, what
idea would the reader expect that paragraph to
emphasize?

                          Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 113
                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=354#h5p-4

Now that you have an idea of different sentence structures, let's
focus on specific issues that can damage your writing. Below,
you will find links to other chapters, each with it's own specific
writing focus. Since everyone's needs are going to be different,
we want you to focus on one chapter that you think you need
the most help with. Each section will have activities for you to
do to check your understanding of the content.

   If you're not sure which to choose, ask your self the questions
below. If you don't know the answer, then click the link to be
taken to the appropriate section.

  · Are your sentences often too short, and not conveying
      complete ideas? (Sentence Fragments)

  · Do you write in long, confusing sentences and not know
      how to break them up? (Run-On Sentences)

  · When is it appropriate to use the passive voice? Is a
      nominalization a good thing? (Verb Tense)

  · Do you know how to use a semicolon or colon?
      (Punctuation)

  · Have you ever been told that your writing needs to be
      trimmed down? (Eliminating Wordiness)

114 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
Key Takeaways

     · A sentence must have a subject and verb to
        form a complete idea.

     · A clause has both a subject and verb. There are
        two types of clauses: an independent clause
        (which can stand alone) and a dependent clause
        (which can not stand alone).

     · Using a variety of sentence types as well as
        using these types strategically to convey your
        ideas will strengthen your style. Keep the
        following in mind:

              Simple sentences are great for emphasis.
                 The make great topic sentences.

              Compound sentences balance ideas; they
                 are great for conveying the equal
                 importance of related ideas.

              Complex sentences, when you use them
                 effectively, show complicated relationships
                 between ideas by subordinating one idea to
                 another.

              Compound-complex sentences can add
                 complexity to your writing, but you need be
                 make sure it the writing doesn't lose the
                 reader.

     · Ultimately, using a combination of these
        structures will make your writing stronger.

                          Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence | 115
References

Purdue Writing Lab. (n.d.). Parts of                   speech
overview. https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/
mechanics/parts_of_speech_overview.html

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus). It is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

116 | Chapter 9: The Basic Elements of a Sentence
Chapter 10: Sentence
Fragments

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Explain the cause of sentence fragments
          · Identify three different types of sentence
             f ragments
          · Apply strategies to fix sentence fragments

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · sentence fragments
          · preposition
          · prepositional fragment
          · subordinate conjunction
          · subordinate conjunction fragment
          · gerund
          · gerund fragment

                                                                           Chapter 10: Sentence
                                                                                  Fragments | 117
It's inevitable. In using a variety of sentence types in your
writing, you will have errors. One of the most common errors
that writers make are sentence fragments.

The Basics

In past writing assignments, your professor may have written
the word "Fragment" or "frag" or even "not a complete
sentence" on your paper. A sentence fragment is a sentence
that is missing a subject or a verb. While the sentence may
include a description or may express part of an idea, it does not
express a complete thought, and that is the issue.

   Look at the example below:

                         Children helping in the kitchen.

The above example is a sentence fragment. It does not
express a complete thought. If you read it out loud, it should
sound like something is missing. In this case, a verb is missing.

   Now, you might say, "Wait a minute, isn't `help' a verb?" Well,
often it is a verb, but in this case it is not. What we have here is
known as a gerund phrase. We'll explain this in more detail in
a little bit, but, essentially, what that means is that the entire
phrase above serves as the subject for the sentence. That's
right! Multiple words can combine to make a single subject!

   Thankfully, you can easily fix this type of fragment by adding
the missing subject or verb. In the example, the sentence was
missing a verb. Adding often make a mess makes this a
complete sentence.

118 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
              Children helping in the kitchen often make a
                                           mess.

It's that easy! If someone tells you there is a sentence
fragment in your writing, first figure out whether you're
missing a subject, verb, or both, and then fill it in.

     Exercise #1: What is Missing?

        Read each sentence fragment below and decide if a
     subject or verb is missing. Then, try to come up with a
     fix on your own. Click on the arrow to check your
     answer.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=891#h5p-16

Before we dive into different types of sentence fragments and
how to fix them, here's a short video that will provide an
overview.

                                                 Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 119
                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=891#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/fixfrags

Identifying Sentence Fragments

Let's get a little more technical now. We know that a sentence
fragment occurs when a subject or verb is missing from a
sentence. Sentence fragments also occur because of some
common error, such as starting a sentence with a preposition,
a subordinate conjunction, or a gerund --don't worry, we'll
explain what those are in a minute. If you use the four basic
sentence structures when you write, you should be able to
avoid these errors and thus avoid writing sentence fragments.
Nevertheless, mistakes still happen, so it's important to know
what to look for while you revise.

Preposition Fragments

Prepositions serve a lot of different purposes. These are words
such as in, on, at, of, and under (and there are many, many
more). Essentially, they are used to show relationships between
words.

   For example:

120 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
                            The dog is under the table.

under is the preposition as it shows where the dog is in relation
to the table. For more background on what a preposition is,
check out this link from Grammarly.

   When you see a preposition in a sentence, check to see that it
is part of a sentence containing a subject and a verb. If it is not
connected to a complete sentence, it is a sentence fragment.

   Here is an example of a preposition fragment:

                              After walking two miles.

In the above example, after is the preposition and we are also
missing a subject. Who is walking the two miles?

   Let's try this again.

            After walking over two miles. John remembered
                                        his wallet.

Now we have two sentences. Does that fix the problem? We
know who did the walking now. It's John.

   Well, no. It doesn't. "After walking over two miles" is still a
sentence fragment because it is missing the subject. Even
if it's explained in the next sentence, it still doesn't work
grammatically because it's not a complete idea.

   Luckily, the problem is an easy fix. You can combine the
sentence fragment with the second sentence.

                                                 Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 121
   The easy way is to replace the period with a comma:

            After walking over two miles, John remembered
                                        his wallet.

You can also rearrange the sentence so the preposition
fragment goes at the end of the sentence. Just make sure you
drop the comma.

             John remembered his wallet after walking over
                                       two miles.

Is one version better than the other? Technically, no. As with
all writing, the best approach depends on context. If you have
an entire paragraph that starts with only prepositional phrases,
it's going to look a little odd. It's all about balance and using a
variety of sentence structures to make your writing stand out.

Subordinate Conjunction Fragments

Do you remember subordinate conjunctions from the chapter
on sentence structure? Subordinate conjunctions include
words such as since, because, without, or unless. Like
prepositions , they serve many different purposes. For more
background on how subordinate conjunctions work, check
out this link from Grammarly.

122 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
   Take a look at the incorrect example sentence below. In this
case, because is the subordinate conjunction.

                              Because we lost power.

"Now hold on!" you might be saying, "you said at the start
of this chapter that a sentence fragment is missing either a
subject or a verb, and that first sentence has both!"

   You're right. It does. There is a subject (we) and a verb (lost),
but since the sentence begins with "because," it does not feel
like a complete idea. Read it out loud. It should sound like
something is missing. Its incompleteness suggests that it's a
sentence fragment, and more specifically, a subordinate
conjunction fragment! Fortunately, there is an easy fix. Let's
add another sentence just like last time.

                  Because we lost power. The entire family
                                        overslept.

Does something about this type of sentence seem familiar? It
should! Structurally, it should remind you of the prepositional
fragment we just fix. Many writers will try adding a another
sentence to fix their sentence fragments like in the example
above and not actually fixing anything! The example above
is obviously still wrong, but its similarity to the prepositional
fragment example suggests how to fix it.

                                                Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 123
                  Because we lost power, the entire family
                                        overslept.

           The entire family overslept because we lost power.

Be sure not to forget to include that comma between the two
sentences if the subordinate conjunction starts the sentence.

Gerund Fragments

Gerunds are a little more complicated. Essentially, when a word
ends in -ing, it can be either a noun, an adjective, or a verb. If
the -ing word is noun, or, in some cases, an adjective, then it is
known as a gerund.

   Let's use the word "singing" as an example.

                     She is singing at the festival tonight.

In the above example, singing is combined with a helper verb
(is) to make is singing. In this case, singing is being used as a
verb.

   Now look at this example.

124 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
                        Singing is what I was born to do!

Don't be fooled! Singing looks the exact same, but it's not being
used as a verb anymore. It's a noun! More specifically, it's the
subject of the sentence. Now it's agerund!

   Let's look at one other example with the word working:

          Verb: I was working on my part of the report until
       midnight.

          Gerund: Working on reports until midnight make
       me tired the next morning.

In the first sentence, working has a helping verb (was) which
means it's the verb form. In the second sentence, working is
being used as the subject of the sentence, which makes it a
noun. Therefore, it is a gerund.

   If you need a little more help understanding gerunds, check
out this link from Grammarly.

   So what do these gerunds have to do with sentence
fragments? Let's look an an example of a gerund fragment:

                 Taking deep breaths. Saul prepared for his
                                     presentation.

In that example, taking is the gerund. Does the first sentence
make sense on it's own? Does it sound like a complete idea?

                                                Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 125
   No. It doesn't.
   So how do we fix this? Well, like the other two fragment
types we covered, we can combine the fragment with the next
sentence by using a comma instead of a period.

                 Taking deep breaths, Saul prepared for his
                                     presentation.

You can also rearrange the order of the sentences. However,
when you do that, you may have to add words so it makes
sense.

           Saul prepared for his presentation by taking deep
                                        breathes.

You can also change the gerund back into a verb by changing
the structure of the sentences.

                Saul prepared for his presentation. He was
                               taking deep breaths.

Notice that we can tell taking is a verb now because it has a
helping verb (was).

126 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
Sentence Fragment Review

As we've seen, sentence fragments can take many different
forms. Fortunately, they are easy to fix. It's all a matter of
knowing what to look for and making sure your fixes make
sense. Let's test your understanding now.

     Exercise #2: Identify and Fix the Sentence Fragment

        Below you will see two sentences. One will be a
     sentence fragment, the other will be a complete
     sentence. First, identify which sentence is the fragment
     and what type it is: a preposition fragment, a
     subordinate conjunction fragment, or a gerund
     f ragment.

        Next, come up with a fix so that both sentences
     make grammatical sense. The solution will provide two
     possible solutions, since there are many ways you could
     fix the sentences. If you're not sure if your solution
     works, please check with your instructor.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=891#h5p-23

                                                Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 127
If you would like to watch another video on sentence
fragments, try this one:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=891#oembed-2

Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/senfragrev

     Key Takeaways

          · A sentence fragment occurs when it is missing
             either a subject, verb, or both.

          · They can generally be fixed by adding the
             missing elements to the sentence. The most
             common issue is that a verb is a missing.

          · There are also different types of fragments:
             prepositional fragments, subordinate
             conjunction fragments, and gerund fragments.

Now that you are finished with this chapter, you can either
click on one of the other sentence-level issues and learn about
them, or continue to the next required chapter.

                                 Go To Another Topic
    Run-On Sentences | Verb Tense | Punctuation | Eliminating

                                       Wordiness

128 | Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments
References

EnglishClub.  (n.d.). Preposition             list.

https://www.englishclub.com/grammar/prepositions-list.htm

Grammarly.    (2017,         April            7). Gerund.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/gerund/

Ross, B. (2021, January 14). Prepositions. Grammarly.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/prepositions/

Traffis, C. (2020, December 16). What is a subordinating

conjunction? Grammarly. https://www.grammarly.com/blog/

subordinating-conjunctions/

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Communication at Work" by
Jordan Smith (on Open Library). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

   This chapter is also adapted from "Writing for Success" by
University of Minnesota (on University of Minnesota Libraries
Publishing). It is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

                      Chapter 10: Sentence Fragments | 129
Chapter 11: Run-on
Sentences

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Explain the cause of a run-on sentence
          · Differentiate between a fused sentence and a
             comma splice
          · Apply three strategies to fix run-on sentences

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · run-on sentence
          · fused sentence
          · comma splice
          · coordinating conjunctions
          · subordinate conjunctions
          · transition words

It's inevitable. In using a variety of sentence types in your
130 | Chapter 11: Run-on
Sentences
writing, you will have errors. One of the most common errors
students have are run-on sentences.

The Basics

Just as short, incomplete sentences can be problematic,
lengthy sentences can be problematic too.

   As writers we want to ensure our sentences are always form
a complete idea to avoid confusion for our reader. A "complete
sentence" is also known as an independent clause which we
learned about in the previous chapter. Here's an example:

          I have to complete my project by tomorrow. It is
       worth 30% of my grade.

Both sentences are independent clauses. They both express a
complete idea.

   However, many people make mistakes when they incorrectly
combine two or more independent clauses. This is what is
known as a run-on sentence.

   A run-on sentence can take two main forms. Before we tell
you what those are, so if you articulate it on your own. Read the
examples below and see if you can identify what is wrong with
each.

          Example #1: I have to complete my project by
       tomorrow it is worth 30% of my grade.

                                                      Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 131
       Example #2: I have to complete my project by
       tomorrow, it is worth 30% of my grade.

Example #1 is known as a fused sentence. This means that two
independent clauses are combined without any punctuation.

   Example #2 is known as comma splice. This means that two
independent clauses are incorrectly joined by a comma.

   Look at two more examples below. Can you tell which one is
a fused sentence and which is a comma splice?

          Example #1: We looked outside, the kids were
       hopping on the trampoline.

          Example #2: A family of foxes lived under our shed
       young foxes play all over the yard.

Example #1 is a comma splice. Example #2 is a fused sentence.
Let's do some more practice identifying the two.

     Exercise #1: Fused Sentence or Comma Splice?

        Read the run-on sentences below. Decide if they are
     an example of a fused sentence or a comma splice.

132 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=893#h5p-27

Fixes for Run-on Sentences

While run-on sentences are extremely common, they are also
easily fixed by using punctuation, coordinating conjunctions,
or subordinate conjunctions.

Punctuation

A period and a semicolon are the most common punctuation
marks used to fix run-on sentences.

   A period will correct the error by creating two separate
sentences.

                                                     Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 133
          Run-on: There were no seats left, we had to stand
       in the back.

          Complete Sentence: There were no seats left. We
       had to stand in the back.

Using a semicolon between the two complete sentences will
also correct the error. A semicolon allows you to keep two
closely related ideas together in one sentence. When you
punctuate with a semicolon, make sure that both parts of the
sentence are independent clauses.

   Many people mistakenly assume a semicolon can be used
like a comma, and that is not correct.

          Run-on: The accident closed both lanes of traffic
       we waited an hour for the wreckage to be cleared.

          Complete Sentence: The accident closed both
       lanes of traffic; we waited an hour for the wreckage
       to be cleared.

Make sure that both ideas are closely related before you use a
semicolon. If they are not related, you cannot use a semicolon.

   For example, a semicolon can't be used in the following
sentence because both ideas are not related:

134 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
          Incorrect Semicolon Use: The accident closed
       both lanes of traffic; we ate fast food for dinner.

Now, you might be saying, "What if they ate fast food because
of the accident? Wouldn't the two sentences be related then?"

   In such a case, you may be right. But it falls on the writer to
make that distinction clear to the reader. It's your job to make
sure the connection between your ideas is clear! This can be
done with transition words.

   When you use a semicolon to separate two independent
clauses, you may wish to add a transition word to show the
connection between the two thoughts.

   After the semicolon, add the transition word and follow it
with a comma:

          Run-on: The project was put on hold we didn't
       have time to slow down, so we kept working.

          Complete Sentence: The project was put on
       hold; however, we didn't have time to slow down, so
       we kept working.

We can also apply this to our incorrect example above:

                                                     Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 135
          Incorrect Semicolon Use: The accident closed
       both lanes of traffic; we ate fast food for dinner.

          Correct Semicolon Use: The accident closed both
       lanes of traffic; therefore, we ate fast food for dinner.

Coordinating Conjunctions

You can also fix run-on sentences by adding a comma and
a coordinating conjunction.

   Remember, a coordinating conjunction acts as a link
between two clauses.

          These are the seven coordinating conjunctions
       that you can use: for, and, nor, but, or, yet, and so.

Use these words appropriately when you want to link the two
independent clauses.

          Run-on: The new printer was installed, no one
       knew how to use it.

136 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
          Complete Sentence: The new printer was
       installed, but no one knew how to use it.

Subordinate Conjunctions

Adding subordinate conjunctions is another way to link
independent clauses. Like the coordinating conjunctions,
subordinate conjunctions show a relationship between two
independent clauses. There are many different subordinate
conjunctions. Check out this link to see a list.

          Run-on: We took the elevator, the others still got
       there before us.

          Complete Sentence: Although we took the
       elevator, the others got there before us.

In the example above, the run-on is a comma splice, which
results from joining two complete ideas with a comma. In the
correct example, the subordinating conjunction
although appears at the start to show the relationship
between the sentences. Now, it's okay to combine both
sentences with a comma.

   Here's another example:

                                                     Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 137
          Run-on: Cobwebs covered the furniture the room
       hadn't been used in years.

          Complete sentence: Cobwebs covered the
       furniture because the room hadn't been used in
       years.

In this example, the run-on is a fused sentence. We fixed this
issue by inserting the subordinate conjunction because in-
between both sentences.

     Exercise #2: Fixing Run-on Sentences

        A reader can get lost or lose interest in material that
     is too dense and rambling. This can easily happen
     when there are too many run-on sentences in a
     paragraph. Use what you have learned to correct the
     following passages. When you think you have a
     solution, compare it to the possible answer. Changes
     are bolded and colored purple.

        If your answers are a little different, that's okay, as
     long as you followed the strategies we discussed. If
     you're not sure, please ask your instructor.

138 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
   The report is due on Wednesday, but we're
flying back from Miami that morning. I told
the project manager that we would be able
to get the report to her later that day she
suggested that we come back a day early to
get the report done and I told her we had
meetings until our flight took off. We e-
mailed our contact who said that they would
check with his boss, she said that the project
could afford a delay as long as they wouldn't
have to make any edits or changes to the file
our new deadline is next Friday.

           An interactive H5P element has been
           excluded from this version of the text. You
can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=893#h5p-24

   Anna tried getting a reservation at the
restaurant, but when she called they said

                                      Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 139
             that there was a waiting list so she put our
             names down on the list when the day of our
             reservation arrived we only had to wait thirty
             minutes because a table opened up
             unexpectedly which was good because we
             were able to catch a movie after dinner in the
             time we'd expected to wait to be seated.

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=893#h5p-25

                Without a doubt, my favorite artist is
             Leonardo da Vinci, not because of his
             paintings but because of his fascinating
             designs, models, and sketches, including
             plans for scuba gear, a flying machine, and a
             life-size mechanical lion that actually walked

140 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
        and moved its head. His paintings are
        beautiful too, especially when you see the
        computer enhanced versions researchers use
        a variety of methods to discover and enhance
        the paintings' original colors, the result of
        which are stunningly vibrant and yet delicate
        displays of the man's genius.

                    An interactive H5P element has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You
         can view it online here:
         https://openpress.usask.ca/
         rcm200/?p=893#h5p-26

Key Takeaways

     · A run-on sentence occurs when two or more
        independent clauses are connected without
        proper punctuation

                                                Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 141
· There are two types of run-on sentences: a
   fused sentence and a comma splice.

· A fused sentence occurs when two
   independent clauses are combined without
   punctuation.

· A comma splice occurs when two independent
   clauses are combined with a comma.

· Both types of run-on sentences can be fixed by
   adding correct punctuation, a coordinating
   conjunction, or a subordinate conjunction to the
   sentence. The one that's best depends on the
   information the writer is trying to convey.

Now that you are finished with this chapter, you can either
click on one of the other sentence-level issues and learn about
them, or continue on to the next required chapter.

                                 Go To Another Topic
            Sentence Fragments | Verb Tense | Punctuation |

                              Eliminating Wordiness

References

Possel, H.  (n.d.). Transition      Words.  Smart

Words. https://www.smart-words.org/linking-words/transition-

words.html

Traffis, C. (2020, December 16). What is a subordinating

conjunction? Grammarly. https://www.grammarly.com/blog/

subordinating-conjunctions/

142 | Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences
Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Communication at Work" by
Jordan Smith (on Open Library). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

   This chapter is also adapted from "Writing for Success" by
University of Minnesota (on University of Minnesota Libraries
Publishing). It is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

                                                     Chapter 11: Run-on Sentences | 143
Chapter 12: Verb Tense

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Identify the purpose of verbs
          · Explain why maintaining a consistent verb
             tense is important
          · Explain how using the active voice and avoiding
             nominalizations can make your writing more
             direct.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · verb tense
          · simple present
          · simple past
          · simple future
          · active voice
          · passive voice
          · nominalization

144 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
All starting writers struggle with verb tenses. More specifically,
they tend to struggle with keeping the tenses consistent,
especially in long documents.

   If you've ever received feedback from a professor like
"inconsistent tense" or "passive voice" then it generally means
something is wrong with your verbs. It's important to fix this
issue because keeping verb tenses consistent will ensure your
audience knows whether an event happened in the past,
present, or future.

   In this chapter, we will briefly review verbs, discuss different
verb tenses, and finish off by discussing how to avoid the
passive voice and nominalizations.

The Basics

Verbs do two things. First, they are the action of the sentence.
They tell the reader what sort of action you, someone, or
something, did.

          I walked to the store.

In the above example, the verb "walked" tells the reader what
kind of action brought you to the store. We know the person
didn't run, skip, or saunter to the store: they walked.

   The second thing verbs do is tell the audience when
something happened. This is where verb tenses come in. In
the same example, "walked" is in the past tense so we know
the event happened in the past. There are three main tenses:
present, past, and future. However, within those three tenses
are several more.

                                                                Chapter 12: Verb Tense | 145
                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=372#h5p-28

That is certainly a lot of verb tenses, but, thankfully, you will
not have to use all of them in professional communication. In
fact, you will mostly be using simple present, simple past and
simple future. The issue that most people run into, though, is
being consistent with their verb tenses.

Maintaining Consistent Verb Tense

Consistent verb tense means the same verb tense is used
throughout a sentence or a paragraph. As you write and revise,
make sure you use the same verb tense consistently and avoid
shifting from one tense to another unless there is a good
reason for it.

   Let's look at an example. In the following box, can you see
how the tense is inconsistent?

          We will submit the report after I finished my
       section.

There are two different verb tenses being used here: simple
future (will submit) and simple past (finished). Let's fix this
problem by keeping the tenses consistent.

146 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
          Simple Future: We will submit the report after I
       finish my section
       Simple Past: We submitted the report after I
       finished my section

As you can see, there are two ways to fix this program. While
both are now grammatically correct, the one you use will
depend on what information you are trying to convey.

     Exercise #1: Pick the Inconsistent Verb Tense

   Read the sentences below. Pick the one that uses
inconsistent verb tense.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=372#h5p-30

Now, in some cases, clear communication will call for different
tenses. Look at the following example:

          When I was a teenager, I wanted to be a
       firefighter, but now I am studying computer

Chapter 12: Verb Tense | 147
       science.

In the above example, the writer talks about a past desire and
their present situation. Whenever the time frame for each
action or state is different, a tense shift is appropriate.

     Exercise #2: Identify the Incorrect Verb Choice

   Read the email below for incorrect verb tenses. Click
all the verbs that use the wrong tense.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=372#h5p-31

The inconsistent tense in the e-mail will very likely distract the
reader from its overall point. In the professional world, your
coworkers will most likely not correct your verb tenses or call
attention to grammatical errors, but it is important to keep
in mind that these errors do have a subtle negative impact
in the workplace, just as they do when applying for jobs and
communicating with clients. If you keep making small
mistakes like this, the receiver of your message may assume
you do not pay attention to little details.

148 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
Simplifying Verbs

Another issue that writers have is overcomplicating their verbs
with extra words. In almost every instance, if you realize you
can simplify your writing by taking out words, that is the best
option. In regards to verbs, the issue typically stems from
writers using passive voice and nominalizations in their
writing.

Active Voice and Passive Voice

Even when writers have consistent verb tenses, they often
overcomplicate their writing by expressing the action in as
many words as possible. One way they do this is by using the
passive voice. Consider the following sentences, for instance.
Which would you prefer to read?

PASSIVE VOICE                      ACTIVE VOICE

The candidate cannot be supported  Our members
by our membership.                 cannot support the
                                   candidate.

Most readers would prefer the second option. Why? Here, the
active voice construction on the right uses two fewer words
to say the same thing. As a result, it is more direct than the
passive voice construction. How does it do that?

   First, let's define the two terms. Active voice is a sentence
structure where the subject carries out the action. Passive
voice is a sentence structure where the subject receives the
action.

   Essentially, it all comes down to the subject and verb. Who
is the subject of the passive voice sentence? It's not "the
candidate" because the action of the sentence is not being

                                   Chapter 12: Verb Tense | 149
done by them. The subject is "our membership" because they
are the ones doing the supporting.

   In the active voice sentence, "members" has been moved
to the start of the sentence. It is clear that they are doing the
action.

   Both sentences are valid grammatically. You could use either
format in your writing, and the reader would understand what
you are saying. However, the active voice is generally the better
one to use since active sentences tend to be shorter, more
precise, and easier to understand.

   There are legitimate uses of the passive voice though. When
you want to deemphasize the doer of the action, passive voice
is a good choice. Look at the example below.

                 Ten late arrivals were recorded this month

In this example, the passive voice above doesn't place blame or
credit, so it can be more diplomatic in some contexts. Passive
voice also allows the writer to avoid personal references or
personal pronouns (he, she, they) to create a more objective
tone. Additionally, there are situations where the doer of the
action is unknown, as in the following example.

          Graffiti was painted on the side of our building last
                                           night.

We don't know who created the graffiti, so a passive form is
useful here.

   However, keep in mind that overusing the passive voice
sounds unnatural and appears as an attempt to extend the

150 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
word count or sound more fancy and objective. Most readers
prefer the active voice because the passive voice is either
more wordy or vague. Nevertheless, it is important to consider
what is conventional in the type of writing you're engaging
in--for instance, certain disciplines require that lab reports use
the passive voice.

Nominalization

Another issue that overcomplicates writing is when writers
turn the main action they describe into nouns, a process called
nominalization. This involves taking a verb and adding a suffix
such as -ant, -ent, -ion, -tion, -sion, -ence, -ance, or -ing, as well
as adding forms of other verbs, such as "to make" or "to give."
Nominalization may also require articles (the, a, or an) before
the action nouns. Consider the following comparisons of
nominalized-verb sentences with simplified verb forms:

                                                                 Chapter 12: Verb Tense | 151
NOMINALIZED FORM                   SIMPLIFIED FORM

The committee had                  The committee discussed the
a discussion about the new budget  new budget constraints.
constraints.

We will make                       We
a recommendation to proceed        will recommend proceeding
with the investment option.        with the investment option.

They handed down                   They judged that the offer
a judgment that the offer wasn't   wasn't worth their time.
worth their time.

The regulator                      The regulator will approve the
will grant approval of the new     new process within the week.
process within the week.

He always gives me advice on what He always advises me on

to say to the media.               what to say to the media.

She's giving your                  She's passing on your
application a pass because of all  application because of all the
the errors in it.                  errors in it.

You can tell that the simplified sentences have greater impact
than those that use nominalizations. In all of the
nominalization examples, more words are required to say the
same thing. When writing contains all three issues we've
discussed (inconsistent verb tense, passive voice, and
nominalizations), it becomes muddled and lacks the clarity
that is expected in professional writing

Exercise #3: Identify the Verb Issue and Simplify

   Read the sentences below. Determine whether there
is an issue with the passive voice or nominalizations.
Then, try to simplify the sentence. Please note that our
solution is just one possible solution. If yours doesn't

152 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
match, it could still be correct. Check with your
instructor if you're not sure.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=372#h5p-32

Key Takeaways

     · Verb tense helps you express when an event
        takes place.

     · Maintaining consistency among verb tenses in
        your writing will ensure your communication is
        clear. While there are twelve different tenses in
        English, the three you will be using the most
        are simple present, simple past, and simple
        future.

     · A more direct style of writing is almost always
        preferable. Therefore, it is often to best to avoid
        the passive voice and nominalizations.

Now that you are finished you can either click on one of the
                                                                Chapter 12: Verb Tense | 153
other sentence-level issues and learn about them, or continue
to the next part of the chapter on quoting.

                               Go To Another Topic
     Sentence Fragments | Run-On Sentences | Punctuation |

                              Eliminating Wordiness

References

Grammarly.  (2021,            January  14). Verb  tenses.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/verb-tenses/

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from Business Communications for
Fashion by Anna Cappuccitti (on openpress.usask.ca). It is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

   This chapter is also adapted from Business Communication
for Success by the University of Minnesota (on University of
Minnesota Libraries Publishing). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License

154 | Chapter 12: Verb Tense
Chapter 13:
Punctuation

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · List the differences between a comma,
             semicolon, and colon
          · Explain when to use a semicolon instead of a
             comma in a list
          · Determine which punctuation to use in a
             sentence

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · comma
          · semicolon
          · colon
          · independent clause
          · coordinating conjunction
          · subordinate conjunction

                                                              Chapter 13: Punctuation | 155
"Punctuation marks are the road signs placed along the
highway of our communication, to control speeds, provide
directions and prevent head-on collisions" (Iyer, 2001).

The Basics

Consider how punctuation can change the meaning of the
following run-on sentence:

          I have two hours to kill someone come see me.

The main function of punctuation is to separate phrases and
clauses into meaningful units of information. Therefore, it is
necessary to understand the basic structure of
sentences--phrases and clauses--to understand the proper
uses of punctuation. When punctuation is missing or
incorrectly used, the reader may get a completely different
message than the one intended.

   Take the sample sentence above. A period placed in the
wrong place makes a huge difference in terms of the
information that is communicated to the reader.

          Example #1: I have two hours to kill. Someone
       come see me.
       Example: #2: I have two hours to kill someone. Come
       see me.

Here's another example using commas.

156 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
          Example #1: Let's eat, grandma!
       Example #2: Let's eat grandma!

Obviously, all the above examples communicate drastically
different messages. Errors like this can not only confuse readers
and waste time, but can have disastrous results in cases where
the writing has legal, economic, or safety implications.

The article "Comma Quirk Irks Rogers" provides an example
of how a punctuation error can have real world costs and
consequences. One comma error in a 10-page contract cost
Rogers Communication $2 million dollars (Robertson, 2016). If
you need further evidence, read about the case of the trucker's
comma that went all the way to the supreme court, resulting in
a $10 million dollar payout (Nast, 2017)!

   There are several helpful rules that will help you determine
where and how to use punctuation, but first, it might be
helpful to understand the origins. Punctuation was initially
developed to help people who were giving speeches or reading
aloud. Various kinds of punctuation indicated when and for
how long the reader should pause between phrases, clauses,
and sentences:

                                 Comma = 1 second pause
                                 Semicolon = 2 second pause
                                 Colon = 3 second pause
                                 Period = 4 second pause

                                                              Chapter 13: Punctuation | 157
These "pause rules" can still offer some guidance, but they
are not foolproof since there are many reasons that someone
might pause while speaking. These reasons can be that the
speaker simply ran out of breath, got distracted, or needed
time to think of a word.

   Below are some more consistent rules that you should follow
to properly punctuate your sentences. These rules are
presented in a numerical order to help you remember them
more easily. We will start with commas, since they are one of
the most common errors students make.

The Comma (,)

Commas are one of the most versatile pieces of punctuation
out there. They can do many things, which means they are easy
to use incorrectly. Before jumping into the five rules, here is
a video that provides a quick overview. The video focuses on
how commas are used with coordinating conjunctions and
subordinate conjunctions which you should already be
familiar with.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=387#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/commaTED
   Now let's get to the rules.

158 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
        COMMA RULE #1 - Introduce the Subject

        If the subject is not the first word/phrase in the
     sentence, place a comma before it to separate it clearly
     from the introductory element and indicate clearly
     what the subject of the sentence is.

Sentences are most often strongest when the subject is the
first element of the sentence. However, sometimes the subject
needs to be delayed until later in the sentence.

   Take a look at the following example:

              Before starting the project, we should ask the
                           customer what they want.

The subject of the sentence is "we" but that is delayed by the
introductory phrase "Before starting the project." Including
that comma helps the reader understand the meaning of the
sentence by helping them identify the subject more easily.

   While it is still possible that a reader will understand the
sentence if the comma is left out, there are times where a
comma is absolutely essential. Otherwise, the sentence will be
unclear.

   In the following sentence, see if you can determine what the
subject is without a comma to help you:

                                                             Chapter 13: Punctuation | 159
               Based on that initial design concepts will be
                                       generated.

The subject--and therefore the meaning of the
sentence--depends on where you place the comma. It could
go in a couple of places. If the initial phrase is "Based on that,"
and "that" refers to some previously stated idea, then the
sentence indicates that the subject is "initial design concepts,"
and the verb is "will be generated." Here's what that would look
like:

               Based on that, initial design concepts will be
                                       generated.

However, if the initial phrase is "Based on that initial design,"
then we already have an initial design to work from and do not
have to generate one. We are now focusing on creating more
advanced "concepts," that will be "based on that initial design."

   Here's what that would look like:

               Based on that initial design, concepts will be
                                       generated.

So if the subject is not the first word in your sentence, place
a comma before it to clearly show what the subject is (hence
"comma rule #1").

160 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
   In each of the following examples, the subject of the main
clause is bolded.

After an           Finally, the design must consider all
introductory word  constraints.

After an           Initially, the design must meet early
introductory       objectives.
phrase
                   Meeting all the client's needs, this design has
After a            the potential to be very successful.
subordinate
clause                Unlike Emma, Karla loves mechatronics.

                   If the design meets all the objectives, we will
                   get a get a raise.

                   Although we are slightly over budget, the
                   design will be cost effective overall.

                      While he interviews the client, she will do a
                   site survey.

COMMA RULE #2 - Interrupt the Subject and Verb

        Never place a single comma between the subject
     and verb of the sentence; you need either two commas
     (like brackets) or no commas between the subject and
     verb.

When you place an interrupting word, phrase, or clause
between the subject and verb, if that phrase is a non-essential
element, you must enclose that phrase in commas (use the
"bracket test": if you could enclose it in brackets, then you can
use commas). If the phrase is essential to the meaning, omit
the commas.

   The words interrupting the subject and verb are bolded in
the examples below.

                   Chapter 13: Punctuation | 161
Interrupting word         Communication errors, unfortunately,
                          can lead to disastrous design flaws.

                          The rules, however, are quite easy to
                          learn.

Interrupting              The Johnson street bridge, commonly
                          known as the "Blue Bridge," had to be
Nonessential Phrase       replaced.

or Clause                 The new bridge, completed last year, is
                          a rolling bascule design.
(these phrases or
clauses could be             The new bridge, which is a rolling
bracketed, and even       bascule design, was completed last year.
omitted, without
changing the meaning
of the sentence)

Interrupting Essential    The objective that is most critical to our
phrases or clauses        success is the first one.

do not use commas;        That bridge that needed replacing was
these phrases or clauses  the Blue Bridge.
are essential to the
meaning of the sentence      The man with the yellow hat belongs
                          to Curious George.

                             The student who has the best design
                          will get an innovator's award.

If you would like more information on Essential vs Non-
Essential elements, and when to use "that" vs "which," check
out this Grammar Girl link: Which versus That

   Beware the "Pause Rule"--many comma rule #2 errors
occur when a sentence has a long subject phrase followed
by the verb "is." People have the tendency to want to place
a comma here, even though it is incorrect, simply because
they would normally pause here when speaking. Below is an
example of the wrong use:

   The main thing that you must be sure to
remember about the magnificent Chinese pandas
of the southwest, is that they can be dangerous.

In this case, a comma should not be used.
162 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
        COMMA RULE #3 - The Serial Comma

        When listing a series of 3 or more items, separate the
     items with commas.

Whether you are listing 3 or more nouns, verb, adjectives,
phrases, or even clauses, use commas to separate them. In
general, do not place a comma before the first item or after
the last item. If you are only listing two items, do not separate
them with commas. Note what happens when you forget to
put commas in the following sentence:

                    I love cooking my family and my pets.

The author may have intended to list three things that she
loves, but without punctuation, she ends up listing two things
she loves to cook. Here is the correct version:

                   I love cooking, my family, and my pets.

Only use the commas if there are three or more elements
being listed. Make sure to list the elements in a consistent
grammatical form (all nouns, or all verbs, or all using parallel
phrasing).

                                                             Chapter 13: Punctuation | 163
2 listed       All initial designs must incorporate mechanical
elements       structures and electrical systems. (2 nouns)

(no commas     Squirrels eat acorns and sleep in trees. (1 subject + 2
needed)        verbs)

3 listed       The final design must incorporate mechanical,
elements       electrical, and software subsystems. (3 adjectives
               describing different subsystems)

               Squirrels eat acorns, sleep in trees, and dig holes in
               the garden. (3 verbs)

                  The proposed designs must not go over budget,
               use more than the allotted equipment, or take
               longer than 1 week to construct. (3 verbs: go, use,
               and take)

faulty         Proposed design concepts must adhere to all
parallel       constraints, meet all objectives, and the
phrasing       components x must be on the approved list. (2
               verbs and a 1 noun)
(one of these
things is not  The new bridge is aesthetically pleasing, structurally
like the       sound, and has x a pedestrian walkway. (2
others...)     adjectives and 1 verb)

There is some debate about whether to place a comma before
the "and" used before the final listed item. This comma,
referred to as the Oxford Comma since it is required by Oxford
University Press, is optional in many situations. For an optional
piece of punctuation, the Oxford Comma has stirred up a
surprising amount of controversy!

   Here's a video that explains that controversy, if you're
interested.

          One or more interactive elements has been
          excluded from this version of the text. You can

164 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=387#oembed-2

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/oxfordcontr
        COMMA RULE #4 - Joining Clauses

        Separate independent clauses by placing a comma
     before the coordinating conjunction.

While you might occasionally omit commas if the two clauses
you want to join are very short ("She drove and he navigated."),
it is a good habit to separate them with a comma for the sake
of clarity.

   The mnemonic device for remembering the coordinating
conjunctions that can link two independent clauses together
is FANBOYS (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so). When you have two
complete sentences, but you want to join them together to
make one larger idea, use a comma before the coordinating
conjunction.

                                                             Chapter 13: Punctuation | 165
 FANBOYS    Two clauses joined by a comma and coordinating
, for                                    conjunction
, and
, nor     Thank goodness next week is reading break, for we all
, but     need rest.
, or
          Vampires drink blood, and zombies eat brains.
, yet
          You should not play with vampires, nor should you
, so      hang around with zombies.

          The undead are not acceptable playmates, but
          werewolves are ok.

          You can simply avoid werewolves during the full
          moon, or you can lock them in the basement.

          Some rules of etiquette suggest it is rude to lock
          someone in the basement, yet safety is of paramount
          concern.

          I think you understand my concerns, so I will leave it
          at that.

COMMA RULE #5 - Signal to the reader

   Use commas to indicate that a non-essential
sentence element (a word, phrase, or clause) follows
the comma, or to signal an abrupt shift in thought.

166 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
Image #1: Punctuation makes all the difference

                                 Learning comma rules takes
                              practice, of course.

                                 Practice makes perfect, in the
                              long run.

                                 Vampires make everyone
                              nervous, even the bravest slayers.

                                 I told you I need it by Wednesday,
                              not Thursday.

Consider the difference between "It's raining cats and dogs"
and "It's raining, cats and dogs."

                                                             Chapter 13: Punctuation | 167
Exercise #1: Identify the Broken Rule and Fix

   Below are six sentences. Identify the rule being
broken, and put commas in the correct spots (if
needed).

          An interactive H5P element           has been
          excluded from this version           of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=387#h5p-36

The Semicolon (;)

Most people are pretty confident when it comes to rules
around the comma. The semicolon, on the other hand, is
another story entirely. Are they more like a comma, or more like
a period? Well, the answer is that they can be work like both,
depending on the situation of course!

   Here's a video that provides an overview:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can

168 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=387#oembed-3

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/semicolorules
   Semicolons are used to link ideas when something stronger

than a comma is needed. A semicolon has three main
functions. Here are the first two:

     Semicolon Rule #1

   Use a semicolon to join closely related independent
clauses into one sentence:

If the two independent clauses are closely related in content,
then a semicolon may be appropriate.

   Here is an example:

   Scott was impatient to get married; Sharon
wanted to wait until they were financially
secure.

The subject in both sentences are both            strongly
related--indeed, in this case, they are engaged!

Chapter 13: Punctuation | 169
     Semicolon Rule #2

        Use a semicolon to link two sentences joined by a
     transition word (however, therefore, finally, moreover,
     etc.)

Transition words are a great way to connect your sentences.
Here is an example:

          Canadian History is a rather dull class; however, it
       is a requirement for the elementary education
       program.

You may have noticed that in both examples above, a
semicolon works the same way a period does. If you could put
a period there, then you can put a semicolon there--as long as
both sentences are related. The semicolon simply connects the
ideas more closely as part of one key idea and makes the pause
between them a little shorter.

170 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
   The main rule you must
remember is that if you use a
semicolon in this way, the
clauses on either side of the
semicolon must be complete
sentences. You cannot use a
semicolon to introduce a phrase
or fragment.

   Complete sentence; complete
                 sentence.

   Think of the semicolon as
working like a hinge in a bi-fold
door; it joins two complete door
panels that each have their own
frame together as one.

   Also remember that you
cannot simply use a comma
instead of a semicolon to link the two clauses; doing so would
result in a comma splice.

     Semicolon Rule #3

        Use a semicolon to separate items in a complex list
     where one or more of the items have internal
     punctuation

Take a look at this sentence:

                                                              Chapter 13: Punctuation | 171
          The role of the vice-president will be to enhance
       the university's external relations, strengthen its
       relationship with alumni, donors, and community
       leaders, and implement fundraising programs.

Was it hard to read at all? It probably was because it's unclear
what list items should be grouped together. This is where the
third function of the semicolon comes in.

   Here's a correct example:

          The role of the vice-president will be to enhance
       the university's external relations; strengthen its
       relationship with alumni, donors, and community
       leaders; and implement fundraising programs.

In this case, the semicolon separates long, complex list items
that contain commas within them. Without the semicolon, we
have a complicated sentence that is difficult to read.

The Colon (:)

Like the semicolon, a colon is another type of punctuation that
confuses a lot of people. Thankfully, it serves a simple purpose.
Here is a video to review its use:

172 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
           One or more interactive elements has been
           excluded from this version of the text. You can
view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=387#oembed-4

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/linkingcolon
        COLON RULE

   Use a colon to introduce amplification in the form of
an example, explanation, quotation, summary, or list.

Keep in mind that when correctly used, colons are only placed
where the sentence could come to a complete stop (i.e. you
could put a period there instead).

Amplification  The hurricane lashed the coastal community:
Example        within two hours, every tree on the waterfront had
List           been blown down.

               The tour guide quoted Gerald Durrell's opinion of
               pandas: "They are vile beasts who eat far too many
               leaves."

               Today we examined two geographical areas: the
               Nile and the Amazon.

Remember that when introducing a list, example, or quotation
with a colon, whatever comes before the colon should be a
complete sentence. You should not write something like this:

               Today we examined: x

               Chapter 13: Punctuation | 173
                  Three important objectives we must consider
               are: x
If these clauses cannot end in a period, they should not end in
a colon. Whatever comes after the colon can be a fragment or
list; it does not have to be a complete sentence.

     Exercise #2: Comma, Semicolon, and Colon Review

   Read the sentences below. Drag and drop the correct
punctuation mark into each blank.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=387#h5p-38

     Key Takeaways

          · Proper punctuation is essential when conveying
             meaning in writing. When used improperly, it can
             have huge financial consequences.

          · Commas, semicolons, and colons link ideas in
             different ways.

          · Commas can introduce the subject of a

174 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
             sentence, interrupt the subject and verb, be used
             to separate a list of three or more items, connect
             independent clauses with the addition of a
             coordinating conjunction, and indicate non-
             essential elements in a sentence.
          · Semicolons can join closely related
             independent sentences, link two sentences with a
             transition word, and separate items in a complex
             list.
          · Colons are only placed where the sentence
             could come to a complete stop. The information
             that follows the colon can amplify the information
             that came before it, provide an example, or
             provide a list.

Now that you are finished with this chapter, you can either
click on one of the other sentence-level issues and learn about
them, or continue on to the next required chapter.

                                 Go To Another Topic
       Sentence Fragments | Run-On Sentences | Verb Tense |

                              Eliminating Wordiness

References

Fogarty, M. (2008, March 21). Which versus that. Quick and Dirty
Tips. https://www.quickanddirtytips.com/education/grammar/
which-versus-that-0

   Iyer, P. (2001, June 24). In praise of the humble comma. TIME.
https://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/
0,9171,149453,00.html

                                                              Chapter 13: Punctuation | 175
    Nast, C. (2017, March 17). A few words about that ten-million-

Dollar  serial  comma.         The        New      Yorker.

https://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/a-few-

words-about-that-ten-million-dollar-serial-comma

    Robertson, G. (2006, August 6). Comma quirk irks Rogers. The

Globe and Mail. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-

business/comma-quirk-irks-rogers/article1101686/

    Steck, E. (2014, September 10). Word play: Should you use the

Oxford comma? Let's review. Quietly Blog. https://blog.quiet.ly/

community/should-you-use-the-oxford-comma/

    Trayser, L. (2017, November 28). Say hello to the Switzerland

of      Oxford  comma          opinions.  The      Writing

Cooperative. https://writingcooperative.com/say-hello-to-the-

switzerland-of-oxford-comma-opinions-a96e9ab4afc8

Attributions

Image #1 by Phil Venditti on Flickr. It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 2.0 Canada License

   This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus). It is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

176 | Chapter 13: Punctuation
Chapter 14: Eliminating
Wordiness

     Learning Objectives

        After this section, you should be able to:
          · Explain why concise writing is important in
             professional communication
          · Identify common causes of wordy writing
          · Apply the six methods listed below to make a
             piece of writing more concise.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · conciseness
          · lead-ins
          · jargon
          · plain words

                                                                       Chapter 14: Eliminating
                                                                                  Wordiness | 177
The Basics

In your university classes, you are probably used to trying to
stretch out your writing to reach that 1000-word goal for an
essay. This is a habit you want to avoid in professional
communication because professional audiences-- employees,
clients, supervisors, etc.--prefer writing that is clear and, most
importantly, concise. For our purposes, conciseness means
using the fewest words possible to achieve the goal of
communication.

   What is the goal of communication? It is to ensure that your
reader understands your intended meaning. Just ask yourself,
if you were given the choice between reading a 500 word
article and a 250 word article that both say the same thing,
which one would you prefer to read?

   To be clear, there is nothing grammatically wrong with all
the examples we will cover below. However, having perfect
grammar doesn't mean a message is particularly well-written
either. The issue here is a matter of style. Using the techniques
listed below will keep readers focused on your message and
help them interpret what you are saying more easily.

   So how do we make our writing more concise? Here are a
few basic steps you can follow.

1. Mass-delete Whatever Doesn't Belong

The first practical step towards trimming your document is
a large-scale purge of whatever doesn't contribute to the
purpose you set out to achieve. Such a purge is important
because you don't want to waste time proof-editing anything
that you're just going to delete anyway. However, this action
is probably the most difficult one to take because it involves

178 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
deleting large swaths of writing that may have taken some
time and effort to compose.

   A good rule is that if the content could potentially sidetrack
readers, whose understanding of the topic would be
unaffected (at best) or (at worst) overwhelmed by it's inclusion,
those sentences, paragraphs, and even whole sections simply
must go. Highlight, delete, and don't look back.

2. Delete Long Lead-ins

The next-biggest savings in writing space come from deleting
lead-ins. Lead-ins are the groups of words that you wrote to
gear up towards your main point. In ordinary speech, we use
lead-ins as something like throat-clearing exercises. In writing,
however, these are useless at best because they state the
obvious. At worst, lead-ins immediately upset the reader by
signaling that the rest of the message will contain some time-
wasting text.

   Take the following the examples:

            · I'm Jerry Mulligan and I'm writing this email
                to ask you to please consider my application
                for a co-op position at your firm.

            · You may be interested to know that you can
                now find the updated form in the company
                shared drive.

            · To conclude this memo, we recommend a
                cautious approach to using emojis when
                texting clients, and only after they've done so
                first themselves.

                                              Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 179
They're all a bit long-winded, aren't they? Can you identify the
lead-ins?

   If not, here are the same examples with the lead-ins
highlighted.

            · I'm Jerry Mulligan and I'm writing this
                email to ask you to please consider my
                application for a co-op position at your firm.

            · You may be interested to know that you
                can now find the updated form in the
                company shared drive.

            · To conclude this memo, we recommend a
                cautious approach to using emojis when
                texting clients, and only after they've done so
                first themselves.

These lead-ins are unnecessary.
   In the first example, the recipient sees the name of the

sender before even opening their email. It's therefore
redundant for the sender to introduce themselves by name
and say that they wrote this email. Likewise, in the third
example, the reader can see that this is the conclusion if it's
the last paragraph, especially if it comes below the heading
"Conclusion."

   In each case, the sentence really begins after these lead-in
expressions, and the reader misses nothing in their absence.
Here's how they look with their lead-ins removed.

180 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
            · Please consider my application for a co-op
                position at your firm.

            · You can now find the updated form in the
                company shared drive.

            · We recommend a cautious approach to
                using emojis when texting clients, and only
                after they've done so first themselves.

All three examples are improved by having their lead-in
removed. If your writing has similar long lead-ins, delete them.

3. Pare Down Unnecessarily Wordy
Phrases

We habitually use long stock phrases in our writing and speech
because they sound fancy. However, length does not grant
respectability. These phrases look ridiculously cumbersome
when seen next to their more concise equivalent words and
phrases, as you can see in Table 1 below. Unless you have good
reason to do otherwise, always replace the wordy phrases with
concise ones in your writing.

                                              Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 181
Table 1: Replace Unnecessarily Wordy
  Phrases with Concise Equivalents

Replace These Wordy Phrases  with These Concise Equivalents
due to the fact that         because

not later than July 7        by July 7

at this present moment in time now

in any way, shape, or form   in any way

pursuant to your request     as requested

thanking you in advance      thank you

in addition to the above     also

in spite of the fact that    even though / although

in view of the fact that     because / since

are of the opinion that      believe that / think that

afford an opportunity        allow

despite the fact that        though

during the time that         while

on a weekly basis            weekly

at a later date/time         later

until such time as           until

in the near future           soon

fully cognizant of           aware of

in the event that            if

for the period of            for

attached hereto              attached

each and every               all

in as much as                because / since

more or less                 about

feel free to                 please

Again, the reader misses nothing if you use the words and

182 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
phrases in the second column instead of those in the first. Also,
concise writing is more accessible to readers who are learning
English as an additional language.

4. Delete Redundant Words

Our writing and speech is also filled with redundant words in
stock expressions. These prefabricated phrases aren't so bad
when spoken because talk is cheap. In writing, however, which
should be considered expensive, they make the author look
like an irresponsibly heavy spender. Be on the lookout for the
expressions below so that you are in command of your
language.

   Simply delete the crossed-out words in red if they appear in
combination with those in blue:

  · absolutely essential (you can't get any more essential than
      essential)

  · future plans (are you going to make plans about the past?
      plans are always future)

  · small in size (the context will determine that you mean
      small in size, quantity, etc.)

  · refer back to ("back" doesn't help the verb "refer" in
      anyway, so cut it)

  · in order to (only use "in order" if it helps distinguish an
      infinitive phrase, which begins with "to," from the
      preposition "to" appearing close to it)

  · each and every or each and every (or just "all," as we saw
      in the table above)

  · repeat again (is this déjà vu?)

                                              Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 183
5. Delete Filler Expressions and Words

If you audio-record your conversations and make a transcript
of just the words themselves, you'll find an abundance of filler
words and expressions that you could remove without harming
the meaning of your sentences. A few common ones that
appear at the beginning of sentences are "There is," "There are,"
and "It is," which must be followed by a clause starting with the
pronoun "that" or "who." Consider the following examples:

1.There are many who want to take your    Many want to take your
place.                                    place.

2. There is nothing you can do about it.  You can do nothing
                                          about it.
3. It is the software that keeps making
the error.                                The software keeps
                                          erring.

In the first and third cases, you can simply delete "There are"
and "It is," as well as the relative pronouns "who" and "that"
respectively, leaving the sentence perfectly fine without them.
In the second case, deleting "There is" requires slightly
reorganizing the word order, but otherwise requires no
additional words to say the very same thing. In each case, you
save two or three words that simply don't need to be there.

   Other common filler words include the articles "a," "an," and
"the," especially in combination with the preposition of. You
can eliminate many instances of "of the" simply by deleting
them and flipping the order of the nouns on either side of
them.

 technology of the future future technology

Obviously, you can't do this in all cases (e.g., changing "first
of the month" to "month first" makes no sense). When
proofreading, however, just be on the lookout for instances
where you can.

184 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
   The definite article the preceding plural nouns is also an easy
target. Try deleting the article to see if the sentence still makes
sense without it.

The shareholders unanimously  Shareholders unanimously
supported the initiative.     supported the initiative.

Though the above excess words seem insignificant on their
own, they bulk up the total word count unnecessarily when
used in combination throughout a large document.

Basically, you can't really do much   You can't do much to
to fully eliminate bad ideas because  eliminate bad ideas
they're quite common.                 because they're so
                                      common.

6. Favor Short, Plain Words and Revise
Jargon or Bureaucratic Expressions

If you pretend that every letter in each word you write costs
money from your own pocket, you would do what readers
prefer: use shorter words. The beauty of plain words is that
they are more understandable and draw less attention to
themselves than big, fancy words while still getting the point
across. This is especially true when you are writing reports,
which are often filled with unnecessary jargon. Choosing
shorter words is easy because they are often the first that come
to mind, so writing in plain language saves you time.

   Obviously, you would use jargon for precision when
appropriate for your audience's needs and your own. You would
use the word "photosynthesis," for instance, if (1) you needed to
refer to the process by which plants convert solar energy into
sugars, and (2) you know your audience knows what the word
means. In this case, using the jargon saves word space because
it's the most precise term for a process that otherwise needs

                                              Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 185
several words. Using jargon merely to extend the number of
words, however, is a desperate-looking move that your
instructors and professional audiences will see through as
waste of time due to a lack of quality ideas.

   For business writing, simplifying language is more effective.
Table 2 shows examples of commonly used, complicated, or
bureaucratic expressions and their simpler alternative.

186 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
Table 2: Plain and Simple Language

Complicated or Bureaucratic Expression Simpler Alternative

in lieu of           instead of

whereas              because
   solicit              ask for

apparent             clear
as per your request  as you requested
commence             begin, start
consolidate          combine
ascertain            find out
demonstrate          show
disseminate          distribute, send
endeavour            try
erroneous            wrong
expedite             speed up
facilitate           help
implement            carry out
inception            start
leverage             use
optimize             perfect
terminate            end
proximity            near
finalize             about
subsequent           complete
utilize              use

                             Source: Brockway (2015)
   The longer words in the above table tend to come from the
Greek and Latin side of the English language whereas the
shorter words come from the Anglo-Saxon (Germanic) side.

                     Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 187
When toddlers begin speaking English, they use Anglo-Saxon-
derived words because they're easier to master, and therefore
recognize them as plain, simple words throughout their adult
lives.

     Exercise #1: Identify the Filler

   Read the sample email below. Click on words or
phrases that are filler or redundant and could easily be
removed without losing the sentences meaning. For
example, if a sentence reads:

   Due to the fact that this project is
absolutely essential, we must fix the problem
immediately

   You would click on the words "Due to the fact that"
and "absolutely."

          An interactive H5P element     has been
          excluded from this version     of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=411#h5p-33

188 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
Exercise #2: Fix the Filler

   Now that you have identified the filler words and
phrases in the sentence. How could you simplify the
language? Below is the same email. Try to write your
own, simplified version. Then compare it to the possible
version below.

           Dear Hiring Committee,
           I am Cassandra Thompson and I am
        writing this letter to ask you to please
        consider my application for any future
        openings at your company in the near future.
        Your company's community first model
        aligns with my own future plans to work in
        community development after I graduate
        from college. Personally, I believe community
        engagement is absolutely essential in order
        for a business to succeed. This believe is due
        to the work I did as an intern for Senator
        Caufield's local office. I was in charge of the
        running the front desk during the time that I
        worked there. I was often the first person
        constituents met, so I have a lot of
        experience conversing with new people. I

                                        Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 189
also have experience disseminating
information to news outlets, consolidating
constituent questions, and demonstrating a
professional demeanor. I hope that you will
consider my application, as I know I can
improve the quality of your company's
interactions with the community.

   Sincerely,

   Cassandra Thompson

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=411#h5p-34

     Key Takeaways

          · In professional communication, clear and
             concise writing is key. Always strive to remove
             unnecessary wording and trim back when

190 | Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness
             possible to ensure your ideas are clearly
             communicated.
          · A few words here and there may not seem like a
             big difference, but over the course of entire,
             multi-page report, it could make a huge
             difference in how well your message is
             understood by your reader.

Now that you are finished with this chapter, you can either
click on one of the other sentence-level issues and learn about
them, or continue on to the next required chapter.

                                 Go To Another Topic
       Sentence Fragments | Run-On Sentences | Verb Tense |

                                      Punctuation

References

Brockway, L. (2015, November 3). 24 complex words--and their
simpler alternatives. PR Daily. https://www.prdaily.com/
24-complex-words-and-their-simpler-alternatives/

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from Business Communications for
Fashion (on openpress.usask.ca) by Anna Cappuccitti. It is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License

                                              Chapter 14: Eliminating Wordiness | 191
TECHNICAL
CORRESPONDENCE

                                                          Technical Correspondence | 193
Chapter 15: Memos and
Letters

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between a memo and letter and
             explain their different purposes in a professional
             setting.
          · Identify the seven elements of the full block
             letter format.

     Key Terms and Concepts

        Type your examples here.
          · SIDCRA
          · Memos
          · Header Block
          · Letters
          · Full block letter format

                                                                       Chapter 15: Memos and
                                                                                       Letters | 195
Professional Correspondence

A lot of your time as a professional will be spent
communicating through letters, memos, emails, and text
messages. Some of these forms of communication are
probably more familiar to you than others; however, as a
professional it is important that you understand how and when
to use each format and why. This is because your employer will
expect you to be able to communicate effectively to maintain
your credibility and build relation with co-workers, clients, and
the public.

   When you craft your correspondence, letters and memos are
treated as informal reports and follow the SIDCRA format.
Similarly, in a professional context, emails and texts should
maintain this organizational structure to help your audience
understand and retrieve information quickly. This is why you
should begin with the main point for each of these types of
correspondence. Busy readers need to be able to scan the
document quickly to assess if the document requires
immediate attention.

   As always, before you begin to write, consider your audience's
needs and your purpose for writing in the first place. For all
correspondence, you should:

  · Include a detailed subject line which provides a summary,
      or a sense of purpose for the document,

  · Provide a brief introduction which states the purpose for
      writing and provides an overview or forecasting of the rest
      of the document,

  · Provide necessary context for your reader in either the
      introduction or in a background paragraph,

  · Use headings to help your reader find information quickly,
      and to help you, the writer, organize information
      effectively, and

196 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
  · Keep paragraphs short and focused on one main point.

To decide which format to use, consider the size and
importance of your audience, your purpose for writing, and the
complexity of the information being communicated.

   Although RCM 200 introduces standard templates and
formats, there is some room for variation, and you should
always follow your employer's particular preference for letter,
memo, and email format.

   For this chapter, we will focus on memos and letters. The
following chapter will be on email and text messages.

Memos

Memoranda, or memos, are one of the most versatile
document forms used in professional settings. Memos are "in
house" documents (sent within an organization) to pass along
or request information, outline policies, present short reports,
or propose ideas. While they are often used to inform, they
can also be persuasive documents. A company or institution
typically has its own "in house" style or template that is used for
documents such as letters and memos.

Memo Format

Figure #1 below shows a sample of an "in house" memo style
(the style we will use for memo assignments written for this
class), with annotations pointing out various relevant features.
The main formatted portions of a memo are the Logo or

                                                   Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 197
Letterhead (which is optional), the Header Block, and the
Message.

Figure #1 Sample Memo, annotated.

The Header Block

The Header Block appears at the top left side of your memo,
directly underneath the word MEMO or MEMORANDUM in
large, bold, capitalized letters. This section contains detailed
198 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
information on the recipient, sender, and purpose. It includes
the following lines:

  · TO: give the recipient's full name, and position or title
      within the organization

  · FROM: include the sender's (your) full name and position
      or title

  · DATE: include the full date on which you sent the memo
  · SUBJECT or RE: write a brief phrase that concisely

      describes the main content of your memo.

Place a horizontal line under your header block, and place your
message below.

The Message

The length of a memo can range from a few short sentences
to a multi-page report that includes figures, tables, and
appendices. Whatever the length, there is a straightforward
organizational principle you should follow. Organize the
content of your memo so that it answers the following
questions for the reader:

 1. Opening: Do I have to read this? Why do I have to read
      this?

2. Details: What do I need to know?
 3. Closing: What am I expected to do now?

The Opening

Memos are generally very direct and concise. There is no need
to start with general introductions before getting to your point.
Your readers are colleagues within the same organization and

                                                   Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 199
are likely familiar with the context you are writing about. The
opening sentences of the memo's message should make it
clear to the reader whether they have to read this entire memo
and why. For example, if the memo is informing me about an
elevator that's out of service in a building I never enter, then I
don't really have to read any further?

The Details

The middle section of the message should give all of the
information needed to adequately inform the readers and fulfill
the purpose of the memo. Start with the most general
information, and then add the more specific facts and details.
Make sure there is enough detail to support your purpose, but
don't overwhelm your readers with unnecessary details or
information that is already well known to them.

The Closing

The final part of the message indicates what, if any, action is
required or requested of the readers. If you are asking your
readers to do something, be as courteous as possible, and try
to indicate how this action will also benefit them.

   For more information on writing memos, check out the
memo page on the the Online Writing Lab at Purdue
University: Parts of a Memo.

     Exercise #1: Sample Memo

200 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
        Below are two images. The first shows a potential
     memo layout with tips for creating one. The second
     shows a sample memo.

        Does the sample memo have all the parts we've
     discussed in this section? Does it need more
     information? Less? Is there anything you think would
     be helpful for the author to include?

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=987#h5p-55

Letter

Letters are brief messages sent to recipients that are often
outside the organization, or external. They are often printed on
letterhead paper that represents the business or organization,
and are generally limited to one or two pages. While email
and text messages may be used more frequently today, the
business letter remains a common form of written
communication as it serves many functions, such as:

  · introducing you to a potential employer

                                                   Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 201
  · announcing a product or service
  · communicating feelings and emotions (complaint letters,

      for example).
Letters are the most formal format for business
correspondence, and your credibility will be established by
using a formal tone and a conventional format for the
document.

   Use a letter format for communicating with people outside
of your own organization, or for information which will be kept
on file (such as a letter of offer from an employer) or may be
needed for legal proceedings. Your reader will expect a well
written and well formatted document. The full block letter
format is the most straightforward letter format and will be
covered in the next section. Professionals who produce their
own correspondence using this format will appreciate its
simplicity and consistency.
As we will soon see, there are many types of letters, and many
adaptations in terms of form and content. Figure #2 shows a
letter of transmittal meant to introduce a technical report to its
recipient. You will eventually write a transmittal letter like this
for your written report assignment in this course.

202 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
Figure #2 Sample letter of transmittal

The Full Block Letter Format

A typical letter has 7 main elements, which make up the full
block letter format.

 1. Letterhead/logo: Sender's name and return address
2. The heading: names the recipient, often including

      address and date
 3. Salutation: "Dear ______ " use the recipient's name, if

      known.
4. The introduction: establishes the overall purpose of the

                                                  Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 203
      letter
 5. The body: articulates the details of the message
6. The conclusion: restates the main point and may include

      a call to action
 7. The signature line: sometimes includes the contact

      information
You can see how these elements are implemented in the
example above. Keep in mind that letters represent you/or and
your company in your absence. In order to communicate
effectively and project a positive image, remember that

  · your language should be clear, concise, specific, and
      respectful

  · each word should contribute to your purpose
  · each paragraph should focus on one idea
  · the parts of the letter should form a complete message
  · the letter should be free of errors.

     Exercise 2: Sample letter

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=987#h5p-59

204 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
Types of Messages

Letters and memos can be written for many purposes. Here are
just a few reasons you may have to write these documents in
your professional career. We will also provide some tips for each
one.

Making a Request

Whenever you make a request, whether in a memo or letter,
remember to consider the tone of your words: be polite and
be respectful. It is certainly easier, and faster, to send off a
message without proofreading it, but doing so will help you
make sure that you do not sound demanding or
condescending to your audience.

   Remember that your request will add to your audience's
already busy day, so acknowledge the time and effort
necessary to address your request. Finally, always be as specific
as possible about what you expect your reader to do and
provide the necessary information so that the reader can
successfully fulfill your request.

   When making a request you should:

  · quickly establish relation, and then begin with the main
      point

  · explain in the body of the document your needs and
      provide details to justify the request

  · end by extending goodwill and appreciation

                                                  Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 205
  · always be courteous and proofread to eliminate poor tone

Thank-Yous

Thank-you letters may feel like an old-fashioned way to
communicate, but even in today's fast-paced world, a well-
written thank you letter can establish your credibility and
professionalism. A hand written thank-you letter is always most
appropriate, but a business thank-you letter may be printed on
company stationery.

   A thank-you letter does not need to be long, but it should
communicate your sincere appreciation to the reader.

  · Be specific about what you are thanking the reader for.
      Avoid clichés and stock phrases.

  · Include some details about why you are thankful and how
      you benefited from the reader's actions.

  · End with a sincere compliment and repeat the thank-you.

Interview Thank-You Note

A brief thank-you letter or thank-you email is an important step
in the interview and job search process. Not only will the note of
thanks communicate your professionalism, but it will also give
you an opportunity to demonstrate your commitment to the
company. Use this opportunity to remind the reader why you
are the best candidate for the position.

"Good News" Messages

Obviously, preparing a good news message (such as a message

206 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
of of Congratulations, Acknowledgement, and Acceptance) is
easier than preparing a negative message. However, care
should be taken in all correspondence to maintain your
credibility as a professional.

  · Be specific about the achievement or award.
  · Be sincere in your congratulations.
  · Avoid using language which might sound patronizing or

      insincere.

"Bad News" Messages

In the course of your professional career, you are going to need
to write negative messages (such as messages of Complaint or
Refusal) for a variety of reasons. Tone is very important here;
comments should be made using neutral language and
should be as specific as possible.

   A thoughtful writer will remember that the message will
likely have negative consequences for the audience, and
although it may be appropriate to begin with a buffer sentence
to establish relation, get to the main point as quickly as
possible. Keep your audience's needs in mind; your audience
will need to clearly understand your decision and your reasons
for making such a decision.

   Do not hide your bad news in ambiguous language to save
your own sense of face. Finally, remember to be courteous
and considerate of your audience's feelings. Avoid inflaming
the situation with emotional, accusatory, or sarcastic language,
and avoid personal attacks on your reader.

  · Be polite and use neutral language.
  · Be specific about the bad news you are conveying.
  · Provide relevant details so your audience can understand

      your decision.

                                                  Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 207
  · End with an appropriate closing; avoid insincere or falsely
      positive endings which are disrespectful to your audience.

Apology / Conciliation

Learning how to apologize well is an important skill for young
professionals. A poorly written apology can exacerbate
problems for both you and your company. Don't apologize
unnecessarily, but when an apology is in order, do so sincerely
and with full recognition of your audience's hurt, frustration
and disappointment.

   Once you reach a leadership position in your field, you may
also need to apologize for someone else's error. As a leader in
an organization, it will be your job to take responsibility and to
apologize fully to maintain your organization's credibility.

   Sincere apologies focus on the audience's needs and
feelings, not the needs and feelings of the person issuing the
apology. Avoid the ubiquitous "this is not who I am" phrase as
part of an apology because saying "this is not who I am" is not
an apology at all. If you do something that requires an apology,
take responsibility and recognize that your actions or words
caused hurt or inconvenience for someone else. An apology
must also be sincere; an accusation veiled as as an apology will
not persuade anyone that you are actually sorry. A phrase such
as "I am sorry you feel that way" will not convince your audience
that you are sincerely sorry. An apology should:

  · Sincerely acknowledge that you are sorry for the words or
      actions which caused harm

  · Acknowledge that the audience's hurt, frustration, or
      anger is real, and warranted

  · Take responsibility for the mistake and the negative
      consequences of the mistake

  · Never suggest that the audience is somehow to blame for

208 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
      the problem
  · Offer some form of compensation if it seems appropriate

      to do so

Transmittal Letters

When you send a report or some other document (such as
a resumé) to an external audience, send it with a letter that
briefly explains the purpose of the enclosed document and
a brief summary. For more information on these kinds of
transmittal documents for reports, visit Chapter 29: Formatting
the Report. For more information on cover letters, visit Chapter
19: Cover/Application Letters.

   Click the link to download a Letter of Transmittal Template
(.docx).

Letters of Inquiry

You may want to request information about a company or
organization such as whether they anticipate job openings in
the near future or whether they fund grant proposals from
non-profit groups.

   In this case, you would send a letter of inquiry, asking for
additional information. As with most business letters, keep your
request brief, introducing yourself in the opening paragraph
and then clearly stating your purpose and/or request in the
second paragraph. If you need very specific information,
consider placing your requests in list form for clarity. Conclude
in a friendly way that shows appreciation for the help you will
receive.

                                                  Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 209
Follow-up Letters

Any time you have made a request of someone, write a follow-
up letter expressing your appreciation for the time your letter-
recipient has taken to respond to your needs or consider your
job application. If you have had a job interview, the follow-up
letter thanking the interviewer for his/her time is especially
important for demonstrating your professionalism and
attention to detail.

     Exercise #3: Letters

        Letters within the professional context may take on
     many other purposes, such as communicating with
     suppliers, contractors, partner organizations, clients,
     government agencies, and so on.

        Below are three images of letters. The first shows a
     layout using the full-block format discussed above. The
     second image is a cover letter, the second is a
     transmittal letter.

        Do the sample letters have all the parts we've
     discussed in this section? If so, what do they still need?
     Is there anything you think would be helpful for the
     author to include?

                          An interactive H5P element has been

210 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=987#h5p-56

For additional examples of professional letters, take a look at
the sample letters provided by David McMurrey in his online
textbook on technical writing: Online Technical Writing:
Examples, Cases & Models.

     Key Takeaways

          · Even in the digital age, writing correspondence
             will be a regular part of your professional career.
             Not only do these types of correspondence help
             maintain your credibility as an employee, they
             help you build relation with co-workers, clients,
             and the public.

          · Memos are in house, internal documents that
             serve a number of purposes, such as passing
             along information or proposing ideas. Their
             format includes a Header Block followed by the
             message itself. A message has three parts: the

                                                    Chapter 15: Memos and Letters | 211
             opening, details, and a closing.
          · Letters are more formal than memos, since

             they are generally externally sent to people
             outside of a company or organization. They use a
             full block format which is the standard for most
             organizations. Like memos, there are many
             different reasons you may write a letter.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus). It is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License

212 | Chapter 15: Memos and Letters
Chapter 16: Text
Messages and Emails

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Identify five strategies for using netiquette
             while communicating online
          · Explain the four guidelines for texting is a
             business environment
          · Recognize key elements of a strong
             professional email

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · netiquette
          · texting
          · chat applications
          · email

                                                             Chapter 16: Text Messages and
                                                                                        Emails | 213
Digital Communication

   Text messaging, emailing,
and posting on social media
in a professional context
requires that you be familiar
with netiquette, or proper
etiquette for using the
internet. We have all heard
the news stories about
people who have been fired
and companies that have
been boycotted for making
offensive or inappropriate
social media posts. People
have even gone to prison for
illegal use of private
messaging. The digital world
may seem like a free-for-all, Photo #1: Team working together
"wild wild west" with no clear
rules or regulations; however, this is clearly a dangerous
perspective for a professional to take, as the consequences for
breaking tacit rules, expectations, and guidelines for
professional communications can be very costly.

   The way that you represent yourself in writing carries
significant weight. Writing in an online environment requires
tact, skill, and an awareness that what you write may be there
for a very long time and may be seen by people you never
considered as your intended audience. From text messages to
memos to letters, from business proposals to press releases,
your written business communication represents you and your
company: your goal is to make it clear, concise, constructive,
and professional.

We create personal pages, post messages, and interact via

214 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
online technologies as a normal part of our careers, but how
we conduct ourselves can leave a lasting image, literally. The
photograph you posted on your Instagram page or Twitter feed
may have been seen by your potential employer, or that
insensitive remark in a Facebook post may come back to haunt
you later.

        Guidelines for Communicating Online

        Following several guidelines for online postings, as
     detailed below, can help you avoid embarrassment
     later:

          · Know your context

                   Introduce yourself
                   Avoid assumptions about your readers;

                      remember that culture influences
                      communication style and practices
                   Familiarize yourself with policies on
                      Acceptable Use of IT Resources at your
                      organization.

          · Remember the human

                   Remember there is a person behind the
                      words; ask for clarification before making
                      judgment

                   Check your tone before you publish; avoid
                      jokes, sarcasm, and irony as these can often
                      be misinterpreted and get "lost in
                      translation" in the online environment

                   Respond to people using their names

                                         Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 215
                   Remember that culture, age, and gender
                      can play a part in how people communicate

                   Remain authentic and expect the same of
                      others

                   Remember that people may not reply
                      immediately. People participate in different
                      ways, some just by reading the
                      communication rather than jumping into it.

          · Recognize that text is permanent

                   Be judicious and diplomatic; what you say
                      online may be difficult or even impossible to
                      retract later.

                   Consider your responsibility to the group
                      and to the working environment

                   Agree on ground rules for text
                      communication (formal or informal; seek
                      clarification whenever needed) if you are
                      working collaboratively

          · Avoid flaming: research before you react

                   Accept and forgive mistakes
                   Consider your responsibility to the group

                      and to the working environment
                   Seek clarification before reacting; what you

                      heard is not always what was said
                   Ask your supervisor for guidance.*

          · Respect privacy and original ideas

                   Quote the original author if you are
                      responding with a specific point made by

216 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
                      someone else
                   Ask the author of an email for permission

                      before forwarding the communication.
        * Sometimes, online behaviour can appear so
     disrespectful and even hostile that it requires attention
     and follow up. In this case, let your supervisor know
     right away so that the right resources can be called
     upon to help.

For further information on netiquette, check out the following
links:

  · Business Insider: Email etiquette rules every professional
      needs to know

  · LinkedIn: Why is email etiquette important

Texting

Whatever digital device you use, written communication in the
form of brief messages, or texting, has become a common way
to connect. This is particularly true with team chat applications
such as Slack and Microsoft Teams which are becoming
increasingly popular with companies as a means for employees
to quickly communicate with each other.
On these platforms, short exchanges are common as they are a
convenient way to stay connected with others when talking on
the phone, or sending an email, would be cumbersome. If you

                                         Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 217
need a quick, brief answer right away, texting is often the best
choice.

   However, it's also important to be mindful of the company
culture and what is deemed "appropriate" on these platforms.
For example, when people text their friends and family, they
often send gifs as a way to communicate their reactions.
Should you also do this at your company? It depends. Some
companies are okay with it, some are not. Even if they are okay
with you using gifs, there may rules around the types of gifs
that are sent. Pay attention to how others are communicating
in these spaces and use that as a guide for your own
communication style.

In summary, texting is not useful for long or complicated
messages. When deciding whether a text or email is better,
careful consideration should be given to the audience.
Wouldn't it seem strange is someone sent you a text that was
like an email?

Watch the short video below:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=551#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: https://tinyurl.com/textonbus
   When texting, always consider your audience and your

company, and choose words, terms, or abbreviations that will
deliver your message appropriately and effectively.

218 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
  Guidelines for Effective Business Texting

   If your work situation allows or requires you to
communicate via text messages, keep the following
tips in mind:

    · Know your recipient: "? % dsct" may be an
        understandable way to ask a close associate what
        the proper discount is to offer a certain customer,
        but if you are writing a text to your boss, it might
        be wiser to write, "what % discount does Murray
        get on $1K order?"

    · Anticipate unintentional misinterpretation:
        texting often uses symbols and codes to
        represent thoughts, ideas, and emotions. Given
        the complexity of communication, and the useful
        but limited tool of texting, be aware of its
        limitation and prevent misinterpretation with
        brief messages.

    · Use appropriately: contacting someone too
        frequently can border on harassment. Texting is a
        tool. Use it when appropriate but don't abuse it.

    · Don't text and drive: research shows that the
        likelihood of an accident increases dramatically if
        the driver is texting behind the wheel ("Deadly
        distraction," 2009). Being in an accident while
        conducting company business would reflect
        poorly on your judgment as well as on your
        employer.

                                   Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 219
Email

Email is familiar to most

students and workers. In

business, it has largely

replaced print hard copy

letters for external (outside

the    company)

correspondence, and in

many cases, it has taken the Photo #2: Email Platform

place of memos for internal

(within the company) communication (Guffey, 2008).

Email can be very useful for messages that have slightly more
content than a text message, but it is still best used for fairly
brief messages. Many businesses use automated emails to
acknowledge communications from the public, or to remind
associates that periodic reports or payments are due. You may
also be assigned to "populate" a form email in which standard
paragraphs are used but you choose from a menu of sentences
to make the wording suitable for a particular transaction.

   Emails may be informal in personal contexts, but business
communication requires attention to detail, awareness that
your email reflects you and your company, and a professional
tone so that it may be forwarded to any third party if needed.
Email often serves to exchange information within
organizations. Although email may have an informal feel,
remember that when used for business, it needs to convey
professionalism and respect. Never write or send anything that
you wouldn't want read in public or in front of your company
president.

   As with all writing, professional communications require
attention to the specific writing context, and it may surprise
you that even elements of form can indicate a writer's strong
understanding of audience and purpose. The principles

220 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
explained here apply to the educational context as well; use
them when communicating with your instructors and
classroom peers.

        Guidelines for Effective Business Emails

        Open with a proper salutation: proper salutations
     demonstrate respect and avoid mix-ups in case a
     message is accidentally sent to the wrong recipient.
     For example, use a salutation like "Dear Ms. X" (external)
     or "Hi Barry" (internal).

        Include a clear, brief, and specific subject line: this
     helps the recipient understand the essence of the
     message. For example, "Proposal attached" or
     "Electrical specs for project Y."

        Close with a signature: identify yourself by creating
     a signature block that automatically contains your
     name and business contact information.

        Avoid abbreviations: an email is not a text message,
     and the audience may not find your wit cause to
     ROTFLOL (roll on the floor laughing out loud).

        Be brief: omit unnecessary words.
        Use a good format: divide your message into brief
     paragraphs for ease of reading. A good email should
     get to the point and conclude in three small
     paragraphs or less.
        Reread, revise, and review: catch and correct
     spelling and grammar mistakes before you press
     "send." It will take more time and effort to undo the

                                         Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 221
     problems caused by a hasty, poorly written email than
     to take the time to get it right the first time.

        Reply promptly: watch out for an emotional
     response--never reply in anger--but make a habit of
     replying to all emails within twenty-four hours, even if
     only to say that you will provide the requested
     information in forty-eight or seventy-two hours.

        Use "Reply All" sparingly: do not send your reply to
     everyone who received the initial email unless your
     message absolutely needs to be read by the entire
     group.

        Avoid using all caps: capital letters are used on the
     Internet to communicate emphatic emotion or yelling
     and are considered rude.

        Test links: if you include a link, test it to make sure it
     is working.

        Email ahead of time if you are going to attach large
     files: audio and visual files are often quite large; be
     careful to avoid exceeding the recipient's mailbox limit
     or triggering the spam filter.

        Give feedback or follow up: if you don't get a
     response in twenty-four hours, email or call. Spam
     filters may have intercepted your message, so your
     recipient may never have received it.

        Tip: add the address of the recipient last to avoid
     sending prematurely. This will give you time to do a
     last review of what you've written, make sure links
     work, make sure you've added the attachment, etc.,
     before adding the sender's address and hitting send.

222 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
The sample email below demonstrates the principles listed
above.

          From: Steve Jobs <sjobs@apple.com>
          To: Human Resources Division <hr@apple.com>
          Date: September 12, 2021
          Subject: Safe Zone Training

          Dear Colleagues:
          Please consider signing up for the next available
       Safe Zone workshop offered by the College. As you
       know, our department is working toward increasing
       the number of Safe Zone volunteers in our area, and
       I hope several of you may be available for the next
       workshop scheduled for Friday, October 9.
          For more information on the Safe Zone program,
       please visit http://www.cocc.edu/multicultural/safe-
       zone-training/

          Please let me know if you will attend.

          Steve Jobs
          CEO Apple Computing
       sjobs@apple.com

                                        Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 223
     Key Takeaways

          · All companies use digital communication in
             some capacity. As a result, the way you represent
             yourself in digital spaces will have an
             impact--either positive or negative--on how
             others view you professionally. This is why it's
             important that you are familiar with the principles
             of netiquette which suggest how to
             communicate in these spaces.

          · The core principles of netiquette include:
                 1. Know your context
                2. Remember the human
                 3. Recognize that text is permanent
                4. Avoid flaming: research before you react
                 5. Respect privacy and original ideas

          · Texting is often best when communicating
             small amounts of information. Email, on the
             other hand, is best when a message has more
             content. However, brevity is still important, as is
             attention to detail. Even if you are
             communicating with colleagues, a poorly
             formatted, error-heavy email can reflect poorly on
             your credibility as a professional.

224 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus). It is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License,

   Photo #1 by Annie Spratt on Unsplash
   Photo #2 by Stephen Phillips on Unsplash

References

Akhtar, A., & Ward, M. (2020, September 4). Fifteen email

etiquette rules every professional should know. Business

Insider.            Retrieved September 10,                   2021,

from https://www.businessinsider.com/email-etiquette-rules-

every-professional-needs-to-know-2016-1

Anthony Weiner sexting scandals. (2011, June 2). Wikipedia,

the free encyclopedia. Retrieved September 10, 2021,

from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

Anthony_Weiner_sexting_scandals

Deadly distraction: Texting while driving should be banned.

(2009, September 22). Chron. https://www.chron.com/opinion/

editorials/article/Deadly-distraction-Texting-while-driving-

should-1592397.php

Guffey, M. E.       (2008). Essentials       of  business

communication (7th ed.). Thomson/Wadsworth.

Raza, H. (2019, August 7). Why is email etiquette

important! LinkedIn. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-

email-etiquette-important-husnain-raza

The seven biggest social media fails of 2017. (2018, January

17).      Entrepreneur. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/

294925

Workopolis. (2018, March 7). Fourteen Canadians who were

                    Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails | 225
fired  for  social  media                   posts.  Workopolis

Blog. https://careers.workopolis.com/advice/14-canadians-who-

were-fired-for-social-media-posts/

226 | Chapter 16: Text Messages and Emails
APPLYING FOR A JOB

                                                                       Applying for a job | 227
Chapter 17: Rhetoric
and the Job Search

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Reflect how to apply rhetorical theory we cover
             in this course to the job application process
          · Explain how the three elements from Bitzer's
             "The Rhetorical Situation"--rhetorical exigence,
             rhetorical audience, and constraints--can impact
             the quality of your job package
          · Identify reasons why it is better to have a job
             package that is audience-centred instead of one
             that is not
          · Analyze an organizational profile in a job
             posting and identify at least 3-4 keywords

Key Terms and Concepts

· job package

                        Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job
                                                     Search | 229
· rhetorical communication
· rhetorical exigence
· rhetorical audience
· constraints
· audience-centred
· keywords

Employment materials are

some of the most

important--and       most

challenging--pieces  of

writing you will ever

undertake.

The aim of the this chapter

is to ease your mind and Photo #1: Talking at a table

demystify the job application

process by giving you some core principles to follow. With

these principles, you can create a job package that will make

you a more desirable candidate to potential employers.

Whether you are applying to be an administrative assistant

or an engineer, a web developer or a caregiver, many of the

strategies are the same. As you read through this chapter, keep

the following principles in mind:

· The more customized your materials are, the more
   successful they will be--generic materials are unlikely to
   capture an employer's attention.

· Your materials should not demonstrate why this job would
   benefit you. Instead, they should show how you, as a
   unique candidate, can benefit your potential employer.

· Your materials should not simply list every job you've ever
   held, but instead emphasize transferable skills, making an

230 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
      argument for how your past accomplishments prepare
      you for the job you are applying for.

Tailoring your materials to a specific audience is to work
smarter, rather than harder. In fact, tailoring is one of the core
principles of technical writing. Imagine yourself in the position
of a hiring manager. Would you be more likely to hire a
candidate whose generic résumé looks like it has been sent
to dozens of similar employers? Or would you be more likely
to hire a candidate who has researched your business and
understands what the job entails?

   The answer is pretty obvious, isn't it?
   Applying for a job is a great opportunity to practice your
developing rhetorical communication skills!

     Exercise #1: Reflecting on Theory

        Take a look back at the rhetorical theories we've
     discussed over the last term, and reflect on how you
     can apply these rhetorical strategies to the job
     application process.

        You may not have encountered the theory in Wayne
     Booth's "The Rhetorical Stance" yet. If that's the case,
     feel free to quickly skim the chapter if you would like to
     get ahead.

                          An interactive H5P element has been

                                      Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search | 231
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=265#h5p-14

Applying the Rhetorical Situation to
Job Applications

Knowing how to apply the theories above will set you on a
strong path when you start applying jobs. We now want to
focus on the theory of Lloyd Bitzer, who you should remember
as the author of "The Rhetorical Situation". This article provides
foundational theory for RCM 200. Recall the three rhetorical
elements he discusses:

  · rhetorical exigence
  · rhetorical audience
  · rhetorical constraints
Let's have a look at all three of these theories in the context of
a job search.

232 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
Rhetorical Exigence

What is your rhetorical exigence as you begin your job search?
You may be thinking that you want a job so you can make
some money, and you may want to develop skills and get
experience. While these needs are understandably important
to you, employers will seldom hire you to solve your problems
or fulfill your needs.

   Think of it this way: why did the employer post the job in
the first place? What problem prompted the job being posted?
Well, the employer needs someone with skills and qualities to
do the job. They want someone who can get along with people,
and someone who is reliable. This means that the more you
can show in your application materials that you are the solution
to the employer's rhetorical exigence, the more successful you
will be.

Rhetorical Audience

Who is the rhetorical audience for the job posting? This is
pretty obvious: it's the employer! The more you know about
the employer, the more carefully you can put your job package
together. Thus, you must begin your research before starting
your cover letter and résumé and especially before going into
your interview.

   How do you do begin your research? Simply google the
employer. Check out any local news stories about recent
projects or company developments. Read the company's
mission statement and learn about any projects they are
currently working on. This will give you a sense of how the
company sees themselves in the world and what is important
to them. This process may seem like it would take a while,
but it's important to do it because this is how you show that

                                     Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search | 233
you care about these things as well. If you can show that your
mission and goals align with those of the employer, then they
are more likely to call you in for an interview.

   Use this information to make your job application materials
more audience-centred.

Rhetorical Constraints

It is possible that you will run into some constraints as you
create your job package. Here are just a few to consider:

The Employers' Needs

Photo #2: Researching the     A job posting usually lists
company                    many different things that an
                           employer wants from a
meet the company's needs.  candidate. It is important,
                           then, that you are selective in
                           the information that you
                           include in your cover letter
                           and résumé.

                              Go through the job posting
                           and pick out keywords to put
                           in your cover letter and the
                           front page of your résumé.
                           Whether your job application
                           package is viewed first by a
                           person or a computer
                           tracking system, both are
                           going to be looking for those
                           keywords to make sure you

234 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
   Ultimately, what will is that your application package will be
not be looked at in isolation. Rather, it will be looked at as part
of a stack of other viable candidates, and at the early stage of
the hiring process, employers are actively looking for reasons
to get rid of your application, and not consider it. This is why it
is so important to make your job package materials audience-
centred by tailoring to the needs of the employer!

Format

You are constrained by the length of your documents. You do
not have ten pages to tell an employer all the reasons why you
are great for a position. A cover letter and résumé that are too
long will go straight into the recycling bin because they show
you cannot be concise. Instead, aim for a 1-page cover letter
and a 2-page résumé.

   Additionally, the look of both documents is important. If they
don't have good visual appeal, both documents will be set
aside immediately. Therefore, be sure to think about white
space, bolding, indentation, horizontal design features, etc.
Your documents will need to be visually compelling and
engaging; they should invite the audience to look at them. We
will see some examples of different formats in the next couple
of chapters.

Truth

You obviously want to show yourself in the best light, but you
also need to tell the truth. If a résumé or cover letter suggests a
lie, they will be thrown out right away. This means you need to
think about what is relevant and most recent, and include that
information on your résumé. Keep in mind Booth's discussion

                                     Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search | 235
of the rhetorical corruptions, and in particular, the Advertiser's
Stance. You will want to avoid sacrificing the logos of your
message as you put together your application materials.

Reading the Job Ad

Job advertisements provide a lot of information about what
is important to a company. It is very easy to immediately skip
down to the skills section, and not consider the rest of the
posting. Instead, take the time to read all of the job ad carefully
to find keywords which highlight skills, qualities, and values
that are important to the company.

   Let's look at an example. Below is an organizational profile
for Nutrien Ag Services. Organizational profiles are generally
found at the top of job posting and are great places to search
for keywords. This profile was found in a job posting for an
internship position targeted towards students and new grads.
See if you can identify at least 3-4 keywords. Keep in mind
though that there are many more than that in the profile.

          At Nutrien, our Purpose is to grow our world from
       the ground up and we do so with safety and
       integrity as our core values. Nothing is more
       important than sending our people home safe,
       every day.

          Nutrien Ag Solutions is the retail division of
       NutrienTM, the largest crop inputs company in the

236 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
       world. As part of our collective mission of Feeding
       the Future, Nutrien Ag Solutions provides full-acre
       solutions through our trusted crop consultants at
       more than 2,000 locations in North America, South
       America, Europe and Australia. For more than 150
       years, we have been helping growers achieve the
       highest yields with a wide selection of products,
       including our proprietary brands: Loveland
       Products, Inc.; Proven®Seed and Dyna-Gro®Seed; as
       well as financial, custom application and precision
       ag services.

          We harvest the best. Diverse views and experience
       make us strong. We look for people who have a
       safety-first mindset, who are collaborative team
       players, who deliver on their commitments, who are
       innovators in search of a better way, and who
       believe in inclusion.

          Working at Nutrien Ag Solutions will provide you
       an opportunity to help us Feed the Future, and grow
       your career.

You probably noticed that there is fair amount of information
that is not relevant to our purposes. That's okay, though; as long
as you can find at least a few keywords that you can use to
make you job application package more audience-centred ,
you'll be in a good position. Here is a list of keywords that you
could potentially use for this job posting:

  · safety
  · integrity
  · trust

                                     Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search | 237
  · helping growers
  · customized services
  · precision
  · diverse views
  · collaborative
  · reliable
  · innovative
  · inclusive

That's a lot! Don't worry though, you don't have to include all
of those keywords in your job package. Instead, pick at least
3-4 that apply to you and your experience and include those in
your materials.

     Exercise #2: Reading a Job Ad

        Now it's your turn.
        Below is a paragraph from a Cargill job
     advertisement for a summer production management
     engineering internship position. This paragraph was
     listed under the organizational profile heading of the
     job posting. See if you can pick out the keywords that
     let you know what is important to Cargill:

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:

238 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=265#h5p-18

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=265#h5p-19

        Now, reread the job ad and answer this question: how
     does Cargill see itself?

        They see themselves as a unique, leading
     international produce that is growing their reputation
     every day.

Ultimately, you will be more successful in your job application
if you can show you share these same values, and that you are
the person with the same set of skills and qualities that the
company has.

     Key Takeaways

                                     Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search | 239
        As you start putting together your job package, keep
     the following things in mind.

          · Focus on the employer's exigence, not your
             own. If you can solve the employer's exigence,
             you will probably solve your own.

          · Know your audience. The more research you
             can do about the employer, the more you can
             tailor your application materials to be audience-
             centred, which means you will be more
             successful with your job search.

          · The best way to tailor your materials is to search
             for keywords in the job posting's organizational
             profile. Try to include at least 3-4 keywords in
             each of your job package materials.

          · Consider all the constraints you face while still
             making your application stand out. Make sure
             your application is targeted and is something that
             people actually want to look at.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing" by Allison
Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas,
Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva (on Open Oregon). It is
licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   Photo #1 by Christina on Unsplash
   Photo #2 by Duncan Meyer on Unsplash

240 | Chapter 17: Rhetoric and the Job Search
Chapter 18: Application
Preparation

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Use job boards or other means to find a job
             posting that you can use for your job package
             assignment
          · Conduct a self-inventory to evaluate your skills,
             achievements, and accomplishments
          · Analyze a company's website or other sources
             to evaluate its goals and values and establish your
             connection to the company
          · Identify keywords in a job posting that you can
             highlight in your own application materials to
             show you "speak their language"

Key Terms and Concepts
     · pre-writing

                        Chapter 18: Application
                                Preparation | 241
          · job package
          · self-inventory
          · keywords
          · action verbs
          · rhetorical audience
          · rhetorical exigence

Spending adequate time preparing to write your employment
materials can save you many headaches in the drafting phase,
i.e., the writing phase where you are actually creating your
materials. This chapter focuses on the pre-writing phase,
which is when you should be gathering information and
content to help generate those materials. In this chapter, you
will find a potential job that you are eligible to apply for now,
conduct a self-inventory of your skills and achievements,
research your potential employer, and research the job you
have selected. This may seem like a lot of work, but following
these steps will make you more likely to stand out from all the
other applicants.

242 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
Finding a Job

   Finding a suitable job
opening itself can be a time-
consuming process. Here are
a few resources to get you
started:

· Job boards: browse sites     Photo #1: Making a plan
   like

   Indeed, CareerBuilder, Glassdoor and Monster to search
   for jobs in your field.
· Specialty job lists: look for lists of jobs in specific industries
   such as agriculture (Western Producer), nonprofits
   (Idealist), or media (MediaBistro)
· Company, organization and government websites: visit the
   employment section on websites of companies you
   admire; search federal, provincial, regional, and city
   websites for job postings.
· Your own network: talk to classmates, friends, past
   employers, and professors or visit LinkedIn to search for
   openings at companies in your network.
· Your college: visit your college or university placement
   office/career center and attend job fairs hosted at your
   college. The University of Saskatchewan has specific jobs
   listed for its students/alumni listed here.

Many job seekers also use Kijiji to look for work; just be aware
that Kijiji postings often lack detail and may come from
headhunters or placement agencies, rather than from the
direct employer.

   Once you have found a job, make sure to print and/or save
a copy of the job posting or job description. You will use this
document to help you tailor your application materials and

               Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 243
prepare for your interview. Because companies often delete the
job posting once they have received sufficient applicants, it is
important that you save your own copy.

     Exercise #1: Finding a Job Posting

        One of your assignments for this course is to apply
     the rhetorical theory you are learning to the job
     application process.

        For this assignment, you will create a job package for
     a position you are qualified to apply for. The exercises in
     this chapter will get you started.

        Let's begin by actually finding some potential jobs!
     Use the web site options listed above to identify a
     couple of positions you are qualified for. Looking for
     internships in your field is a great place to start.

        After you have gathered a few job postings, pick one
     that you are most excited about. This is the one you will
     use for the job package assignment and for the other
     exercises in this chapter.

        Don't forget to print or save a copy of the job posting
     you choose. Once you have the posting ready to go,
     head on to the next section.

244 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
Conducting a Self-Inventory

It's important to know what you have to offer as a potential
employee. As you work on your résumé, you may worry that
you have nothing valuable to include, or you may worry that
you are "bragging." One way to get over these hurdles is to
allocate time to a self-inventory.

   Brainstorm your skills, accomplishments and knowledge by
asking yourself the following questions:

  · What did you accomplish at a past or current work, school,
      or volunteer position?

  · What transferable skills have you learned?
  · What would you tell a friend or family member you were

      proud of having achieved there?

Start writing down skills and action verbs that describe your
experiences and accomplishments, and don't worry about
putting them into a résumé format yet.

     Exercise #2: Self-Inventory

        Let's take a moment to brainstorm some skills and
     action verbs that you can use in your job package
     assignment for this course. The best way to do this is to
     browse a skill list such as the one below.

        Complete the following steps:
         1. Scan the groupings of skills (Communication

             Skills, Creative Skills, Financial Skills etc.) for

                                           Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 245
             action verbs related to skills you have or work you
             have done.
        2. Write down the categories of skills you have
             (again, Communication Skills, Creative Skills,
             Financial Skills etc.) and the action verbs that
             describe skills you have or work you have done
             (e.g. analyzed, performed, calculated, advocated,
             etc.).
        For example, you probably have done quite a few
     team projects in school already. You could probably
     pick "Communication Skills" and "Collaborated."

246 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
   Communication/ People  Creative Skills     Management/
Skills                    Combined         Leadership Skills
                          Created
   Collaborated           Developed           Assigned
   Communicated           Drew                Coordinated
   Developed              Illustrated         Decided
   Edited                 Planned             Improved
   Incorporated           Revised             Led
   Proposed               Shaped              Managed
   Suggested              Crafted             Oversaw
   Synthesized            Conceived           Recommended
   Translated             Established         Reviewed
   Facilitated                                Supervised
   Mediated                                   Delegated

   Table adapted from Creating Resumes I by Roads to
Success, licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

   For an additional list of action words for your job
package, check out the Usask's Career Centre's
materials on résumés and cover letters.

As you gather information about your work history and skills,
double check that your information is accurate and current.
Gather dates of employment, dates of trainings, lists of
activities you have been involved in, academic awards,

                                            Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 247
achievements and special projects. If you're having trouble
remembering the information, ask former coworkers or
managers about your significant workplace contributions.

Researching Your Potential Employer

   As we've already discussed,
you must adapt your job
package materials to your
potential employer because
they are your rhetorical
audience. Of course, to know
your audience means you will
need to first take the time to Photo #2: Looking for work
do a little research. It is
important that you research your potential employer as well as
the job for which you're applying. The easiest way to research a
potential employer is to visit the company's website.

   Look for an "About Us" page or a "Mission Statement," and
observe how the company describes its goals and values.

   Try to answer the following questions about the company or
organization:

  · Whom does this company serve?
  · Who are this company's partners or competitors?
  · What technologies would I use at this company?
  · What is the tone of this company's materials (formal,

      conservative, humorous, "cutting edge," etc.)?
  · How would you describe this company's brand?

Here are a few more ways to research a company: search for
its name on LinkedIn and other social media sites, browse for

248 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
news articles about the company or press releases written by
the company, speak with friends or colleagues who work for
the company, or call the company to request an informational
interview. This may seem like extra work, but this research can
help you analyze the needs of your rhetorical audience and, as
a result, better market yourself as a solution to those needs.

   As you research, look for ways to connect with the company:

  · What do you admire about the company?
  · Where do your values and interests overlap with those of

      the company?
  · What makes this company a good fit for you?

Try to summarize your connection to the company in one
sentence. Remember that your potential employer is also your
rhetorical audience, and adapt your tone, examples, and level
of technicality accordingly.

     Exercise #3: Research the Employer

        It's time to research the company where you are
     applying!

        Using the company from your job posting, find the
     company's "About Us" and/or "Mission Statement"
     page and try to answer the questions listed above. You
     may need to look at other parts of the website or online
     to find some of the answers. The job posting is also a
     great place to find this info.

        Once you have your answers, try to summarize your
     connection to the company in one sentence. What is it

                                           Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 249
     about this company that makes you want to work for
     them? What part of their goals and/or values do you
     most respond to? A sentence that explains this
     information would be great for the first paragraph of
     your cover letter!

Researching the Potential Job

To research the job itself, take advantage of the job posting you
found. The job posting is your secret weapon; in this document,
you are told what the employer is looking for in a candidate.

     Exercise #4: Researching the Job

        The job posting will give you insight into the
     rhetorical exigence that a company needs solved.
     Obviously, the solution is you! The best way to figure
     out how you can solve that problem is by scouring the
     job posting and making connections to the words in it.

        You want to get into a conversation with the
     document as you go over it, so you will need a way to
     annotate the posting. Either print it out or copy and
     paste it in a document editor like Microsoft Word. Once
     you have the document ready, take the following steps:

250 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
         1. Highlight or underline any qualifications that
             you hold--any skills you have, technologies you've
             used, etc.

        2. Make note of any past achievements that relate
             to any of the preferred qualifications. Ideally, try to
             use the achievements and experiences you
             generated from Exercise #2. For example, if the
             job description seeks a candidate who can
             diagnose and solve technical problems, write
             down an example of a specific time in which you
             did so in a professional or academic setting.

        3. Circle any keywords you might use in your own
             materials. Using the same terms as a potential
             employer demonstrates to that employer that you
             are able to "speak their language."

        4. Note any questions/uncertainties and any
             qualifications you do not have in order to decide
             what to highlight and what to downplay in your
             materials (as well as what you need to learn more
             about).

        Any content you find through this process can be
     discussed in your application materials. You may not
     end up using all of the content you generate, but its
     important to have options when trying to appeal to
     your rhetorical audience--the company.

If you're having trouble identifying keywords, creating a word
cloud from the job description might help. This can be
accomplished by using a website like EdWordle. Word clouds
present text as a visual display, reorganizing content so that
the largest words are those that appear most frequently in the
analyzed text(see Figures 1 and 2 below). A word cloud can be

                                            Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 251
a helpful visual tool to identify keywords to use in your résumé
and cover letter. You might also be surprised to find that a "big
word" (a commonly repeated keyword) is one that you would
not automatically associate with the job.

   For example, Figure 1, below, is generated from a job posting
for a Children's Museum Experience Facilitator position. What
words stand out to you?

Figure 1. Portland Children's Museum Experience Facilitator Job
Description as a Word Cloud

We can see in Figure 1 that some of the words are obvious
terms we would expect to find in a children's museum job
description--museum, children, exhibits, playing, etc. However,
"diversity" and "diverse" are both large terms, too. If you were
applying for this job, you would now know to talk about your
commitment to diversity/experience working with people from
diverse backgrounds.

   Now you try. Figure 2, below, is a word cloud generated from
a job posting from Nutrien for a summer student position
targeted towards Mechanical Engineers.

252 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
   What words stand out to you?

Figure 2. Nutrien Summer Student, Mechanical Engineering Job
Description as a Word Cloud

Obviously, certain words like "Nutrien" and "Engineering" are
no surprise. However, there are a few keywords we can pull
out of this: words like communication, inclusion, analysis,
organizational. After putting together this word cloud, you now
know a few areas and skills that you should speak to if you are
applying for this position.

     Exercise #5: Keyword Analysis

        Generate a word cloud using your job posting. You
     can do this by using a website like EdWordle.

        What words stand out to you? Are there any words
     that you didn't notice back in Exercise #3? Try to

                                            Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 253
     identify at least 3-4 keywords that you will be able to
     speak to in your job application materials.

     Key Takeaways

          · Creating a job package can be a time-
             consuming process. However, you can make the
             process easier by engaging in some pre-writing
             activities.

          · To find a job posting, you are not limited to
             using all-purpose job boards like Indeed. There
             are specialty job boards like Idealist that target
             specific job interests and some companies only
             post jobs on their websites. Also, you can tap into
             your existing networks that you already have
             access to such as friends, family, and University of
             Saskatchewan Career Services.

          · Companies are your rhetorical audience. They
             want to know that you will align with their goals
             and values. You can learn what those are by using
             the "Mission Statement" and/or "About Us" page
             on the company's website or by searching the
             internet. Once you know this information, you
             should be able to summarize your connection to
             the company in a single sentence.

          · You are the solution to a company's rhetorical
             exigence. The best way to show this is by

254 | Chapter 18: Application Preparation
             identifying keywords in the job posting and
             connecting those keywords to your skills,
             accomplishments, and achievements in your
             application materials.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing" by Allison
Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas,
Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva (on Open Oregon). It is
licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   Photo #1 by Firmbee on Unsplash
   Photo #2 by Clem Onojeghuo on Unsplash

                                            Chapter 18: Application Preparation | 255
Chapter 19: Cover/
Application Letters

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Explain the difference between a cover letter
             and a résumé
          · Recall at least three tips for making your cover
             letter stand out
          · Distinguish between the four parts of a cover
             letter and the purposes of each
          · Analyze a sample cover letter to determine
             strengths and weakness

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · cover letter / application letter
          · full block letter format
          · pathos
          · ethos

256 | Chapter 19: Cover/
Application Letters
· logos

In the era of social media,

the idea of writing a cover

letter to introduce your

résumé may seem outdated.

However, the cover letter

(also known as an

application letter) still serves

a few critical functions. If your

résumé is characterized by

breadth--giving a broad

overview          of  your

qualifications--the cover

letter is characterized by

depth--choosing a few most

significant qualifications to Photo: A workspace

cover in detail.

Your cover letter is the first writing sample your employer

will see from you that is written in paragraphs rather than

bullet points. In paragraphs, it is easier to market your unique

qualifications and how you will fit in with the culture of the

company. An effective cover letter will create a picture of you as

a potential employee, and inspire a potential employer to learn

more about you.

Keep the following tips in mind as you write your cover letter:

· Your cover letter is essentially an argument for why you
   should be granted an interview.

· Make sure to support the claim that you are qualified for
   the position with evidence. This evidence should come
   from the pre-writing exercises you did in the previous

                      Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters | 257
      chapter.
  · Demonstrate your authority by speaking in detail about

      your qualifications, and show the reader that you have the
      skills and abilities necessary to do the job at hand. The
      more detail you offer and the more precise your language
      is, the more the reader will be able to picture you doing
      the job. See the sample cover letter below for examples of
      "showing."
  · Use your audience analysis research to help you connect
      with the company and to choose the appropriate tone,
      level of formality, and level of technicality
  · Follow the full block format for professional letters found
      in the Technical Communication chapter.
  · Aim for one page for your letter and avoid spilling over
      onto a second
  · Follow the Seven Cs to make sure you've edited your letter
      professionally

Outline for Cover Letters

With some adjustments, the full block format will help you
design your cover letter, but what about the actual content?
The general outline for a cover letter has four parts, each with
their own elements. They are:

 1. Salutation
2. Opening Paragraph
 3. Body Paragraph(s)
4. Closing Paragraph

Make sure your cover letter has all the elements discussed
below. Otherwise, your cover letter risks not being the
persuasive document it needs to be to get you an interview.

258 | Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters
Salutation

Make your best attempt to find a specific name (or at least the
job title) of the person to whom you should address this letter.
Avoid using generic salutations like "Dear Hiring Manager," as
they do not add any relation to your letter. If you do not know
the specific audience to direct your letter to, you can omit this
portion of the letter.

Opening Paragraph

State why you are writing, specifically naming the position to
which you are applying. Indicate how you learned about the
position (networking if you can). In one sentence, create a
pathos appeal by using your audience analysis research to
establish a connection with the company. Finally, in one
sentence, summarize your strongest qualification/s for the job,
in order to build up your credibility or ethos.

Body Paragraph(s)

Your body paragraphs show how you are uniquely qualified
for the position. Build each paragraph around a single
qualification or unique professional strength that relates to the
job for which you are applying. Open the paragraph with a
claim about this qualification/strength, and then provide a
developed illustration of a time in your work or academic
history when you used/excelled at this skill, or used it to benefit
others.

   For example, if the job requires excellent customer service
skills, you might discuss a time in which you used your
customer service skills to defuse a conflict or increase your

                                          Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters | 259
company's profits. It can be effective to conclude your middle
paragraphs with sentences that express how these past
experiences will prepare you for the potential job. These
concluding statements contribute to your ethos by
demonstrating your good judgement, and establish an
effective logos appeal by drawing connections between your
skills and experiences and the company's needs.

   Be sure to begin each paragraph with a clear topic sentence
that unifies the information found in the paragraph.

Closing Paragraph

Thank the reader for their time and consideration. Gesture
towards an interview. You may explicitly request an interview,
or you may wish to include such a phrase as, "I look forward to
discussing my qualifications with you in person soon."

   If there is any information the reader should know about
getting in touch with you, include it; if your phone number
and email address do not appear elsewhere in the cover letter,
include them here. You may refer the reader to your enclosed
résumé.

     Exercise #1: Sample Cover Letters

        Below are images of two cover letters. The first image
     shows an outline version. The second one is a sample.
     Review the outline, and then read the sample. Does the
     sample meet all the criteria we have discussed in this
     chapter? Why or why not? How could it be improved?

260 | Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters
   If you need a reminder on what the criteria for each
part is, click the icon at the end of each element.

                    An interactive H5P element has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You
         can view it online here:
         https://openpress.usask.ca/
         rcm200/?p=584#h5p-57

Key Takeaways

     · The cover letter is your argument for why a
        company should hire you. It is a way for you to
        market your qualifications to a potential employer
        and explain how you will fit into the company
        culture. This is accomplished by choosing your
        most significant qualifications and discussing
        them in detail.

     · It is not enough to state: "I have customer
        service skills." You must back up this claim with
        evidence from your past experiences.

     · It is also important to create a connection with
        your audience. If you can show how your own
        goals align with the company, it will be easier for

                                     Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters | 261
             them to see why you would be a good fit.
          · Your cover letter should have four elements: a

             Salutation, Opening Paragraph, Body
             Paragraph(s), and Closing Paragraph.
          · For the Salutation, avoid generic greetings if
             possible. Try your best to find the specific name
             of the person receiving your letter.
          · The Opening Paragraph is your chance to forge
             a connection to the company. Explain why you
             want to work for the company and summarize
             your strongest qualifications.
          · Each Body Paragraph of your letter should
             focus on a specific qualification and provide
             evidence of how you acquired and/or used that
             qualification.
          · The Closing Paragraph is there to thank the
             reader and affirm your interest in an interview.
             Don't forget to include your name and any
             necessary contact information.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing" by Allison
Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas,
Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva (on Open Oregon). It is
licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   Photo by Olena Sergienko on Unsplash

262 | Chapter 19: Cover/Application Letters
Chapter 20: Writing the
Résumé

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of the chapter, you should be able to:
          · Identify the three distinct purposes of a résumé
             in the job application process
          · Compare the benefits and uses of a
             chronological résumé, functional résumé, and
             targeted résumé.
          · Design your own targeted résumé that includes
             contact info, a headline, education, skills/
             achievements, and employment experience
          · Evaluate the conventions of the résumé you
             have created using the guidelines presented in
             this chapter

Key Terms and Concepts
     · résumé

                        Chapter 20: Writing the
                                     Résumé | 263
· chronological résumé
· functional (skills) résumé
· targeted (hybrid) résumé
· reverse chronological order

What is a Résumé?

A résumé is a document that summarizes your education,

skills, talents, employment history, and experiences in a clear

and concise format for potential employers. All of us want our

résumés to stand out from the stack. However, the best way to

create an eye-catching one is not through gimmicks or flash,

but rather through substance and customization.

The word résumé is a French word that mean "a summary."

Leonardo da Vinci is credited with writing one of the first

known résumés, although it was more of a letter that outlined

his credentials for a potential employer, Ludovico Sforza. The

résumé got da Vinci the job, though, and Sforza became a

longtime patron of da Vinci and later commissioned him to

"The most important                paint The Last Supper.
  tool you have on a                  Résumés and cover letters

résumé is language"                work together to represent
                                   you in the most positive light

                         to prospective employers.

- Jay Samit With a well-composed

                                   résumé and cover letter, you

stand out to the employer -- who may give you an interview

and then a good shot at landing the job.

The résumé serves three distinct purposes that define its

format, design, and presentation:

264 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
 1. To represent your professional information in writing
2. To demonstrate the relationship between your

      professional information and the problem or challenge the
      potential employer hopes to solve or address [this is your
      rhetorical exigence]
 3. To get you an interview by clearly demonstrating you
      meet the minimum qualifications and have the
      professional background to help the organization meet its
      goals

An online profile page is similar to a résumé in that it
represents you, your background, and qualifications. People
network, link, and connect in new ways via online profiles or
professional sites like LinkedIn. In many ways, your online
profile is an online version of your résumé with connections
and friends on public display. Your social media is often
accessible to the public, so never post anything you wouldn't
want your employer (current or future) to read, see, or hear.

   This chapter covers a traditional résumé, as well as the more
popular scannable features, but the elements and tips could
equally apply to your online profile.

   For an overview of the résumé, check out the following video:

     Exercise #1: Interactive Video

        Watch the interactive video below about strategies
     for creating a résumé. The video will stop at different
     points to check your understanding of the material.

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 265
                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=867#h5p-40
        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/reswrit101

266 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
Types of Résumés

Your résumé is an

inventory of your education,

work experience, job-related

skills,    accomplishments,

volunteer history, internships,

and more. It's a professional

autobiography in outline

form to give the person who

reads it a quick, general idea

of who you are, and what

skills,    abilities,  and

experiences you have to offer.

With a better idea of who you

are, prospective employers

can see how well you might

contribute to their workplace.
   As a college student or Photo #1: A workspace

recent graduate, though, you

may be unsure about what to put in your résumé, especially if

you don't have much employment history. Still, employers

don't expect recent grads to have significant work experience.

Even with little work experience, you may still have a host of

worthy accomplishments to include. It's all in how you present

yourself.

Work histories come in a variety of forms, as do résumés.

Although career experts enjoy debating which style of résumé

is the best, ultimately you must consider which fits your

current situation. Which style will allow you to best package

your work history, and convey your unique qualifications?

There are three different formats that we will discuss in this

chapter: a chronological resume, a functional (skills) resume,

and a targeted (hybrid) resume. For your job package

                       Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 267
assignment in RCM 200, we will use the targeted résumé
approach, but it's important to know about the other options
you have as well.

   The chronological résumé is a traditional format whose
principal section is the "Employment Experience" section. In
the chronological résumé's "Employment Experience" section,
jobs are listed in reverse chronological order, and
achievements/skills are detailed underneath each position.

   In contrast, a functional (skills) résumé features a well-
developed "Skills & Achievements" section, in which skills are
organized into categories. The functional résumé still includes
an "Employment Experience" section, but it is streamlined to
include only the basic information about each position held.

   A targeted (or hybrid) résumé includes a well-developed
"Skills & Achievements" section that highlights the candidate's
most important and relevant skills, but it also includes select
bullets under each job in the "Employment Experience"
section. This will be the type of résumé you will produce in RCM
200.

   There are many reasons to choose one format over another.
In brief, the chronological résumé serves candidates with a
long/uninterrupted work history, in fields where the company
worked for is of paramount importance. On the other hand,
the functional résumé serves candidates who are transitioning
between fields, candidates shifting from a military to a civilian
career, or candidates who have gained skills in a variety of
different settings (workplace, academic, volunteer). The
targeted résumé offers the best of both worlds.

   Here are some examples of chronological, functional (skills),
and hybrid résumé formats:

Chronological Résumé

A chronological résumé lists your job experiences in reverse

268 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
chronological order--that is, starting with the most recent job
and working backward toward your first job. It includes starting
and ending dates. Also included is a brief description of the
work duties you performed for each job, and highlights of your
formal education.

   The reverse chronological résumé may be the most
common and perhaps the most conservative résumé format.
It is most suitable for demonstrating a solid work history, and
growth and development in your skills. However, this format
may not suit you if you are light on skills in the area you are
applying to, or if you've changed employers frequently, or if you
are looking for your first job.

                            An interactive H5P element has been
                            excluded from this version of the text.
                 You can view it online here:
                 https://openpress.usask.ca/
                 rcm200/?p=867#h5p-20

Note that the Chronological Résumé:

  · Lists both work and education in reverse chronological
      order (starting with the most recent positions/schools and
      working backward)

  · Lists job achievements and skills under each position
  · Presents experience under headings by job title, company,

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 269
      location, and dates of employment
  · Allows employers to easily determine work performed at

      each company

Functional (Skills) Résumé

A functional résumé--also known as a skills résumé--is
organized around your talents, skills, and abilities more so than
work duties and job titles, as with the chronological résumé.
It emphasizes specific professional capabilities, including what
you have done or what you can do. Specific dates may be
included but are not as important.

   This means that if you are a new graduate entering your
field with little or no actual work experience, the functional
résumé may be a good format for you. It can also be useful
when you are seeking work in a field that differs from what
you have done in the past. It's also well suited for people in
unconventional careers.

                            An interactive H5P element has been
                            excluded from this version of the text.
                 You can view it online here:
                 https://openpress.usask.ca/
                 rcm200/?p=867#h5p-21

270 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
Note that the Functional Résumé:

  · Focuses on skills and experience, rather than on
      chronological work history

  · Groups functions or skills under categories
  · Describes responsibilities, accomplishments, and

      quantifiable achievements under categories in the skills
      section
  · Typically opens with a brief summary/profile detailing
      strengths (one-three sentences)
  · Demonstrates how you match the requirements of your
      potential job by including relevant achievements and
      accomplishments

Targeted (Hybrid) Résumé Format

The targeted résumé--also known as the hybrid résumé--is
a format reflecting both the functional and chronological
approaches. It's also called a combination résumé. It highlights
relevant skills, but it still provides information about your work
experience. With a targeted résumé, you may list your job skills
as most prominent and then follow with a chronological (or
reverse chronological) list of employers.

   This résumé format is most effective when your specific skills
and job experience need to be emphasized. Your job package
assignment will follow this format.

                                                 Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 271
                            An interactive H5P element has been
                            excluded from this version of the text.
                 You can view it online here:
                 https://openpress.usask.ca/
                 rcm200/?p=867#h5p-22

Note that the Targeted Résumé:

  · A targeted résumé showcases your relevant skills and
      provides information about your work experience.

  · This résumé format is best for emphasizing skills and job
      experience.

The Main Parts of a Résumé

An important note about formatting is that, initially, employers
may spend only a few seconds reviewing each
résumé--especially if there is a big stack of them or they seem
tedious to read. That's why it's important to choose your format
carefully so it will stand out and make the first cut.

272 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
     Exercise #2: What Do Employers Expect From A Résumé?

        Take a moment to reflect on the following questions:
          · What do you think employers want to see in
             your résumé?
          · What elements are the most important to
             them?

        When you have an answer to both questions, watch
     the video below. In the video, several employers are
     asked those questions. Do their answers surprise you at
     all? If so, why? Is there anything that you didn't expect?

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=867#oembed-1

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/resutips

Format is definitely an important component of a résumé.
However, employers also have expectations for the content in
your résumé. They expect it to be clear, accurate, and up to
date (Bennet, 2005). This document represents you in your
absence, and you want it to do the best job possible. You don't
want to be represented by spelling or grammatical errors, since

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 273
they may raise questions about your education and attention
to detail. Someone reading your résumé with errors will only
wonder what kind of work you might produce that will poorly
reflect on their company. There is going to be enough
competition that you don't want to provide an easy excuse to
toss your résumé at the start of the process. Do your best work
the first time.

   Résumés have several basic elements that employers look
for, including your contact information, objective or
goal, education, work experience, and so on. Each résumé
format may organize the information in distinct ways based on
the overall design strategy, but all information should be clear,
concise, and accurate (Simons & Curtis, 2004).

Contact Info

Create a header that includes your address, telephone number,
professional email address, and possibly a Linkedin page.

   The University of Saskatchewan offers an "email alias" you
can use in place of your NSID email address if you like, but this
is not required. For more information, go to this link.

Headline (Also called Summary, Profile, or
Highlights of Qualifications)

Include a brief summary of your professional self to grab your
reader's attention. Think of this section as your "elevator pitch,"
offering a quick impression of your personal brand. Include
a few key (relevant) achievements/strengths (in bullets or
sentences). Headline sections are especially useful for
candidates with a long work history, or who have experienced
job transitions.

274 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
   Have you been starting your résumé with an
objective statement? These days, most experts recommend
leaving the objective off your résumé entirely. Objectives too
often emphasize what you want from a job, rather than what
you can offer an employer, and thus are generally seen as a
waste of space.

Education

  · Place your education section after the headline/summary
      section if it is recent and relevant, after the experience
      section if your stronger qualification is employment
      experience.

  · List the most current degree/school attended first, and
      proceed in reverse chronological order.

  · Include the following information for each educational
      item: the name of the school, the school's location, your
      graduation date or anticipated graduation date, the
      degree earned (and major if appropriate).

  · DO NOT include high school if you are in college unless
      your high school work was outstanding or unique (like a
      trade/technology/arts high school).

  · DO include trainings and certifications (e.g. first aid
      certifications, sales seminars, writing groups).

  · Develop this section by adding educational
      accomplishments:
         Relevant courses (if they prepared you for the job)
         Special accomplishments (conferences, special
            papers/projects, clubs, offices held, service to the
            school)
         Awards and scholarships (could also be separate
            section - Honours)

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 275
Employment Experience

List positions in reverse chronological order (most recent first).

  · Include basic information for each job: job title, employer,
      dates employed, city/state (and country if outside of
      Canada) of employment.

  · Include internships and skilled volunteer positions (but if
      you do, title the section "Experience" rather than
      "Employment").

  · Consider filtering work experience into "Related
      Experience" or "Relevant Experience" instead of one
      employment section to highlight most relevant jobs (and
      downplay less significant experience).

Skills/Achievements/Qualifications

  · Use sub-headers to group skills into skill set headings
      (management skills, customer service skills, laboratory
      skills, communication skills, etc.). Use targeted headings
      based on the qualifications your potential employer is
      seeking.

  · Include only the most relevant, targeted skills and
      achievements.

  · Emphasize quantifiable achievements and results: skills,
      equipment, money, documents, personnel, clients, etc.-
      Use the active voice (supervised sixteen employees,
      increased profits, built websites) vs. the passive voice (was
      responsible for supervising or duties included...)

  · See the "Building a Better Bullet" section below for more
      information on how to craft an effective "skill bullet."

276 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
Optional Sections

  · Volunteer Work: List skilled volunteer work (building
      websites, teaching classes) under skills, along with your
      other qualifications, but include general volunteer work
      (making meals for a soup kitchen, etc.) toward the end of
      your resume in its own section or under activities.

  · Activities and Interests:
         DO include interests that may be relevant to the
            position but aren't professional skills (sports for an
            opportunity at Nike, student groups for leadership,
            golfing for business jobs, game design/play for game
            design jobs, blogging for PR jobs). Market yourself in
            the best light.
         DO include honours, awards, publications, conferences
            attended, languages spoken, etc. You may choose to
            include a separate honours section or fold these into
            your achievements section.

References

Do not list references on your résumé. Instead, give a separate
sheet at the employer's request (page 3). Generally, three
references are sufficient. The most important references are
your superiors, but you can also use co-workers, clients, or
instructors. Contact each person to verify his/her willingness to
act as a reference for you. Your reference sheet should match
the look of your cover letter and your résumé.

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 277
Résumé Guidelines

   The following tips will help
you write a résumé that
adheres to the conventions
employers expect while
ditching fluff in favor of
expertise.

                                 Photo #2: A conference call

Using "Me" and "I"

The convention in a résumé is to write in sentence fragments
that begin with active verbs. Therefore, you can leave out the
subjects of sentences. Example: "I eliminated the duplication
of paperwork in my department by streamlining procedures"
would become "Eliminated paperwork duplication in a
struggling department by streamlining procedures."

Quantifiable Skills

The more you can present your skills and achievements in
detail, especially quantifiable detail, the more authoritative you
will sound. This means including references to technologies
and equipment you have used; types of documents you have
produced; procedures you have followed; languages you speak;
amounts of money you have handled; numbers of employees
you have supervised or trained; numbers of students you have
taught; technical languages you know; types of clients you
have worked with (cultural backgrounds, ages, disability status
- demographic information that might be relevant in your new

278 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
workplace); graphic design, blogging or social media skills; and
so on.

Filler Words (Fluff)

Avoid generic filler words that can be found on many resumes
and don't suggest meaningful skills. Filler words include:

  · team player
  · results-oriented
  · duties include
  · fast-paced
  · self-motivated

If you MUST use these phrases, find concrete examples to back
them up. For example, instead of using "team player," include
a time you collaborated with peers to earn a good grade on a
project, save your company money, or put on a successful work
event.

Results

In at least one place in your résumé, preferably more, make
mention of a positive impact (or result) of your skills/
achievements. How did you create positive change for your
employer, coworkers or customers? Did you resolve a customer
complaint successfully? Did you make a change that saved
your employer money? Did you build a website that increased
traffic to your client? Did you follow procedures safely and
reduce workplace injuries?

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 279
Building a Better Bullet (Two Skill Bullet
Formulas)

Each skill bullet may need to go through a few revisions before
it shines. Here are two formulas to help you strengthen your
bullets:

   Formula 1: Verb + Details = Results
   Start your bullet with an action verb describing a skill or
achievement. Follow it with the details of that skill or
achievement, and then describe the positive impact of your
achievement. For example:

  · Developed (VERB) new paper flow procedure (DETAILS),
      resulting in reduced staff errors and customer wait times
      (RESULT)

  · Provided (VERB) friendly customer-focused service
      (DETAILS) leading to customer satisfaction and loyalty
      (RESULT)

  · Organized (VERB) fundraising event (DETAILS) generating
      $xxx dollars for nonprofit (RESULT)

  · Provided (VERB) phone and in person support for patients
      with various chronic and acute health issues (DETAILS &
      RESULT COMBINED)

  · Supported (VERB) 8-10 staff with calendaring, files and
      reception (DETAILS), increasing efficiency in workflow
      (RESULT)

Formula 2: Accomplished [X] as measured by [Y] by doing [Z]
   Develop your bullets by going into detail about how you

accomplished what you have accomplished and why it matters
to your potential employer. Compare the following three
versions of the same skill bullet:

  · First Draft: Participated in a leadership program
  · Second Draft: Selected as one of 125 for year-long

280 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
      professional development program for high-achieving
      business students
  · Final Draft: Selected as one of 125 participants nationwide
      for year-long professional development program for high-
      achieving business students based on leadership potential
      and academic success

Note how the third version is not only the most specific, but
it is the one that most demonstrates the "so what" factor,
conveying how the applicant's skills will benefit the potential
employer.

Keywords

Remember, use keywords you gathered in your pre-writing
phase (from the job description, research into your field, and
the "action verb" list presented earlier in the application
preparation chapter). If your potential employer is using a
résumé-scanning program, these keywords may make the
difference between getting an interview or a rejection.

Length

Résumé length is a much-debated question, and guidelines
change as the genre changes with time. In general, the length
of a résumé should be no longer than two pages (and each
page should be full -- no 1.5 page résumés). Some fields,
however, may have different length conventions (academic
resumes, for example, which include publications and
conference attendance, tend to be longer). If your resume is
on the longer side, your work history should justify the length.
Some experts recommend one page per ten years of work

                                                 Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 281
history; while that may be extreme, it is better to cut weaker
material than to add filler.

Design

Résumé design should enhance the content, making it easy
for the reader to quickly find the most significant and relevant
information.

   A few general guidelines:

  · Templates are handy, but bear in mind that if you use a
      common template, your résumé will look identical to a
      number of others.

  · Use tables to align sections, then hide the borders to
      create a neat presentation.

  · Use ten-twelve point font.
  · Don't use too many design features--be strategic and

      consistent in your use of capitalization, bold, italics, and
      underline.
  · To create visual groupings of information, always use more
      space between sections than within a section. This way
      your reader will be able to easily distinguish between the
      key sections of your résumé, and between the items in
      each section.
  · Use the same font in your résumé and your cover letter to
      create coherence.

Field-Specific Conventions

You may find that there are certain conventions in your field
or industry that affect your choices in writing your résumé.
Length, formality, design, delivery method, and key terms are

282 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
just some of the factors that may vary across disciplines. Ask
faculty or professional contacts in your field about employers'
expectations, visit the University of Saskatchewan Career
Services. or conduct web research to make informed field-
specific choices.

     Key Takeaways

          · A résumé serves three distinct purposes:

                 1. It represents your professional information
                      in writing

                2. It demonstrates the relationship between
                      your professional information and the
                      problem (i.e., rhetorical exigence) that a
                      potential employer hopes to solve or
                      address.

                 3. It gets you an interview by demonstrating
                      that you meet the minimum qualification
                      and professional background necessary to
                      help the employer meet its goals.

          · The format you choose for your résumé will
             depend on your needs and experience. A
             chronological résumé emphasizes work history,
             whereas a functional résumé emphasizes skills.
             For this class, you will create a targeted résumé
             which emphasizes both work history and skills.

          · Employers are looking for any opportunity to
             throw out your résumé. To avoid this, ensure that
             your résumé has basic elements such as contact

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 283
             info, a headline, education, employment
             experience, and skills/achievements.
          · Also ensure that the writing conventions in your
             résumé are solid. Some of these include:

                   Avoid using "I" and "me" statements
                   Make sure you are discussing quantifiable

                      skills
                   Remove all filler words
                   Mention the results you have achieved in

                      at least one part of the document
                   Craft stronger bullet points

References

Bennett, S. (2005). The elements of resume style: Essential
rules for writing resumes and cover letters that work.
AMACOM.

   Simons, W., & Curtis, R. (2004). The Resume.com guide to
writing unbeatable résumés. McGraw Hill Professional.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing" by Allison
Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas,
Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva (on Open Oregon). It is
licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   This chapter is also adapted from another chapter in

284 | Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé
"Technical Writing" by Allison Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy
Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas, Megan Savage, and Michele
DeSilva (on Open Oregon). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License

   This chapter is also adapted from "Business Communication
for Success" by the University of Minnesota (on University of
Minnesota Libraries Publishing). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License

   This chapter is also adapted from "Blueprint for Success in
College and Career" by Lumen Learning and Linda (Bruce) Hill
(on Rebus Community). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

   Photo #1 by Julian Christian Anderson on Unsplash
   Photo #2 by Sigmund on Unsplash

                                                Chapter 20: Writing the Résumé | 285
Chapter 21: Interview
Strategies

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Explain at least three strategies for preparing
             for an interview
          · Explain how to best respond to interview
             questions
          · Identify the required elements of a post-
             interview thank you note

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · interviewing
          · thank-you note

Interviewing is the phase of the job search process where you
go from being an applicant on paper to a real, 3-dimensional
286 | Chapter 21: Interview
Strategies
person. Essentially, you will be evaluated on your verbal
communication skills through this face-to-face (or video or
phone) interaction. Employers want to see whether you match
up to the qualifications described in your résumé, and they
want to see whether you have good interpersonal
communication skills to get a sense of how you would
function as part of their team.

                       Interviews  are  often

"One important key     intimidating for job seekers
      to success is
                       who feel the pressure of
 self-confidence. An
   important key to    being evaluated and feel
  self-confidence is
                       uncomfortable with the
preparation." (Arthur
           Ashe)       interview format. While the

                       nervousness may never go

                       away, effectively preparing

                       for the interview can make

you feel more confident, and, with practice, you will be better

able to stay in the moment and treat the interview like a

conversation.

This chapter focuses on general interview preparation. Do

bear in mind, though, that different disciplines and industries

have different interviewing techniques. For instance, the

technical interview or "code day" has become standard for

many computer science-related fields. You should always do

research on standard practices in your industry, but also keep

in mind that interviews can be surprising. In fact, some

employers try to surprise interviewees to get a sense of how

they think and react in unfamiliar situations. Part of your

challenge is to stay open-minded and relaxed so you can

project confidence, even in unexpected or unfamiliar

situations.

               Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 287
Preparing for the Interview

Good preparation before an interview is based on
understanding who your audience is--understanding the
employer and the industry. This is not the type of information
that you can memorize the night before. Take as much time
as you can to read and absorb information from a variety of
sources to get a thorough sense of the company--not just the
basic information you find on the "About" page of their website,
but the tone and personality they broadcast in social media,
their past and current projects, their achievements, their
community involvement, etc.

Job Interview Types and Techniques

   Every interview you
participate in will be unique:
the people you meet with,
the interview setting, and the
questions you'll be asked will
all be different from
interview to interview.

   The various factors that
characterize any given interview can contribute to the sense of
adventure and excitement you feel. Nevertheless, it's also
normal to feel a little nervous about what lies ahead. With so
many unknowns, how can you plan to "nail the interview" no
matter what comes up?

   A good strategy for planning is to anticipate the type of
interview you may find yourself in. Common formats for job
interviews are described in detail below. By knowing a bit more
about each type and being aware of techniques that work for

288 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
each, you can plan to be on your game no matter what
form your interview takes.

Screening Interviews

Screening interviews might best be characterized as "weeding-
out" interviews. They ordinarily take place over the phone or
in another low-stakes environment in which the interviewer
has maximum control over the amount of time the interview
takes. Screening interviews are generally short because they
glean only basic information about you. If you are scheduled to
participate in a screening interview, you might safely assume
that you have some competition for the job and that the
company is using this strategy to whittle down the applicant
pool. With this kind of interview, your goal is to win a face-to-
face interview.

   For this first shot, though, prepare well and challenge
yourself to shine. This type of interview should be treated like
a real interview. This may mean dressing for the interview and
having a resume in front of you so that it can be referred to.
Another suggestion is to make sure your cell phone is fully
charged and that the screening interview takes place in a
location that is free of distractions. Try to stand out from the
competition and be sure to follow up with a thank-you note.

Phone or Web Conference Interviews

If you are geographically separated from your prospective
employer, you may be invited to participate in a phone
interview or web conference interview, instead of meeting
face-to-face. Technology, of course, is a good way to bridge
distances. The fact that you're not there in person doesn't make

                                                 Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 289
it any less important to be fully prepared, though. In fact, you
may wish to be all the more "on your toes" to compensate for
the distance barrier. Make sure your phone or computer is fully
charged and your internet works (if possible, use an ethernet
connection instead of wifi). If you're at home for the interview,
make sure the environment is quiet and distraction-free. If the
interview is via web conference, try to make your background
neat and tidy (ideally, the background should be a plain wall,
but that isn't always possible). Avoid using a simulated
background, as they often look fake and the employer may feel
that you are trying to hide something.

One-on-One Interviews

Many job interviews are conducted with just you and a single
interviewer--likely with the manager you would report to and
work with. The one-on-one format gives you both a chance to
see how well you connect and how well your talents, skills, and
personalities mesh. You can expect to be asked such questions
as, "Why would you be good for this job?" and "Tell me about
yourself." Many interviewees prefer the one-on-one format
because it allows them to spend in-depth time with the
interviewer. Rapport can be built. As always, be very courteous
and professional. Have handy a portfolio of your best work, and
be sure to get their contact info so that you can send a follow-
up email.

Panel Interviews

An efficient format for meeting a candidate is a panel
interview, in which perhaps two to five coworkers meet at the
same time with a single interviewee. The coworkers comprise

290 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
the "search committee" or "search panel," which may consist of
different company representatives such as human resources,
management, and staff. One advantage of this format for the
committee is that meeting together gives them a common
experience to reflect on afterward. In a panel interview, listen
carefully to questions from each panelist, and try to connect
fully with each questioner. Be sure to write down names and
titles, so you can send individual thank-you notes after the
interview.

Serial Interviews

Serial interviews are a combination of one-on-one meetings
with a group of interviewers, typically conducted as a series of
meetings staggered throughout the day. Ordinarily, this type
of interview is for higher-level jobs when it's important to meet
at length with several major stakeholders. If your interview
process is designed this way, you will need to be ultra prepared,
as you will be answering many in-depth questions.

Lunch Interviews

In some higher-level positions, candidates are taken to lunch
or dinner, especially if this is a second interview (a "call back"
interview). If this is you, count yourself lucky and be on your
best behavior, because even if the lunch meeting is
unstructured and informal, it's still an official interview. If all
persons interviewing you are ordering an alcoholic drink, feel
free to order one as well (know your tolerance!), along with
a glass of water. Drink slower than the interviewer to show
restraint and patience. You are not expected to pay or even to

                                                  Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 291
offer to pay, but, as always, you must send a thank-you note.
Lastly, use your best table manners!

   These are just some of the interview types that you may
encounter. The video below covers more if you are interested.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=592#oembed-2

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/10interviewtypes

During the Interview

Once you have prepared mentally and gathered the
information for your interview, it's time to prepare for the
interaction during the interview.

292 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
Dress the Part

Let's keep this simple--dress your best. In most business
cultures, dressing professionally is a sign of respect, conveying
that you care about the position, that you want to make a good
impression.

   Here are the basics:

 1. Wear your best professional clothing--this typically means
      a suit (and a tie, for men) and dress shoes (no open toes,
      no white socks).

2. Try on the complete outfit (including shoes) to make sure
      you're comfortable. Does it fit? Does it stay in place? Can
      you sit down, shake hands, and move comfortably? You
      don't want your clothing to distract you or the interviewer.

 3. Clean and press your clothes and shoes. Prepare your
      outfit the night before and hang it up (no wrinkles!).

Even if you know the work environment is casual, you should

                                                  Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 293
dress "up" for the interview--more professionally than you
would if you worked there. The exception would be if you are
explicitly told not to--for instance, if the recruiter specifies that
you should dress "business casual."

Don't Come Empty-Handed

Arriving at the interview with important documents and notes
shows that you are prepared and thinking ahead. Organize all
your materials in a nice folder or folio--presentation matters!

   Print out several clean copies of your résumé and any other
documents you might want to reference, like the job or
internship description or your references. You should also bring
a few samples of your work, if possible--documents you've
prepared or artifacts from projects.

   Make the most out of all of that research and preparation
by bringing notes. A nice notebook or paper and a pen are
perfectly acceptable for you to have in the interview and they
can help you feel more focused by getting some of the
information out of your head and organized on paper.

   Follow these guidelines:

 1. Be organized. Re-write or type and print your notes so you
      can easily find the information you need. You don't want
      to be shuffling through scraps of paper.

2. Keep it simple. Write down keywords, brief phrases and
      ideas that will jog your memory, not a complete script.

 3. Prepare questions for the interviewer (see examples
      below). You typically have the opportunity to ask these
      questions at the end of the interview, when it can be
      difficult to remember what you were going to ask.

294 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
          Pro Tip: Take notes during the interview! The
       interviewer will likely reveal information to you
       during the conversation--write down anything that
       you want to remember for later or anything that you
       want to come back to later in the conversation.

Interview Questions

For most job candidates, the burning question is "What will I
be asked?" There's no way to anticipate every single question
that may arise during an interview. It's possible that, no matter
how well prepared you are, you may get a question you just
didn't expect. Not to worry! Prepare as much as you can--doing
so will build your confidence in your answers and help you to
be ready for unexpected questions. Think of the interview as a
kind of impromptu speech.

   To help you reach that point of sureness and confidence, take
time to review common interview questions. Think about your
answers. Make notes, if that helps. Conduct a practice interview
with a friend, a family member, or a colleague. Speak your
answers out loud. Below is a list of resources that contain
common interview questions and good explanations/answers
you might want to adopt.

                                                  Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 295
WEBSITE:     DESCRIPTION:

100 top job  This site provides a comprehensive set of

interview    interview questions you might expect to be

questions--be asked, categorized as basic interview questions,

1 prepared for behavioral questions, salary questions, career

the interview development questions, and other kinds. Some

(f rom       of the listed questions provide comprehensive

Monster.com) answers, too.

             This site provides text and video answers to the

             following questions: Tell me about yourself,

Interview    describe your current position, why are you

2 Questions and looking for a new job, what are your strengths, Answers (from what is your greatest weakness, why do you

BigInterview) want to work here, where do you see yourself in

             five years, why should we hire you, and do you

             have any questions for me?

             This site explores some of the most difficult

Ten Tough    questions you will face in job interviews. The

Interview    more open-ended the question, the greater the

3 Questions and variation among answers. Once you have Ten Great become practiced in your interviewing skills, you

Answers (from will find that you can use almost any question

CollegeGrad) as a launching pad for a particular topic or

             compelling story.

The video below asks different hiring managers what they
want to hear from candidates in interviews.

           One or more interactive elements has been
           excluded from this version of the text. You can
view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=592#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/answeringintqs

Questions to Ask the Interviewer

At the end of nearly every interview, applicants are often asked
296 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
if they have any questions they would like to pose to the
employer. Do you have a question ready to ask?

   In addition to revealing your knowledge of the company,
these questions are also an opportunity for you to figure out
if the employer and the company culture is a good fit for you.
Think carefully about what matters to you, what would allow
you to do your best work, and try to ask questions that will give
you insight into those factors.

  · What are the primary tasks or responsibilities for a person
      in this position? What does a day in this job look like? Is
      travel required? Overtime?

  · What is the orientation or training process?
  · What are the goals/priorities for a person in this position?

      How will success be measured?
  · What is the company's assessment and review process?
  · Does the company support professional development

      activities?
  · How does this position fit within the team/department?

      What is the reporting structure?
  · Does this position function alone or within a team setting?
  · How would you describe the company culture or team

      dynamic?
  · What is this company's approach to management?
  · What are the company's overall goals and priorities and

      how do those affect someone in this department/
      position?

NOTE: The end of the interview is not typically the best time to
ask about salary and benefits. This is your opportunity to learn
about the workplace and the position--the environment, how
it's structured, employee support programs.

                                                  Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 297
          From Donnie Perkins, Chief Diversity Officer,
       College of Engineering. Learn more here.

          Following are some questions students may ask
       prospective employers about their diversity,
       inclusion and equity. Company recruiters who can
       provide factual and reasonable responses to these
       questions are on a positive track advancing diversity
       and inclusion in ways that truly benefit employees,
       the company, customers, and community while
       promoting innovations, strategic thinking and
       active engagement.

            · How does [Company] define diversity,
                inclusion, and equity? Provide an example of
                how diversity, inclusion, and equity benefits
                [Company].

            · What are the racial, ethnic, and gender
                demographics of [Company's] company-wide,
                leadership, and manager levels?

            · As a national and/or multinational company,
                describe your cultural competency training
                program for employees who will take
                assignments in [specific countries or
                continents where the company does
                business].

            · Describe the role and responsibilities of
                women and persons of color on [Company's]
                leadership team.

            · Give me an example of how [Company]
                values people of color, female, LGBTQ, veteran
                and employees with disabilities.

298 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
Body Language & Interaction

As a general rule, it's important to be observant and take your

cues from the interviewer. Reflect their tone and pay attention

to the dynamic they set--are they very formal and professional

or more conversational? It's okay to make small talk, but you

want to follow the lead of the interviewer.

Be conscious of your posture. You will want to sit up straight

(no leaning or lounging) and avoid crossing your arms in front

of your chest (it can seem defensive or withdrawn).

Make eye contact. Look at the interviewer while they ask

you questions and give them non-verbal cues--smiling,

nodding--when appropriate. Make it clear that you are

listening and understand what they're saying.

                                     Speak     clearly  and

           thoughtfully. Adjust your

           volume for the environment

           and make sure the

           interviewer can hear and

           understand you easily. Don't

           rush yourself and take time

           to deliver thoughtful

responses. Ask for clarification if you don't understand a

question.

Project calm. Fidgeting and extra movement can make you

seem nervous even if you aren't. Be aware of your tendencies

and try to minimize them. If you know you fidget, try to keep

your hands folded and avoid clicking or tapping the pen. Don't

wear jewelry that you will play with or that will make noise

while you move. Wear your hair in a way that will not tempt

you to touch or play with it constantly. If seated at a table,

sit towards the front of the chair and plant your feet on the

floor--it can help keep you steady.

Be yourself. With all of the previous tips in mind, you also

need to feel comfortable and like yourself. If you are

           Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 299
enthusiastic, if you talk with your hands, if you are shy, that's
fine--you just need to be the most engaged, professional
version of yourself you can be in order to show the interviewer
what you are capable of in the workplace.

After the Interview

At the end of the interview, you will want to ask the interviewer
what you can expect in terms of next steps or when they might
make a decision about the position. This will help set your
expectations and allow you to prepare for future
interactions--they might have multiple rounds of interviews or
they might have another week left of meeting with candidates,
for instance.

   Within 24 hours of the interview, you should send a thank
you note to the interviewer(s). Email is a standard and
expected vehicle for this message and you will likely have
already been in contact with them via email or will have their
business card from the interview.

   The formula for this message is simple, but choose your
words carefully and try to extend their good impression of your
written communication here as well:

  · Relevant subject line
  · Gratitude for their time and the opportunity
  · Your continued interest in the position
  · Something specific from your conversation (this is where

      taking notes comes in handy!)
  · Reminder of your qualifications
  · Positive and forward-looking conclusion

300 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
You will want to reflect the overall tone of your interaction--try
to make it consistent with the person they met the day before.

          Subject: Design Engineer Internship - Thank you
          Ms. Tanner,
          Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you
       yesterday. I feel like I learned a lot about the Design
       Engineer Internship role at ABC Innovations and I
       remain very interested in the position.
          After hearing about the project I would be
       assigned to, I did some further research on your
       prototyping process and I can see interesting
       connections with the work I did in my previous
       internship. It would be exciting to build on that
       knowledge with your team.
          Please feel free to contact me via phone at xxx-
       xxx-xxxx or email if there is any additional
       information I can provide. I look forward to hearing
       from you.
          Thank you,
          J. Buckeye

     Key Takeaways

                                                  Chapter 21: Interview Strategies | 301
          · Interviewing is all about preparation. Never
             walk in blind to an interview. Spend some time
             before hand research the company and the
             position. This will help you better articulate how
             you will be a good fit for them. Additionally,
             review some common interview questions and
             have some stories in mind that you can use to
             answer them.

          · Also come prepared with some questions of
             your own. Pick ones that are important to you as
             this will help you determine if the company is a
             good fit.

          · After the interview is complete, send a thank
             you note to the person or people you met with.
             Keep in mind that this is an opportunity to
             emphasize your qualifications. If your thank you
             note has lots of grammatical errors, it will reflect
             poorly on you as a candidate.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "A Guide to Technical
Communications: Strategies & Applications" by Lynn Hall and
Leah Wahlin (on ohiostate.pressbooks.pub). It is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License

   This chapter is also adapted from "Blueprint for Success in
College and Career" by Lumen Learning and Linda (Bruce) Hill
(on Rebus Community). It is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

302 | Chapter 21: Interview Strategies
WRITING A REPORT

                                                                        Writing a Report | 303
Chapter 22: The
Rhetorical Nature of
Reports

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Define what a report is and identify the
             different forms that it can take.
          · Identify how certain reports can be informal,
             formal, or somewhere in-between.
          · Explain how you have already created several
             reports during your academic career.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · report
          · written report
          · oral report
          · informative report

                                                       Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature
                                                                                 of Reports | 305
          · persuasive report

Over the next several chapters, we will be walking you through
the process of creating reports. Reports are crucial deliverables
in many technical professions. In fact, engineers can spend
anywhere from 20% to 95% of their time writing reports
(Leydens, 2008). That's a lot of writing! However, it's also
important to remember that not all reports are written, as they
can take an oral format as well. Before we go into the actual
process of how to write a report or give a presentation,
however, let's look at reports more generally.

What is a Report?

What comes to mind when you think of the word report? If you
went to school in Canada, your first thought might be one of
the many book reports you did for your English classes where
you had to summarize and review a book you read recently.
However, since you have been in this class for a couple weeks
now, maybe you're thinking about reports in a professional/
technical sense, like a business proposal or a research
statement.

   Before we get too ahead of ourselves, let's consider this
definition for the word report:

           a transmission of any information

306 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
That definition is pretty basic, but what that tells you is that
reports are happening around you all the time because, as
we've already learned, communication is the transmission of
information. This also means that a report doesn't just have to
be written, since we also transmit information when we speak.
Let's look at a more detailed definition.

          an account of your investigation into a subject,
       presented in a written document or oral
       presentation that has conventional formatting.

Something has changed with this definition. Can you see what
it is? Similar to our first definition, this new definition also
describes reports as an exchange of information. The
difference, though, is that there is a focus on you--the writer or
speaker--to share that information in a way that is accessible
and relatable to your audience.

   We'll explain how to do that in just a moment, but let's first
review the different forms a report might take in your
professional career, as well as some reports you may have
already done (possibly even without realizing it).

Types of Reports

Reports can take different forms. Here are few different types:

                             Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports | 307
   Depending on your career trajectory, you may have to do a
several, if not all, of these report types.

   The reason why you may be writing or presenting a report
will depend on your career and need. As a result, there are a
number of different reasons why you would create one:

   Do any of those reasons sound familiar? They should! At their
core, reports are a form of rhetorical communication, which
308 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
we covered in the first chapter. Not only are they intentional,
purposeful acts of communication, but they also involve
making a connection with the audience in order to get them
to change something. You'll need to accomplish both in the
formal report and persuasive presentation you create for RCM
200.

   Composing a report may seem a bit overwhelming, but it's
important to realize that you have already created several
reports in your life. Of course, you may think, "That's not true.
The whole reason I'm taking the class is so I can learn how to
do that!" Trust us when we say you have more experience with
reports than you think.

Kinds of Reports

To help you see how you have already been creating reports in
other contexts, it is important to distinguish between the two
types of reports.

   As we have mentioned, reports can be presented either
orally or in writing. However, within those two categories are
range of different forms that a report can take. Not only that,
it's important to recognize that reports can move on a
spectrum from informal to formal.

                             Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports | 309
Oral Reports

   Can you think of any informal oral reports that you've done?
Here is an example: if you meet with your team, and a colleague
asks you about your portion of the research, you might tell
them about some of the resources you have found and how
you plan to use them. In this case, you would be providing an
impromptu update. Does this sound familiar? If you bump into
a friend in the hall and have a brief chat about your plans this
weekend, this is also an impromptu update.

   Online conferencing happens when you meet a supervisor,
instructor, or team over a platform like Zoom or Webex. Usually,
such meetings take place at a scheduled time, which means
there are specific topics you need to discuss. It is far less casual
than running into someone in the hallway. However, even an
online conference can be less formal depending on the
context. If you are video chatting with friends or family in
another city, or province, or even country, odds are it will be far
less formal, especially if you are just catching up!

   If you have ever given a presentation in front of a class, you
have given a formal presentation. In such assignments, you
were likely being graded, which means there was more at stake
for you. Similarly, if you are the leader of an on-campus club,
you might occasionally have to speak in front of your club to
discuss future plans and events. While this may be less stressful
because you are not being graded, you are still operating in

310 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
a professional capacity, which makes the presentation more
formal.

   These are just some of the ways you have already given oral
reports in your life. Can you think of any other examples and
whether they are informal or formal?

Written Reports

   Like oral reports, written reports can take many forms that
fall somewhere on the spectrum of informal and formal.

   As we have discussed, text messages are generally very brief
and are best kept short. As a result, they are an informal type
of written report. If someone has asked you to text them when
you leave, then they are asking for a written report. Emails
can also fall into this informal category as well when they are
being written to friends and family. However, emails become
more formal when written to either a potential employer or co-
worker. As you saw in the Job Package section of this textbook,
formal writing is essential if you want to convince a potential
employer to hire you.

   Memos and letters tend to be more formal since they are
used in official capacities. However, even those will only be
seen by a small audience.

   Formal reports are much more technical, and will likely be

                               Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports | 311
seen by a larger audience. Therefore, they are much more
formal.

Reports and Rhetoric

Hopefully, you have a sense of how you are already creating
reports in your daily life. Now, let's review some examples of
reports you may be familiar with (and some you may not be)
and discuss how that writing is rhetorical in nature. While all
these examples are focused on written reports, you will see
examples of a rhetorical oral report later on in this text.

Form Reports

A form report is what it sounds like: a form that you fill out
to report something. These reports tend to be very dry and
require only concise statements describing the facts. However,
each still has a persuasive element.

  · Taxes
         If you have ever filed a tax return, you have submitted
            a form report to the government. This type of form
            report includes all of your sources of income and your
            eligible deductions. While most of this information is
            factual, you are still trying to persuade the
            government to accept your tax return because you do
            not want to provoke an audit. Ultimately, you are
            trying to convince the government that your
            information is credible.

  · Incident Report

312 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
         If you have ever worked at a job where safety was a
            large component, such as a lifeguard, you probably
            filled out incident reports. In these reports, you were
            not just describing the incident as you experienced it;
            rather, you were trying to present it in such a way that
            the reader will accept your account as true, complete,
            and unbiased.

  · Expense Report
         If you spent your own money for company business,
            and you wanted to get it back, then you needed to
            write an expense report that demonstrated your
            professionalism. Otherwise, the company would not
            reimburse you.

Even though all of the above examples may appear simple, all
of them have a rhetorical element that must be considered
when filling them out.

Other Reports

Of course, all reports aren't as dry and concise as tax forms.
After all, only the most basic level of persuasion is required in
order to inspire the Canadian Revenue Agency to accept how
much money you owe them or for them to pay you money you
that you are owed. Sometimes, however, a certain report will
require you to focus more carefully on your persuasive skills in
order to convince someone to do something with the facts.

  · Job Application
         Whenever you compose a job package to apply for a
            job, you are creating a report. This report describes
            the education, experiences, and skills that you can
            offer to a potential employer in the hope of

                              Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports | 313
            persuading them that your report is true and that
            your assessment of how you will be a good fit is valid.
  · Application to Graduate School
         Similarly, when applying to graduate school, you are
            trying to persuade the admissions board that you
            would be a good fit for their program and their school.
  · Funding for Business Plan
         If you plan to start your own business, you will write up
            a business plan. This is a report that you create in
            order to attain funding for your business. A bank will
            not give you a loan without a complete report or if
            they don't believe you are credible!

In summary, reports take many forms. You have already tried
some, and others you have not. Regardless, it's okay if you are
not an expert in any of them. This skill will come with time and
plenty of practice. Our goal in this course is to give you the
general skills you need to create effective, persuasive reports so
that you can apply your knowledge to other situations.

   Ultimately, in order to write a really effective report or give a
stellar presentation, you will want to apply the rhetorical tools
we have already discussed in this course.

How are Reports Rhetorical?

Reports (both written and oral) fall under two categories:
informative reports and persuasive reports. Both try to
achieve similar, though different, results. With an informative
report, you want to establish your credibility so the audience
accepts the facts. With persuasive reports, you want to
audience to accept the facts, but you may also want to change
their thinking and, therefore, their actions.

314 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
   For this course, you will be creating two reports: a written
formal research report and an oral persuasive presentation.

   Since both of your reports will be rhetorical in nature, your
ultimate goal is to persuade the audience to take action on a
topic. The question is, then, how do you accomplish this in your
reports? The best place is start with the rhetorical theory that
we learned from Bitzer and Aristotle. By using rhetorical theory
to assess the situation and to plan a report, your message will
become more persuasive.

   Over the next couple of chapters, we will walk you through
how to apply that theory as you construct your own reports.
To help you see how this theory is applied in practice, you
will see two students Mei (she/her) and Hamid (he/him) go
through their own processes. Mei is working on the written
report for this course, and Hamid is working on the persuasive
oral presentation. Before they can jump into using the theory,
though, they'll need to come up with a focused topic for their
report.

     Key Takeaways

          · Reports can take many forms. Whether written
             or oral, you already have experience creating a
             number different types of reports that range
             from informal to formal.

          · This experience will be a big help to you in this
             course. What will probably be different for most of
             you, though, is that you will need to use the
             rhetorical theory we have discussed in this course
             to create your messages.

                              Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports | 315
· Specifically, you will be using the theory of
   Bitzer and Aristotle to craft your reports so that
   they are persuasive in nature, not simply
   informative.

References

Leydens, J. (2008). Novice and insider perspectives on

academic and workplace writing: Toward a continuum of

rhetorical awareness. IEEE Transactions on Professional

Communication, 51(3),  242-263. https://doi.org/10.1109/

tpc.2008.2001249

316 | Chapter 22: The Rhetorical Nature of Reports
Chapter 23: Report
Planning and
Choosing a Topic

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Compare different strategies for developing a
             focused topic and use one to start off your report.
          · Develop a focused topic and research question
             for your formal written report.

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · iterative process
          · scope
          · focused topic
          · research question

                                                         Chapter 23: Report Planning and
                                                                        Choosing a Topic | 317
Writing as Process

As a technical student, you are already familiar with the design
process. Whether you're sketching a prototype or coming up
with a pest management plan, most technical disciplines are
already familiar with the cyclical nature of problem-solving.

   A good example of this is the process used by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The image
below highlights their process. Does anything stand out to
you?

NASA Engineering Design Process

The process is cyclical! In RCM 200, we contend that technical
communication follows a similar repeating pattern. In the
context of report writing, there are three stages that must be
followed and revisited. These are:
318 | Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic
 1. Planning Your Message
2. Producing a Draft
 3. Polishing the Draft

When looking at NASA's design process, we can see some
similarities to the plan - produce - polish process of report
writing. Both processes are iterative, or a process for
calculating a desired result by means of a repeated cycle of
operations. If you were to use the NASA design process to write
a report, it might look something like this:

  · Ask: identify a research problem
  · Imagine: brainstorm potential solution, research ideas,

      identify what research has already been done
  · Plan: choose the report format, outline report sections,

      analyze secondary sources
  · Create: write the report using the proper format
  · Experiment: proofread and edit your report
  · Improve: ask for feedback and make changes

We have obviously simplified the steps a bit by using three
categories instead of six, but keep in mind that each part is
essential to creating a strong report.

   If you would like to see another example of a report writing
process, look at the planning tool found in the the Assignment
Planner from the U of S Library. This website also breaks up the
writing process into stages.

Choosing Your Topic

Often, when you are first given a project, or even when you
have already identified a topic you wish to research, the

                     Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic | 319
problem you are solving is fairly general and open-ended.
While you can approach the problem in a variety of ways at this
stage, you'll need to do some work to decide which particular
approach you will take. Most projects will require careful
consideration of scope.

   Who is your audience? What is your purpose? What are the
limitations placed on what can be expected or achieved? What
are the constraints you have to work within? All of these
elements are rhetorical in nature and must be considered as
you craft your message. This will be much easier once we
come up with a focused topic.

   A focused topic is what it sounds like: a report topic that
is specific. You don't want to your topic to be too broad or
general, otherwise you will have a hard time creating your
report because there will be too much information to cover.

   For example, let's say you want to do a report about climate
change. You could argue that climate change is a specific topic
within the environmental science field, but it's still quite broad.
To help you narrow your focus, it is best to spend some time
determining what you already know, or what you want to know,
about the topic you are considering. In this way, you will be able
to figure out where gaps in your knowledge are and places you
may need to focus in your research. You will then be able to
develop a research question.

     Exercise: Strategies for Developing a Focused Topic

        What strategies have you used when developing
     topics for you past research papers? Did you just pick a
     topic you were kind of interested in and casually search

320 | Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic
the internet to find some relevant information? That's
certainly one way to do it, but that is a horribly
inefficient approach! Using pre-writing strategies is a
much better approach.

   These strategies will help you figure out what you
already know about a topic and what your knowledge
gaps are. With this knowledge, you will be able to
better utilize your research time.

   The video below will walk you through one of these
strategies:

                    One or more interactive elements has
                    been excluded from this version of the
        text. You can view them online here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=352#oembed-1

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/developingtopic

The video above highlights

Questioning as one of the

methods you can use to

narrow the focus of your

topic. Click on this link to

download a copy of the "4-W"

brainstorming  table

mentioned in the above

video.

        Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic | 321
   Here are some other topic brainstorming options you can try:

  · Free-writing: write about the topic for 10 minutes straight
      without stopping or self-editing

  · Mind-mapping or Concept-mapping: create a graphic
      organizer listing ideas and indicating how they are
      connected

  · Questioning: who, what, where, when, why, how? What
      do I already know? What do I need to find out?

  · Brainstorming: list all ideas without censoring or rejecting
      any, no matter how ridiculous they might seem at first.

Following one of these methods will help you narrow your
focus. Clearly you won't be able to solve whatever topic or issue
you pick in one paper or project. And no reasonable instructor
or employer would expect you to. The ultimate aim is to narrow
your topic enough to provide a specific question to guide your
research and identify key words and terminology related to
your topic.

   A good research question should be somewhat open ended;
that is, the answer should not be a simple "yes" or "no." The
focus of your research question should allow you to provide
a comprehensive answer that takes context into careful
consideration.

   Once you have your focused topic and a research question,
you will ready to move on to using rhetoric to craft your
message.

   But before we do that, though, let's take a look at the two
students mentioned in the previous chapter--Mei (she/her)
and Hamid (he/him)-- and how they both approach their
topics. Remember, Mei is picking a topic for her written formal
report and Hamid is picking a topic for his oral persuasive
speech.

322 | Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic
Mei - Picking Her Topic (Formal Report)

   When Mei first came to
the University of
Saskatchewan, she knew
she wanted to be a
scientist. She just didn't
know what type of
scientist.

   Originally, she was
going to be a biologist,
but that didn't feel right, so she switched to chemistry
after her first semester. That didn't feel right either. It
wasn't until she took a physics course and learned
about nuclear energy that she finally realized her life's
calling. She decided to become a nuclear physicist and
started taking the appropriate classes.

   When it is time to pick a topic for her RCM 200 formal
report, Mei decides to write about nuclear energy, but
she isn't sure what to say. She thinks about her past
discussions with people about the topic, and she
remembers that those conversations often end with
her being told that nuclear energy is dangerous and
should be phased out entirely. Maybe she'll write a
report about that? However, to really get a sense of
what she wants to say, she uses the Questioning
method and generates the following form:

               Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic | 323
Topic: Nuclear Energy              Where/Place?
When/Time?

  the present (2021) and into the  Canada
future

What/Event?                        Who/Person?
  using nuclear energy to combat  the general public
climate change
        Based off this exercise, Mei develops the following
     research question to help guide her research: How can
     nuclear energy help reduce the impacts of Climate
     Change?

        Now that she has a focused topic and a research
     question to help guide her research!

     Hamid - Picking His Topic (Persuasive Speech)

                                                     A few months before
                                                  taking RCM 200, Hamid
                                                  went hiking with his
                                                  family in Ontario. After a
                                                  couple days, he noticed
                                                  that he was developing a
                                                  rash on his legs. He didn't
     think much of it though since he assumed he had
     brushed his legs up against something poisonous on
     the hike. A few days after that, however, he started
     feeling fatigued. His started having general aches all
     over his body, and would occasionally get severe
     headaches. Thinking he might have the flu, Hamid
     went to see his doctor.
        The doctor told him that he did not have the flu: he
     had Lyme disease. Hamid was surprised because he
     thought Lyme disease only happened in the United
     States, not in Canada. The doctor informed him that

326 | Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic
deer ticks, which carry the disease, had been slowly
migrating north to Canada over the years and the
disease was becoming more common in Canada. The
doctor also told Hamid that if he had not come in for
treatment right away, the disease may have affected
his central nervous system and potentially killed him.

   When it was time to pick the topic for his RCM 200
persuasive speech, Hamid decided to speak about
Lyme disease as his general topic. He decides to create
a mind-map to help him decide what to speak about.

A sample mindmap on Lyme disease

   After reviewing his mindmap, Hamid realizes that he
wants to learn more about the disease itself, and he
also wants to be able to explain to people why they
should be concerned about it as well. With both of

               Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic | 327
     those things in mind, he comes up with the
     following research question: Why is Lyme Disease
     becoming more prevalent in Canada and how what
     steps should Canadians take to make sure the don't
     get it?

        Hamid feels pretty good about the research focus he
     has come up with. But he also realizes that he may
     need to make adjustments along the way.

With their focused topics and research questions selected,
Mei and Hamid can move on to the next step of the planning
process: using rhetorical theory to craft their persuasive
messages.

     Key Takeaways

          · Technical communication follows a repeating
             pattern where different stages are followed and
             revisited. For our course, we have three: (1)
             Planning your message, (2) Producing a draft, and
             (3) Polishing the draft. Following this iterative
             process will help you generate a more effective,
             polished message.

          · The first thing you want to do is develop a
             focused topic. If you already have a general idea
             of the topic you want to use, that's great. Start by
             using a pre-writing strategy to help you

328 | Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic
   determine what you already know and what the
   gaps in your knowledge are.
· After you have your focused topic, write out a
   research question that you can answer through
   your research.
· Once you have both of those, you can move on
   to considering the scope of your project to get a
   sense of what the expectations and limitations
   are.

References

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (2018).

Engineering  Design  Process  [Image].  NASA.

https://www.nasa.gov/audience/foreducators/best/edp.html

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from A Guide to Technical
Communications: Strategies & Applications (on
ohiostate.pressbooks.pub) by Lynn Hall & Leah Wahlin. It is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License

             Chapter 23: Report Planning and Choosing a Topic | 329
Chapter 24: Using
Rhetorical Theory to
Write Your Report

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Design the message of your report by applying
             the rhetorical theory of Bitzer and Aristotle

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · rhetorical exigence
          · rhetorical audience
          · constraints
          · pathos
          · ethos
          · logos

330 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical
Theory to Write Your Report
By now, you should already have a focused topic and research
question for your report. Now it's time to craft your message.

   As we said in a previous chapters, rhetorical theory will help
you craft a persuasive message for your audience. This chapter
will show you how to do that. Specifically, you will be using
Bitzer's "The Rhetorical Situation" and the Aristotle's "Modes
of Appeal" to help form a message around you focused topic
and research question. Before we connect the theories to your
report, we will briefly review the content in both. While both
theories are distinct in the rhetorical issues they consider, when
combined you will have a much stronger message. You will also
notice that there is some overlap between the two in terms of
what you need to consider. To help you see this in practice, you
will continue to see how Mei and Hamid apply the theory to
their own reports.

   Please keep in mind that you are by no means locked into
your focused topic and research question at this point. As you
go through the theory below, you might realize that your topic
is too broad or that you don't actually want to write about it.
If you need to change or refine it, that's completely fine. What
matters is that you go through this process early enough so
you are realize these issues now instead of the night before the
report is due.

"The Rhetorical Situation" (Bitzer)

In this earlier chapter we mentioned that Bitzer's theory was
good for assessing the context of your communication
situation. This is because "The Rhetorical Situation" is
essentially a planning document. Before you even begin
writing your message--that is, your written report or
presentation--you need to consider the situation you are

            Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 331
building your message for, by reviewing Bitzer's three
constituents:

 1. Rhetorical Exigence: What is the problem that your
      message will solve?

2. Rhetorical Audience: Who is your audience and how do
      they need to receive the information?

 3. Constraints: What challenges will your message face
      (constraints)?

By considering Bitzer's three constituents of the rhetorical
situation, you will analyze the situation before you begin to
design your message and, as a result, start from a much
stronger position. Let's look at how you might do that now.

Rhetorical Exigence

The first constituent is rhetorical exigence. This is something
needing to be done (or a problem to be solved) that can be
fixed, to some degree, with the cooperation of others.

   In terms of reports, if you have to write an informative report
it means you have an audience that needs information (which
is something that needs to be done). An informative report
answers that problem, but it also needs to provide information
in such a way that the audience is persuaded to believe the
information as credible. Keep in mind that it is not enough to
just give them information; it must also be understandable.

   When analyzing rhetorical exigence for your topic, do not
simply stop at "the audience needs information." Go deeper!
Think about the relational issues that go on with persuading an
audience.

332 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
Mei - Rhetorical Exigence

   When thinking about her report, Mei knows she
should start with rhetorical exigence (the problem she
wishes to solve). She thinks about her past
conversations with people about nuclear energy, which
she knows rarely go well.

   But why? After some thought, she realizes it's
because they already have negative ideas of what
nuclear energy involves. Their preconceived notions of
nuclear energy is what stops them from seeing it as a
safe, reliable energy source. Her audience has some
constraints she must consider in her report's
argument.

   Therefore, the problem she needs to solve is to
change their opinion and have them understand that
nuclear energy is actually safe and reliable. However,
she knows she needs to go deeper than that.

     · What preconceived ideas will she be going up
        against in her report?

     · How will people be hesitant when reading her
        report?

   She will need to keep these constraints in mind if she
is going to change her audience's opinion.

      Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 333
     Hamid - Rhetorical Exigence

        Hamid is struggling with his topic. On the one hand,
     the problem is that Lyme disease is a medical issue
     that is becoming more prevalent in Canada; however,
     how does that help his audience? What can they do
     about it?

        After some thought, he realizes that if he can get the
     audience to be more knowledgeable and take the
     disease seriously, then they could save their lives. He
     decides that his speech's rhetorical exigence will be to
     help his audience know what to look out for with Lyme
     disease, and the steps they can take to protect
     themselves.

Rhetorical Audience

   The second constituent is
rhetorical audience. This isn't
just any audience who hears
the message though.
Instead, a rhetorical audience
must meet two criteria. They
must be:

 1. able to make the needed change
2. open to being persuaded

334 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
In terms of a report, then, your rhetorical audience is the one
who requires the information, and is open to being persuaded
that the report is credible. However, when analyzing rhetorical
audience, do not stop at just identifying who needs
information. Go deeper! Ask yourself the question, "How does
the audience need to receive the information so they can
assess it as credible?"

     Mei - Rhetorical Audience

        Next, Mei considers her rhetorical audience. Since
     her formal written report is for RCM 200, Mei knows
     only a few people will read it (like her instructor and
     some of her peers). However, she also knows that she
     should take the assignment seriously. She considers
     the two criteria:

         1. Can her audience make the needed change?
                   While this group may not be able to
                      directly impact environmental energy policy
                      and shift it towards a greater reliance on
                      nuclear energy, she knows that she can at
                      least change their opinion of its safety and
                      viability as an alternative to burning coal
                      and fossil fuels.

        2. Is her audience open to being persuaded?
                   She believes they are. She knows that a lot
                      of people in her program are concerned
                      about climate change and are open to

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 335
                      discussing alternative means of energy
                      production.
        After going through those two questions, Mei is
     feeling pretty good. But she also must consider how
     the audience will receive her information so they can
     assess it as credible. Mei decides the best way to do this
     is by using reputable institutions that study nuclear
     energy to lay out a case for why it is safe and viable. She
     will also need to address concerns the audience has
     about reactor overloads and nuclear waste.

     Hamid - Rhetorical Audience

        Hamid thinks about his rhetorical audience. Unlike
     the formal report he wrote earlier in the term, his
     presentation will be in front of his entire class. That
     means a lot of people will see his presentation.

         1. Can his audience make the needed change?
                   He believes so. As long as his list of
                      strategies are simple and easy to do, Hamid
                      believes his audience will be able to protect
                      themselves from Lyme Disease.

        2. Is his audience open to being persuaded?
                   This will be tricky. Most people he has

336 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                      talked to think of Lyme Disease as an
                      American problem that doesn't affect
                      Canadians. To combat this issue, he will
                      need to show in his speech how prevalent
                      Lyme Disease is becoming in Canada.
                      Otherwise, his audience may not take him
                      seriously.
        In order to show he is credible, Hamid knows that all
     of his sources will need to come from medical
     organizations and medical journals. Additionally, he
     realizes it may help if he also shares his own personal
     experience with the disease.

Constraints

The final constituent is constraints. Constraints always exist
in any rhetorical situation. They are those elements that limit
what the writer or speaker can effectively say.

   As a result, when constructing your report, you need to
consider what will limit how you present your information. Ask
yourself these questions:

  · How much background information does the audience
      need?
         Is your audience new to the topic or are they very well-
            read in this area? If they are knowledgeable, then you
            would only have to present the bare minimum.

  · How long is the report or presentation expected to be?
         Are you sending a paragraph-long email or submitting

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 337
            a 200 page research report? This will determine how
            much time and/or space you have to discuss your
            topic.
  · Are credible sources of evidence available?

         We will go into more detail about this in a future
            chapter, but we will briefly discuss it now. By "credible"
            we mean are the resources peer-reviewed? Can you
            find them in academic literature? Or at the very least,
            will the sources be seen as credible in the eyes of your
            audience? For example, if you are presenting to a
            group of high school students, and you only use
            information from Wikipedia, they may find that
            credible. However, if you are presenting to a group of
            scholars who are experts in their fields, they most
            certainly will not find Wikipedia credible.

  · What are the design conventions (i.e. rules) for the style of
      report?

         Conventions differ for each type of report. For
            example, the rules for writing an email are different
            from writing a report. If you have a 200 page report,
            what kind of graphics do you need to create, and how
            should you format them to meet the conventions of
            that report?

         Also, keep in mind that conventions change from class
            to class, field to field and, sometimes, position to
            position. For example, for this course, we want you to
            use the American Psychology Association (APA)
            format when writing your report. This will affect how
            you format your citations, references and graphics.
            However, if you're an engineer, your field may have
            their own set of formatting conventions than another.
            One example of this is mechanical engineering versus
            electrical engineering, each of which have their own
            style guides.

338 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
Mei - Constraints

   Mei considers all the constraints that will limit her
formal report.

    1. How much background information does the
        audience need?
              Mei assumes that her audience has an
                 idea what nuclear energy is, though they
                 may not know the specifics of how it works.
                 Since Mei is trying to convince her audience
                 that nuclear energy is a safe and reliable
                 source of energy, she decides to avoid going
                 too deep into the technical process of fusion
                 reactions. Instead, she wants to compare the
                 energy outputs between coal/fossil fuel-
                 fired power plants and nuclear power plants
                 as well as show how both impact climate
                 change. This means she will need to find
                 data for both methods so she can compare
                 them for the audience.

   2. How long is the report expected to be?
              Mei reviews the class handout for the
                 formal report and finds that it should be
                 between 1800 - 2400 words, double spaced.
                 She knows that a double spaced page is
                 roughly 500 words, so that means her paper
                 will be roughly 5 pages of written text.

     Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 339
                      However, she also needs to include other
                      elements like a title page and a graphic, so
                      this means her report will be somewhere
                      between 6-8 pages long.

        3. Are credible sources of evidence available?

                   From her courses, Mei already knows a
                      couple of organizations that focus on
                      nuclear energy specifically. She makes a list
                      of the ones she already knows, and searches
                      online for some that focus on the
                      environment generally. Her list includes the
                      Canadian Nuclear Association and the
                      Center for Climate and Energy Solutions.
                      She doesn't know how to find peer-reviewed
                      articles , so she stops by the Murray Library
                      on campus and asks a librarian for help. The
                      librarian directs her to articles in the peer-
                      reviewed journals Popular Science, Fusion
                      Science and Technology, and Energy Policy.

        4. What are the design conventions (i.e. rules) for
             the style of report?

                   Mei pays close attention to format
                      requirements for the assignment because
                      she knows she'll lose points if she forgets
                      any of them. In the written report, she will
                      need to include at least one graphic (like a
                      table, chart, or photograph). That seems
                      easy enough. However, for the entire
                      assignment, she also needs to include a

340 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                 cover page, transmittal document, title
                 page, table of contents, list of tables and
                 figures, reference page, and appendices.
                 She must also use APA format for all of her
                 references and citations. That's a lot of
                 content! She makes a checklist for herself so
                 she doesn't forget anything.

Hamid - Constraints

   Hamid considers all the constraints for his persuasive
speech.

    1. How much background information does the
        audience need?
              Quite a bit, probably. While Hamid is sure
                 that most of his audience has heard of Lyme
                 disease, he doubts that most of them will
                 know it's effects and just how serious it can
                 become if untreated. He decides to break
                 break up his speech into three parts: (1) an
                 overview of Lyme Disease, (2) the challenges
                 of testing for the disease, and (3) how the
                 disease is becoming more common in
                 Canada. Each section should provide
                 enough information to help his audience

      Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 341
                      better understand the disease.

        2. How long is the presentation expected to be?

                   Hamid reviews the class handout for the
                      persuasive speech. The speech will only be 5
                      minutes long, which doesn't leave him a lot
                      of time. If he assumes his introduction and
                      conclusion will be about 30 seconds total,
                      that leaves him only 4 and half minutes to
                      discuss the three sections he came up with.
                      This means he will need to make sure he
                      doesn't have too much information. He also
                      sees that his speech must be within a ten
                      second window. This means it must not be
                      shorter than 4:50, or longer than 5:10. Hamid
                      will need to make sure he practices a lot to
                      ensure his speech is just long enough.

        3. Are credible sources of evidence available?

                   Hamid does a quick web search and finds
                      a number of medical organizations that
                      discuss Lyme Disease such as the Center for
                      Disease Control and Prevention. He also
                      searches for academic articles on the USask
                      Library website and finds several. However,
                      he is unable to find any articles specifically
                      about the disease in Canada. He can't make
                      it to campus, so he uses the USask Library
                      Ask Us online chat service so he can talk to a
                      librarian from his home. The librarian finds
                      three articles for him, one of which is about

342 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                      Lyme Disease spreading in the prairies. This
                      is great news, because that article will help
                      him better connect the disease to the lives
                      of his audience in Saskatchewan.
        4. What are the design conventions (i.e. rules) for
             the presentation?
                   After reading the assignment handout,
                      Hamid sees that his speech needs to be in
                      an extemporaneous style. The speech must
                      also be based on an outline that he will
                      create from the persuasive speech
                      evaluation form that his instructor gave him.
                      Additionally, he needs to ensure his speech
                      is grounded in research, which shouldn't be
                      too difficult to do since he has already found
                      so many great sources. Unfortunately for
                      Hamid though, he is not allowed to use
                      PowerPoint or any kinds of slides to help
                      him. Instead, he will only be able to use a
                      single note-card.

"The Modes of Appeal" (Aristotle)

By now, you should have used Bitzer to determine the problem
you are trying to solve, who is the audience that needs the
information, and how you are going to get that information to
them. Now it's time to put that message together. We can do

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 343
so by considering Aristotle's Modes of Appeal. As a reminder,
these are the strategies you can use to create a persuasive
message (ethos, pathos, and logos), which requires an
assessment of:

 1. the credibility of the speaker (ethos)
2. the needs and values of the audience (pathos)
 3. the available arguments and evidence to decide how to

      present the most persuasive message possible. (logos)

All together, the modes of appeal work together to build a
message that shows the credibility of both the speaker and
their message to the audience. In this section, you'll notice
discussion on sources and finding evidence. Again, we will go
into more detail on that in next chapter.

Ethos

Ethos is defined as the credibility of the speaker as established
in the message by demonstrating good will, good judgement,
and good character. This means taking stock of yourself, your
position, and understanding how that may affect your
message either positively or negatively.

   As you start designing your message, ask yourself the
following questions:

 1. Does my content show awareness of the needs of the
      audience?

2. Am I meeting the conventions of the report or
      presentation?

 3. Is the information presented fair and complete?

344 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
Mei - Ethos

   Mei walks through the three questions to determine
her ethos.

    1. Does my content show awareness of the needs
        of the audience?
              Mei believes it does. Climate change is a
                 very important topic right now that has a lot
                 of people worried. However, she also knows
                 that people are often worried about the
                 safety of nuclear energy. Therefore, she will
                 need to address those concerns in her
                 report by discussing recent nuclear crises
                 like the Fukushima reactor in Japan. She
                 knows that she could lose her credibility if
                 she ignores the risks involved with nuclear
                 energy because it will look like she didn't
                 take her audiences concerns into
                 consideration.

   2. Am I meeting the conventions of the report?
              This one is easy, since Mei already
                 considered this while going over Bitzer's
                 constraints. She already knows her
                 audience (her instructor) will expect her
                 report to have all of the required elements
                 (table of contents, references, etc.). If she
                 includes all of them, it will show the

     Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 345
                      instructor that she took the assignment
                      seriously.
        3. Is the information presented fair and
             complete?
                   Mei is unsure what to do here. She knows
                      that ethos is about showing her credibility,
                      but she also knows that she should not
                      include her personal opinions in the report.
                      Instead, the facts should do the talking. She
                      asks her instructor for advice, and they
                      explain to her that credibility will be shown
                      by the types of information she selects. As
                      long as she is picking from reputable
                      organizations on both sides of the issue, and
                      addresses the audience's concerns with that
                      information, she will come off as credible.
                      Mei is relieved, because that was already her
                      plan after going through Bitzer!

     Hamid - Ethos

        Hamid walks through three questions to determine
     his ethos.

         1. Does my content show awareness of the needs
             of the audience?

346 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
          In general, Hamid's presentation is about
             personal health and safety. From his
             research, he knows that Lyme disease can
             have a serious, negative impact on people's
             lives. In order to establish his credibility, he
             will need to show that concern through his
             tone, body language, and use of detail. He
             realizes that one way he can establish his
             credibility is by discussing his own close call
             with disease. This tactic will help him create
             a personal connection with his audience
             and help show why he thinks it is an
             important topic for them to be aware of.

2. Am I meeting the conventions of the
     presentation?

          The main purpose of the presentation is to
             persuade the audience, but Hamid knows
             he will have to do more than persuade them
             that "Lyme Disease is a serious disease." That
             is too easy, and the professor will probably
             say he didn't go deep enough. That is why
             he will end his speech by discussing how his
             audience can take protective measures to
             stop themselves from catching the disease.
             If he can give them a list of actions to take,
             like checking for ticks when they go hiking,
             that will be much more actionable.

3. Is the information presented fair and
     complete?

 Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 347
                   After thinking about his topic for some
                      time, Hamid realizes he could easily use
                      scare tactics to persuade his audience. He
                      could do this by focusing only on the most
                      severe consequences of Lyme Disease, like
                      how it affects your central nervous system
                      and can lead to paralysis. However, he also
                      realizes that this is a pretty transparent
                      tactic, and may turn his audience off his
                      message. Instead, he decides to use a more
                      balanced approach when describing the
                      diseases impact. By explaining the range of
                      health effects the disease can have, he will
                      show his audience that he has done his
                      research (making him appear more
                      credible), and allow them to come to the
                      conclusion that the disease is serious on
                      their own.

Pathos

Pathos is defined as a connection of the message to the needs,
values, expectations, and wants of the audience. Put another
way, does your message help the audience understand why
the content is important to them?

   As you start designing your message, ask yourself the
following questions:

 1. Does the quality of my research meet the expectations of
      the audience?

348 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
2. Is the report designed to make it easy for the audience to
     understand?

3. Are claims supported by credible evidence?

    Mei - Pathos

       Mei walks through the three questions to determine
    her pathos. It should be easy; she's already determined
    her audience's needs by considering her rhetorical
    audience with Bitzer. However, she still goes through
    the questions just to be sure.

        1. Does the quality of my research meet the
            expectations of the audience?
                  Mei is confident that it will. She's already
                     found several reputable sources that she
                     can integrate into her report, and there is a
                     lot of strong, persuasive content. However,
                     she knows that this will be only part of it.
                     Yes, it's good to have strong sources, but
                     she'll also need to make sure the writing
                     itself is clear and well presented. The
                     formatting will also be need to meet the
                     audience's need, since they (the instructor)
                     will be looking very closely at that.

       2. Is the report designed to make it easy for the
            audience to understand?
                  This goes back to formatting. Once Mei

         Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 349
                      has written her report, she starts adjusting
                      the formatting to meet the criteria for the
                      class. She checks for consistency first. Are all
                      the headings the same size? Is the font the
                      same? She also checks to make sure that
                      her page numbers and headings line up
                      with the table of contents and list of tables.
                      She also prints out a copy of her report so
                      she can make sure the graphics and tables
                      are easy to read.

        3. Are claims supported by credible evidence?

                   While going through Bitzer's constraints,
                      Mei found over 50 resources for her formal
                      report. That's quite a lot, and definitely more
                      than she needs. She starts evaluating the
                      sources she found to ensure they are
                      credible. Some of the resources are quite
                      old, like from the 1980s, and she is not sure if
                      that evidence is still valid today. Therefore,
                      she decides to try and stick with evidence
                      from this century. She also decides to only
                      use with academic journals with peer-
                      reviewed articles. This means getting rid of
                      websites generated by the general public,
                      not organizations. There are more steps she
                      needs to take to evaluate her sources, but
                      she'll get there in time.

350 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
Hamid - Pathos

   Hamid walks through the three questions to
determine his pathos. It should be easy, since he has
already determined his audience's needs by
considering his rhetorical audience with Bitzer and
how he will establish his credibility with ethos.
Regardless, he still goes through the questions just to
be sure.

    1. Does the quality of my research meet the
        expectations of the audience?
              Hamid is already planning to use his first-
                 hand experience with Lyme Disease as his
                 hook to get his audience's attention.
                 However, he doesn't want to focus solely on
                 personal experience. He knows his audience
                 will want to hear data about how Lyme
                 Disease is spreading in Canada. Since he
                 already has information from the Center for
                 Disease Control and Prevention, and several
                 articles from medical journals, Hamid feels
                 confident he will meet his audience's
                 expectations.

   2. Is the presentation designed to make it easy for
        the reader to understand?
              After reviewing some of his resources,
                 Hamid starts to feel a little overwhelmed.

      Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 351
                      Several of his sources, especially the ones
                      from medical journals, have really detailed
                      information about the disease and use
                      terminology that he doesn't fully
                      understand. He could definitely get detailed
                      in his speech but then realizes he doesn't
                      have that kind of time. His speech is only 5
                      minutes long, after all. Also, if he doesn't
                      understand that level of detail, how will he
                      be able to explain it to his audience? Hamid
                      decides to focus just on the most basic
                      information like where the disease comes
                      from, how it impacts the body, and how the
                      audience can protect themselves against it.

        3. Are claims supported by credible evidence?

                   All of Hamid's evidence will come from
                      reputable medical organizations and
                      medical journals, so he's good there.
                      However, how will he show this in his
                      speech? Unlike a written report, there won't
                      be a list of references at the end for his
                      audience to see. This means he will have to
                      mention the names of his sources his in
                      speech. For example, he might say "The
                      Public Health Agency of Canada provides
                      the criteria for diagnosing and treating
                      Lyme Disease." Mention the organizations or
                      journals directly will help here. However,
                      Hamid knows he'll have a hard time keeping
                      all those names straight, so he makes sure
                      to write them down on his notecard so he

352 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                      doesn't forget.

Logos

Logos is defined as a well-organized, well-supported, and well-
positioned argument.

   As you start designing your message, ask yourself the
following questions:

 1. Is the issue presented in a complete and balanced way?
2. Does the report or presentation organize sections in a

      logical way?
 3. Is the argument positioned to recognize the audience's

      concerns?
When we talk about the "positioning of an argument," we are
pointing to the importance of approaching the problem in
a way that shows you understand why the audience should
care. In other words, you must describe the problem and the
solution in terms that are connected to the audience's
concerns.

     Mei - Logos

        Mei is almost done, and she's feeling pretty confident

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 353
     in her logos appeals. She goes through the final three
     questions.

         1. Is the issue presented in a complete and
             balanced way?

                   When evaluating her resources, Mei pays
                      close attention to ones she will use to
                      address her audience's concerns. She wants
                      to make sure she is using the same types of
                      resources (organizations, peer-reviewed
                      academic journals, etc.) for her anti-nuclear
                      energy information as her resources that are
                      pro-nuclear energy, otherwise they will feel
                      unbalanced. However, she also knows that
                      this is still an argumentative report. This
                      means that she should not have an equal
                      number of resources that argue against her
                      point. Otherwise, her report will be unclear
                      and lack focus. What matters is that she
                      uses the same quality of resources, even if
                      that anti-argument will only take up a
                      paragraph or two of her entire report.

        2. Does the report organize sections in a logical
             way?

                   Mei thinks long and hard about this. She
                      knows she is working against her audience's
                      negative notions of what "nuclear power"
                      entails, so her structure will be important if
                      she is going to change their minds. After
                      some outlining, she decides on five sections:

354 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                 Introduction, Nuclear Energy and the
                 Environment, Safety, Viability, and
                 Conclusion. With this structure, she can
                 start by discussing the topic broadly and get
                 more and more specific with each section.
                 After she gets a draft together though, she's
                 feeling less confident. She decides to send
                 her report over the USask Writing Centre for
                 feedback. She's used the service before, and
                 even though the report isn't done, she
                 knows the tutors will let her know if she's on
                 the right track.

   3. Is the argument positioned to recognize the
        audience's concerns?

              Mei is confident that it does. Each section
                 poses a relevant concern that address the
                 audience's concern and then provides a
                 solution. For example, in the Safety section
                 she acknowledges the three main nuclear
                 disasters that people are aware of, but then
                 counters that by discussing how newer,
                 more modern nuclear technology fixes the
                 problems that caused the three disasters in
                 the first place. She doesn't want to concede
                 any points, but she also wants to make sure
                 she address her audience's concern.

Hamid - Logos

      Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 355
        Hamid is almost done. He feels like his speech is
     really coming together. He goes through the final three
     questions to ensure his logos appeal is strong enough.

         1. Is the issue presented in a complete and
             balanced way?

                   Obviously, nobody is going to say that
                      Hamid should include an argument that is
                      pro-Lyme Disease. That doesn't make sense.
                      What matters here is that Hamid is neither
                      diminishing the severity of the disease or
                      overstating its effects. He also needs to
                      make sure that he will be providing his
                      audience with just enough information so
                      that are knowledgeable, but not
                      overwhelmed by the content.

        2. Does the presentation organize sections in a
             logical way?

                   After considering Bitzer's constraints and
                      using the speech outline provided by his
                      instructor, Hamid feels he has a good
                      structure for his speech. He knows he will
                      open by briefly talking about his own close
                      call with disease, then he will provide of an
                      overview of the disease. He will follow this
                      with explaining why testing for Lyme
                      Disease is challenging, how the disease is
                      spreading in Canada, and then provide his
                      audience with a list of strategies for fighting
                      the disease. It's a lot to fit into five minutes,

356 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
                      so Hamid is aware he will have to be very
                      selective of what information he includes.
        3. Is the argument positioned to recognize the
             audience's concerns?
                   Hamid knows from personal experience
                      that medical issues can be pretty daunting.
                      He doesn't want to scare his audience, and
                      he also doesn't want them to be self-
                      defeated by the end of his presentation.
                      That is why his speech will end with a list of
                      strategies they can take to protect
                      themselves from the disease. By including
                      that content, he will empower his audience.

Using Theory to Establish Credibility

Now, with both Bitzer and Aristotle at your side, you can begin
to write a report that understands the rhetorical problem you
are trying to solve, the audience that you are speaking to, and
the message you need to design in a way that is persuasive to
that particular audience (just like Mei and Hamid did).

   Below you have two ways to try this out on your own. The first
is a tool that will walk you through the process. By the end, you
will be able to export your file to your computer. If you would
rather take your time, you can download the Microsoft Word
file and fill out

          An interactive H5P element has been excluded

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 357
          from this version of the text. You can view it
online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=605#h5p-44

Microsoft Word File: Rhetorical Outline For Reports

When creating a rhetorical message, either when writing or
when creating a speech, start with Bitzer. Use his work to
analyze why the audience needs the information, what the
audience already knows, and what form the report--or
message--should take.

   Follow up with Aristotle to establish your credibility in the
report by designing a well-structured message that meets the
audience's needs in a clear and complete way.

   By using your knowledge of rhetoric to develop a message,
you will be able to craft an effective message because you will
know what its purpose is.

     Key Takeaways

          · Now that you have your focused topic and
             research question you can begin crafting your
             report.

          · To do this, you will apply the theory found in
             Bitzer's "The Rhetorical Situation" and Aristotle's
             Modes of Appeal.

          · Bitzer's three constituents (rhetorical
             exigence, rhetorical audience, and constraints)
             will help you assess the situation where you are
             presenting your report. This will start you off on
             much stronger footing.

358 | Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report
          · Once you have evaluated the Bitzer's
             constituents, you can move on to Aristotle's
             Modes of Appeal (ethos, pathos, and logos). The
             three modes will help you craft a much more
             persuasive message.

References

Bitzer, L. F. (2009). The rhetorical situation. In J. MacLennan,
Effective communication for the technical professions (2nd ed.)
(pp.18-21). Oxford University Press. (Abridged from Bitzer, L.F.
(1968). The rhetorical situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1),
1-14.)

   Kennedy, G. A. (1991). Aristotle on rhetoric: A theory of civic
discourse. Oxford University Press, USA.

           Chapter 24: Using Rhetorical Theory to Write Your Report | 359
Chapter 25: Finding
and Evaluating
Research Sources

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between popular sources and
             scholarly sources
          · Identify different types of sources that can be
             used for technical projects
          · Evaluate research sources with a critical lens by
             considering their authority, content, and purpose

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · scholarly sources
          · popular sources
          · authority, content, and purpose

360 | Chapter 25: Finding and
Evaluating Research Sources
Finding and Evaluating Research
Sources

While going through Bitzer and Aristotle's rhetorical theory,
you will need to start looking up some sources you can use
for your report. Perhaps you already know of some sources
that you could pull from. But, if you don't have any sources in
mind, or if you don't know how to even start looking for them,
that's okay too. We'll talk more about strategies for conducting
research in the next chapter. Right now, we want to make sure
you know how to properly evaluate the sources you do find
when you start your research.

Popular vs Scholarly Sources

In this "information age," when so much information is
available at our fingertips on the Internet, it is crucial to be
able to critically search through the reams of information in
order to select credible sources that can provide reliable data
to support your ideas and convince your audience. In the era of
"fake news," deliberate misinformation, and "alternative facts,"
developing the skill to evaluate the credibility of sources is
critical.

   Sources can be broken up into two categories: popular and
scholarly. How would you define the difference between the
two? Can you come up with some examples of both? Ideally,
when you think of both categories, you should think of items
such as those in the figure below.

                 Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources | 361
           Figure #1 Examples of Popular vs Scholarly Sources.1
     Why are scholarly sources more desirable than popular
  sources? Is it ever a good idea to use one source type over the
  other in the report writing process? Let's look at this a little
  more deeply.
     Watch the video below to help distinguish between the two:

                       One or more interactive elements has been
                       excluded from this version of the text. You can
           view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
           rcm200/?p=613#oembed-1

  Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/scholarsource
     Scholarly articles published in academic journals are usually

  required sources in professional communication; they are also

1. 2
2. [1]

  362 | Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources
an especially integral part of engineering projects and
technical reports. Since you are researching in a professional
field and preparing for the workplace, there are many credible
kinds of sources you will draw on in a professional context. How
many can you list? Table #1 below lists several types of sources
you may find useful in researching your projects.

Table #1: Typical Research Sources for Technical
Projects

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=613#h5p-45

Download: Typical Research Sources for Technical Projects

Critically Evaluating Sources

Clearly, there are a lot of places where you can pull sources
from. However--and this is a big however--it is essential that
you critically evaluate your sources for authority, content, and
purpose.

   Anyone can put anything on the internet, and people with
strong web and document design skills can make this
information look very professional and credible, even if it isn't.
Since a majority of research is currently done online, and many
sources are available electronically, developing your critical

                Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources | 363
evaluation skills is crucial to finding valid, credible evidence to
support and develop your ideas. In fact, this has become such
a challenging issue that there are sites like List of Predatory
Journals that regularly update its online list of journals that
subvert the peer review process and simply publish for profit.

   When evaluating research sources and presenting your own
research, be careful to critically evaluate the authority, content,
and purpose of the material, using the questions in Table #2.

Table #2: Evaluating the Authority, Content and
Purpose of the Information

          An interactive H5P element has been excluded
          from this version of the text. You can view it
online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=613#h5p-46

Download: Evaluating the Authority, Content, and Purpose of
the Information

Going through all those questions may seem like a tedious,
unnecessary process, but it is essential that you consider these
questions as you acquire sources for your reports. Not doing so
can negatively impact your credibility as a professional.

   Consider it this way: let's say you are presenting a report to
a potential client. If they find out you used sources that lack
authority, are not relevant or recent, or do not really serve their
purpose, how will they view you? How will that affect their view
of the company you work for?

   Ultimately, critical thinking lies at the heart of evaluating
sources. You want to be rigorous in your selection of evidence,
because once you use it in your paper, it will either bolster your
own credibility or undermine it.

364 | Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources
Key Takeaways

     · Not all sources are created equal when it comes
        to research. There are two main categories:
        popular sources and scholarly sources. Of the
        two, scholarly sources are more credible because
        they have to go through a peer-review process in
        order to be published.

     · However, you still want to make sure you
        evaluate the sources your find for authority,
        content, and purpose regardless of where you
        found it.

References

Government of Canada, Statistics Canada [online]. Available:

http://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/start 

Kurland, D. (2000). What is critical thinking? How the

language really works: The fundamentals of critical reading and

effective              writing. https://www.criticalreading.com/

critical_thinking.htm

List of predatory journals. (n.d.). Stop Predatory

Journals. https://predatoryjournals.com/journals/

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from Technical Writing Essentials (on
                Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources | 365
BCcampus) by Suzan Last, and is used under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Cover images from journals are used to illustrate difference
between popular and scholarly journals, and are for
noncommercial, educational use only. 

366 | Chapter 25: Finding and Evaluating Research Sources
Chapter 26: Strategies
For Conducting
Research

                                                                   Chapter 26: Strategies For
                                                                Conducting Research | 367
     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between primary research and
             secondary research and explain why it is
             important to include both in a persuasive
             document.
          · Explain different methods and locations for
             conducting research online

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · primary research
          · secondary research

You have arrived at the final part of the planning phase of your
report: conducting the research. You've already done a lot to
get here. So far, you have:

 1. generated a focused topic and research question that
      you will address in your report

2. used the rhetorical theory found in Bitzer's rhetorical
      situation and Aristotle's modes of appeal to starting
      planning your message,
                                                                                                   | 369
 3. learned how distinguish between popular and scholarly
      sources and how to evaluate both

Now it's time to start doing the actual research!
   In this chapter we will explain the two types of

research--primary research and secondary research--that
you should be doing for your report, and give you tips for
conducting research online.

What is Research?

370 |
Research begins with questions. You've already started this
process by going through Bitzer and Aristotle. Odds are, as you
did so, more questions came up that you were not sure how to
answer, and that's okay! Doing the actual research will help
you answer those questions. However, as you start acquiring
sources, it's important that you are mindful of the two types of
research that can be conducted for a report.

Primary v. Secondary Research

There are two basic kinds of research: primary research and
secondary research.

   Primary research is often first-person accounts and can be
useful when you are researching a local issue that may not
have been addressed previously and/or have little published
research available. You may also use primary research to
supplement, confirm, or challenge national or regional trends
with local information.

   Primary research can include:

  · Interviews
  · Surveys
  · Questionnaires
  · Observations and analysis
  · Ethnography (the study and description of people,

      cultures, and customs)

Secondary research is what many students are most familiar
with. This type of research generally requires searching libraries
and other research institutions' holdings. Secondary research
requires that you read other peoples' published studies and
research in order to learn more about your topic, determine
what others have written and said, and then develop a

                                                                                                   | 371
conclusion about your ideas on the topic in light of what others
have done and said.

   Some examples of sources that might be used in secondary
research include:

  · Academic, scientific, and technical journal articles
  · Governmental reports
  · Raw data and statistics
  · Trade and professional organization data

It is rare to see a persuasive argument that doesn't include
both primary and secondary research. Let's look at an
example. Say you are interested in using STEM knowledge to
improve the quality of life for the homeless population in
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. The most successful project would
use both secondary and primary research. The next two
sections will demonstrate what this might look like.

Secondary Research in Action

First, the secondary research will help establish best or
common practices, trends, statistics, and current research
about homelessness broadly in Canada and Saskatchewan,
and then more narrowly into Saskatoon.

   Your brainstorming would likely lead to questions regarding
the following:

  · The major issues facing homelessness and combating
      homelessness in the Canada.

  · The homeless population and demographics for
      Saskatoon and Saskatchewan.

  · Services currently available for the homeless in Saskatoon
  · Services available in other cities and the province.

372 |
The above information would likely be available through
secondary research sources. Useful information would likely
be available through city and state government agencies such
as Health Canada or the Employment and Social Development
Canada; local and national homeless advocacy groups such as
the Canadian Alliance to End Homelessness, Saskatchewan
Human Rights Commission, Carmichael Outreach, The
Lighthouse Supported Living, and the Homeless Hub. You
would also need to search relevant research databases--which
are discussed below in the Where Do I Look? section--in
subject areas such as engineering, sociology and social work,
and government documents.

Primary Research in Action

Primary research, such as interviews or surveys, can provide
a more in-depth and local bent to the numbers and details
provided in secondary sources. Some examples of groups to
interview or survey include local homeless advocates; shelter
and outreach employees and volunteers; people currently or
previously experiencing homelessness; and researchers or
university-affiliated groups that conduct, compile, and apply
research on homelessness.

   Will all this research generate a lot of content for your report?
Most definitely.

Do you need to include it all? Absolutely not.
   What matters is that your strive to include both types of

research in your reports. This is because the strongest
research--and most persuasive arguments--blend primary
and secondary research.

                                                                                                   | 373
Where Do I Look?

Now that you can distinguish between secondary research
from primary research, where do you find them?

   In the 21st century, we generally turn to the internet when
we have a question. For technical, scientific, and academic
research, we can still turn to the internet, but where we visit
changes. We will discuss a few different places where you can
perform research including Google, Google Scholar, and your
university library website.

Google and Google Scholar

The default research site for most students tends to be Google.
Google can be a great starting place for a variety of research.
You can use Google to find news articles and other popular
sources such as magazine articles and blog posts. You can use
Google to discover keywords, alternative terms, and relevant
professional, for-profit, and non-profits business and
organizations.

   The most important thing to remember about using Google
though is that search results are organized by popularity, not by
accuracy. Further, because Google customizes search results
based on a user's search history, searches performed by
different people or on different browsers may provide slightly
different results.

   For many technical, scientific, and scholarly topics, Google
will not provide access to the appropriate and necessary types
of sources and information. Google Scholar, however, searches

                                                                                                   | 375
only academic and scientific journals, books, patents, and
governmental and legal documents. This means the results
will be more technical and scholarly and therefore more
appropriate for much of the research you will be expected to
perform as a student.

   However, while Google Scholar will show academic and
technical results, that does not mean that you will have access
to the full-text documents. Many of the sources that appear
on Google Scholar are from databases, publishers, or libraries,
which means that they are often behind paywalls or password-
protected. Do not pay for these documents! There is a good
chance you will be able to access them through the University
library. [for help on linking your university's library to the Google
Scholar database, click here.]

University Libraries

The University of Saskatchewan Library has access to
databases, peer-reviewed journals, and books that are
generally the best choice for accurate and more technical
information. A Google search might yield millions and millions
of results and a Google Scholar search may yield tens or
hundreds of thousands of results, but a library search will
generally turn up only a couple thousands, hundreds, or even
dozens of results.

   You may think, "Isn't fewer results a bad thing? Doesn't that
mean limiting the possibilities for the project?" The quick
answer is yes, fewer results means fewer options for your
project, but no, this does not mean using the library limits the
possibilities for a project.

   Overall, library resources are more tightly controlled and
vetted. Anyone can create a blog or website and post
information, regardless of the accuracy or usefulness of the
information. Library resources, in contrast, have generally gone

376 |
through rigorous processes and revisions before publication.
For example, academic and scientific journals have a review
system in place--whether a peer-review process or an editorial
board. Both feature panels of people with expertise in the areas
under consideration. Publishers for books also feature editorial
boards who determine the usefulness and accuracy of
information.

   Of course, this does not mean that every peer-reviewed
journal article or book is 100% accurate and useful all of the
time. Biases still exist, and many commonly accepted facts
change over time with more research and analysis. Overall, the
process for these types of publications require that multiple
people read and comment on the work, providing some checks
and balances that are not present for general internet sources.

Common Types of Library Sources

  · Databases: databases are specialized search service that
      provide access to sources such as academic and scientific
      journals, newspapers, and magazines. An example of a
      database would be Academic Search Complete.

  · Journals: journals are specialized publications focused on
      an often narrow topic or field. For example, Computers &
      Composition is a peer-reviewed journal focused on the
      intersection of computers, technology, and composition
      (i.e. writing) classrooms. Another example is the Journal of
      Bioengineering & Biomedical Science.

  · Books: also called monographs, books generally cover
      topics in more depth than can be done in a journal article.
      Sometimes books will contain contributions from multiple
      authors, with each chapter authored separately.

  · Various media: depending on the library, you may have
      access to a range of media, including documentaries,
      videos, audio recordings, and more. Some libraries offer

                                                                                                   | 377
      streaming media that you can watch directly on the library
      website without having to download any files.

How Do I Perform a Search?

Research is not a linear process. It requires a back and forth
between sources, your ideas and analysis, and the rhetorical
situation for your research.

   The research process is a bit like an eye exam. The doctor
makes a best guess for the most appropriate lens strength, and
then adjusts the lenses from there. Sometimes the first option
is the best and most appropriate; sometimes it takes a few tries
with several different options before finding the best one for
you and your situation.

   Once you decide on a focused topic and research question,
you will need to determine keywords that you can use to search
different resources.

   It is important to have a wide range of keywords because not
all terms will result in the same information. Developing a list
of keywords can be aided by a quick Google search. A Google
search may reveal more official language or terms; broader or
narrower terms and concepts; or related terms and concepts.
You can also search for the term + synonym to find other words
you might use. Keep in mind, a synonym search will not work
for all terms. For technical and scientific topics, though, Google
may not be a lot of help for finding other terms.

   You can use a couple different tricks to narrow your search.
Using quotation marks around two or more words means the
search results will contain those words only in that specific
order. For example, based on the exercise above, a search for
"homelessness in Saskatoon" would only provide results where
these words appear in this exact order, with no words between

378 |
them. A search for homelessness in Saskatoon without the
quotation marks will search for those words, but also any
sources that have the words homelessness and Saskatoon
anywhere in the text.

   If you still are not sure where to start, or if you hit a wall, the
librarians at the University of Saskatchewan are here to help!
You can go to any of the libraries on campus to ask for help, or
you can use the Ask Us feature on their website to talk to them
directly from your computer.

   Determining a topic and finding relevant resources are only
the beginning steps in the research process. Once you locate
sources, you actually have to read them and determine how
useful and relevant they are for your particular research context
If you would like some tips on how to do that, please check out
this page on Understanding and Documenting information in
Appendix D.

The End of the Planning Phase

Congratulations! You have made it through the planning phase
of your the report writing process! You have already done a
lot! By now you should have a focused topic and research
question, used rhetorical theory to assess your audience and
determine how design your message, and you have found
some sources to use. Now it's time to take all of that
information and put it into a report! We will be covering
different strategies for that in the following couple of chapters.

     Key Takeaways

                                                                                                   | 379
          · The most persuasive research often includes
             both primary research and secondary research.

          · Primary research typically includes first person
             accounts in the form interviews, surveys, and
             questionnaires.

          · Secondary research can be found in sources
             such as as technical journals, government reports,
             and raw data.

          · When searching for research, Google and
             Google scholar are a good place to start, but the
             best place to look is at the University of
             Saskatchewan Library website. If you ever get
             stuck finding sources for your report, reach out to
             the librarians on campus, or use the Ask Us
             feature and the library website.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from A Guide to Technical
Communications: Strategies & Applications (on
ohiostate.pressbooks.pub) by Lynn Hall & Leah Wahlin. It is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

380 |
Chapter 27: Quoting,
Paraphrasing, and
Summarizing Sources

                                                     Chapter 27: Quoting, Paraphrasing,
                                                          and Summarizing Sources | 381
Learning Objectives

   By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
     · Integrate sources into your writing by using a
        lead-in, a source, and analysis
     · Differentiate between direct quotes,
        paraphrase, and summary and explain when to
        use each integration method
     · Edit direct quotes on the grammatical level by
        using the seamless integration method, signal
        phrase method, and colon method
     · Apply the five-step process for paraphrasing to
        different texts to write your own paraphrases
     · Apply the three-step process for summarizing
        to a piece of media that you enjoy

Key Terms and Concepts

     · plagiarism
     · direct quote
     · paraphrase
     · summary

                                                                                             | 383
We are now officially in the second stage of the report writing
process: producing your report!

   By now, you should be off to a good start with your formal
research report. You have used rhetorical theory to plan out
your message and you already have several sources that you
want to use. The question we must now address is how you
include those sources into your writing in a professional way?

   Academic integrity plays a huge role here. You obviously
don't want to copy a source's research word for word and claim
it as your own. That would be plagiarism. However, you also
don't want to only copy large chunks of the text and just put
that in your paper either. That would be poor writing. Instead,
you want to include a combination of both where you use the
work of others to help support your arguments and ideas. This
chapter will walk you through how to do this.

Integrating Materials Into Your Report

     Exercise #1: Interactive Video

        Let's begin with a video that provides an overview of
     the source integration process. Some of these practices
     are probably already be familiar to you.

        After watching the video, you should be able to
     answer the four questions below.

384 |
1. What is the role of a thesis in a paper? How do
     sources help a thesis?

2. In what way is using sources in your paper like
     having a conversation?

3. What are the three ways you can present ideas
     from another source?

4. What must you always include each time you
     use an outside source?

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=628#h5p-48

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/incinfo

One of the most important takeaways from the video is that it
is not enough to simply present information from your sources
in your paper. You must also draw your own conclusions.
Otherwise you are simply restating someone else's work, and
you are not furthering your argument. Many students forget
this crucial step in writing reports. Thankfully, it's a relatively
easy fix once you know what to do. We will first walk you
through the structure you need to follow, and then show you
how to use it to incorporate direct quotes, paraphrase, and
summary in your report.

The Source Integration Structure

Read the example paragraph below. What is wrong with it?

                                                    | 385
          People often have an inaccurate definition of
       communication. MacLennan (2009) explains that
       people tend to define communication incorrectly.
       "Most people, when asked to define
       communication, would produce something like the
       following definition: `the transmission of information
       by speaking, writing, and other means'" (p. 5). She
       goes on to say that this definition is not
       comprehensive enough. "While it may be easy to
       visualize and understand, this model of
       communication is ultimately inadequate, since it
       implies that communication is little more than an
       exchange of information" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 5).
       Instead, she defines communication as "less like a
       process of information exchange than it is like a
       process of negotiation, which almost always involves
       the interplay of assumptions, values, ethics, public or
       professional status, self-definition, personal feelings,
       and social needs" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 5). As we can
       see, the concept of communication is much more
       deep and involved than most people think.

A couple of things should stand out. The most obvious is that
the paragraph is almost exclusively direct quotes. We have
a little bit of the student's input at the start and end of the
paragraph, but there isn't really anything substantial in-
between the quotes.

   Ultimately, the student didn't incorporate all three elements
for integrating sources that are recommended in the above
video. As a reminder they are:

386 |
   Let's look at the same paragraph again, but highlight the
three elements we have discussed. This will show you visually
how the paragraph is arranged. We will use the following
colors:

   Lead-in
   Idea from a Source
   Analysis

          People often have an inaccurate definition of
       communication. MacLennan (2009) explains that
       people tend to define communication incorrectly.
       "Most people, when asked to define
       communication, would produce something like the
       following definition: `the transmission of information
       by speaking, writing, and other means'" (p. 5). She
       goes on to say that this definition is not
       comprehensive enough. "While it may be easy to
       visualize and understand, this model of
       communication is ultimately inadequate, since it
       implies that communication is little more than an
       exchange of information" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 5).

                                                                                                   | 387
       Instead, she defines communication as "less like a
       process of information exchange than it is like a
       process of negotiation, which almost always involves
       the interplay of assumptions, values, ethics, public or
       professional status, self-definition, personal feelings,
       and social needs" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 5). As we can
       see, the concept of communication is much more
       deep and involved than most people think.

We do have some lead-in for the quotes, but almost no analysis
is given. Yes, the quoted information may be relevant, but it
is not immediately clear how it's relevant to the writer's main
point because there is not enough analysis.

   Students often mistakenly assume that their readers will
figure out the relevance on their own, but that is not the case.
It is not the reader's job to interpret your writing for you. It is up
to you to be as explicit as possible by connecting your sources
to your argument.

   Let's look at a revised version of the above paragraph that
does a better job incorporating a lead-in, a source, and
analysis. We have color coded the three elements again so you
can better see where they are in the paragraph:

          Communication is a much more complex concept
       than people realize. Typically, the idea will be
       defined as "the transmission of information by
       speaking, writing, and other means" (MacLennan,
       2009, p. 5). While this interpretation works at a basic
       level, it does not account for the larger complexities

388 |
       at play in communication. This is because
       communication is more than an exchange of
       information: it is a negotiation (MacLennan, 2009, p.
       5). A negotiation is always far more complex than an
       exchange, because, as MacLennan (2009) explains,
       "[it] always involves interplay of assumptions, values,
       ethics, public or professional status, self-definition,
       personal feelings, and social needs" (MacLennan,
       2009, p. 5). As a result, when people communicate
       with each other, they must consider all the different
       elements that can both negatively and positively
       affect their message; otherwise, they risk being
       misunderstood and having their message
       corrupted.

See the difference? Applying this structure when you use
direct quotes, paraphrase, or summary will greatly improve
the quality of your writing. Now let's look at each method for
incorporating sources in detail.

Direct Quotes, Paraphrasing, and
Summary

When writing in academic and professional contexts, you are
required to engage with the words and ideas of other authors.
Therefore, being able to correctly and fluently incorporate
other writers' words and ideas in your own writing is a critical

                                                                                                   | 389
writing skill. As you now know, there are three main ways to
integrate evidence from sources into your writing:

 1. direct quotes
2. paraphrasing
 3. summary

One important note that we haven't mentioned is that you are
required to include a citation anytime you are using another
person's words and/or ideas. This means that even if you do not
quote directly, but paraphrase or summarize source content
and express it in your own words, you still must give credit to
the original authors for their ideas. Your RCM 200 instructor will
be making sure you do this when they read your formal written
report.

   You have already seen the use of citations in action
throughout this textbook. Anytime we have integrated content
from another source, you will have seen a citation that looks
something like this:

   (Smith, 2020)
   These citations are done using the American Psychology
Association (APA) style. You will be expected to use this citation
style in your own paper. However, if you are not sure how to do
APA citation correctly, don't worry. We will go into the specific
mechanics of how to cite sources in the next chapter.
   We will now walk you through each source integration
method, giving you opportunities to practice each one. If at
any point you're confused, or unclear, don't hesitate to ask your
instructor for help. The University of Saskatchewan Writing
Centre is also a great resource.

Direct Quotes

A direct quote is the word-for-word copy of someone else's

390 |
words and/or ideas. This is noted by quotation marks (" ")
around those words. Using quotations to support your
argument has several benefits over paraphrase and summary:

  · Integrating quotations provide direct evidence from
      reliable sources to support your argument

  · Using the words of credible sources conveys your
      credibility by showing you have done research into the
      area you are writing about and consulted relevant and
      authoritative sources

  · Selecting effective quotations illustrates that you can
      extract the important aspects of the information and use
      them effectively in your own argument

However, be careful not to over-quote. As we saw in the above
example, if you over-quote, you risk relying too much on the
words of others and not your own.

   Quotations should be used sparingly because too many
quotations can interfere with the flow of ideas and make it
seem like you don't have ideas of your own.

   When should you use quotations?

  · If the language of the original source uses the best
      possible phrasing or imagery, and no paraphrase or
      summary could be as effective; or

  · If the use of language in the quotation is itself the focus of
      your analysis (e.g., if you are analyzing the author's use of a
      particular image, metaphor, or other rhetorical strategy).

How to Integrate Quotations Correctly

Integrating quotations into your writing happens on two levels:
the argumentative level and the grammatical level.

                                                                                                   | 391
The Argumentative Level

At the argumentative level, the quotation is being used to
illustrate or support a point that you have made, and you will
follow it with some analysis, explanation, comment, or
interpretation that ties that quote to your argument.

   As we mentioned earlier, this is where many students run
into trouble. This is known as a "quote and run." Never quote
and run. This leaves your reader to determine the relevance
of the quotation, and they might interpret it differently than
you intended! A quotation, statistic or bit of data cannot speak
for itself; you must provide context and an explanation for the
quotations you use. As long as you use the three steps we listed
above for integrating sources, you will be on the right track.

The Grammatical Level

The second level of integration is grammatical. This involves
integrating the quotation into your own sentences so that it
flows smoothly and fits logically and syntactically. There are
three main methods to integrate quotations grammatically:

 1. Seamless Integration Method: embed the quoted words
      as if they were an organic part of your sentence. This
      means that if you read the sentence aloud, your listeners
      would not know there was a quotation.

2. Signal Phrase Method: use a signal phrase (Author + Verb)
      to introduce the quotation, clearly indicating that the
      quotation comes from a specific source

 3. Colon Method: introduce the quotation with a complete
      sentence ending in a colon.

Let's see this in action. Consider the following opening

392 |
sentence (and famous comma splice) from A Tale of Two Cities
by Charles Dickens, as an example:

          "It was the best of times, it was the worst of
       times."

          Dickens, C. (2017). A tale of two cities. Alma Books
       Ltd. p. 5

Below are examples of the quote being integrated using the
three methods.
1. Seamless Integration: embed the quotation, or excerpts

   from the quotation, as a seamless part of your sentence

               Charles Dickens (2017) begins his novel with the
               paradoxical observation that the eighteenth
               century was both "the best of times" and "the
               worst of times" (p. 5).

2. Signal Phrase: introduce the author and then the quote
using a signal verb (scroll down to see a list of common verbs
that signal you are about to quote someone)

               Describing the eighteenth century, Charles
               Dickens (2017) observes, "It was the best of times, it
               was the worst of times" (p. 5).

3. Colon: if your own introductory words form a complete
   sentence, you can use a colon to introduce and set off the
   quotation. This can give the quotation added emphasis.

               Dickens (2017) defines the eighteenth century as a
               time of paradox: "It was the best of times, it was the
               worst of times" (p. 5).

                                                                                                   | 393
                  The eighteenth century was a time of paradox:
               "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times"
               (Dickens, 2017, p. 5).

It's important that you not rely on any one grammatical
method in your own writing. Instead, try to use a balance of
methods to make your writing seem more dynamic and varied.

Editing Quotations

When you use quotation marks around material, this indicates
that you have used the exact words of the original author.
However, sometimes the text you want to quote will not fit
grammatically or clearly into your sentence without making
some changes. Perhaps you need to replace a pronoun in the
quote with the actual noun to make the context clear, or
perhaps the verb tense does not fit. There are two main ways
to edit a quotation to make it fit grammatically with your own
sentence:

  · Use square brackets: to reflect changes or additions to a
      quote, place square brackets around any words that have
      been changed or added.

  · Use ellipses: ellipses show that some text has been
      removed. They can have either three dots (. . .) or four dots
      (. . . .). Three dots indicate that some words have been
      removed from the sentence; four dots indicate that a
      substantial amount of text has been deleted, including the
      period at the end of a sentence.

Let's look at this in action using the quote below.

394 |
          "Engineers are always striving for success, but
       failure is seldom far from their minds. In the case of
       Canadian engineers, this focus on potentially
       catastrophic flaws in a design is rooted in a failure
       that occurred over a century ago. In 1907 a bridge of
       enormous proportions collapsed while still under
       construction in Quebec. Planners expected that
       when completed, the 1,800-foot main span of the
       cantilever bridge would set a world record for long-
       span bridges of all types, many of which had come
       to be realized at a great price. According to one
       superstition, a bridge would claim one life for every
       million dollars spent on it. In fact, by the time the
       Quebec Bridge would finally be completed, in 1917,
       almost ninety construction workers would have
       been killed in the course of building the $25 million
       structure"

             Petroski, H. (2012). The obligation of an engineer.
          In To forgive design: Understanding failure
          (pp. 175-198). Harvard University Press.
          https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674065437

You are allowed to change the original words, to shorten the
quoted material or integrate material grammatically, but only
if you signal those changes appropriately with square brackets
or ellipses:

          Example 1: Petroski (2012) observed that "[e]ngineers
       are always striving for success, but failure is seldom far
       from their minds" (p. 175).

          Example 2: Petroski (2012) recounts the story of a large
       bridge that was constructed at the beginning of the

                                                                                                   | 395
       twentieth century in Quebec, saying that "by the time
       [it was done], in 1917, almost ninety construction workers
       [were] killed in the course of building the $25 million
       structure" (p. 175)

          Example 3: "Planners expected that when completed
       the ... bridge would set a world record for long-span
       bridges of all types" (Petroski, 2012, p. 175).
   In summary, there are a lot of ways you can approach
integrating quotes. You can even change certain elements of
your quote as long you indicate this with proper punctuation.

     Exercise #2: Integrating a Quote at the Grammatical Level

        Below is an excerpt from William Zinsser's
     "Simplicity." After you read the excerpt, write your own
     sentences using all three integration methods we have
     discussed. Don't forget, you can change the quotes
     slightly if you need to. Just ensure that you are using
     ellipses or square brackets to indicate this. Also, try to
     say something interesting about the words you are
     quoting. Don't just say "Zinsser (1980) says `insert
     quote.'" Your sentence(s) should express your own
     ideas.

        You'll notice that there is no page number associated
     with this quote. That is because this version comes
     from a website, which does not have page numbers.

        Once you are done, compare them to the examples
     below. If your approach is different that's totally fine. If
     you're not sure that you did it correctly, please check
     with your instructor.

396 |
   "But the secret of good writing is to strip
every sentence to its cleanest components.
Every word that serves no function, every
long word that could be a short word, every
adverb which carries the same meaning that
is already in the verb, every passive
construction that leaves the reader unsure of
who is doing what - these are the thousand
and one adulterants that weaken the
strength of a sentence. And they usually
occur, ironically, in proportion to education
and rank."

   Zinsser, W. K. (1980). Simplicity. In On writing well: An
informal guide to writing nonfiction. Harper Perennial.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=628#h5p-49

Paraphrase and Summary

Unlike direct quotes, which use a source's exact wording,
paraphrase and summary allow you to use your own words

                                                                                                   | 397
to present information. While the approach to using both
methods is similar, the reason you will choose one over the
other is different.

   A paraphrase is typically more detailed and specific than a
summary. It also retains the length of the original source.

   A summary, on the other hand, is used when describing
an entire source. For example, if you want to emphasize the
main ideas of a source, but not go into a great detail, then a
summary is usually best.

Paraphrase

     Exercise #3: Interactive Video

        Watch the interactive video below on paraphrasing.
     It will explain when paraphrasing is preferable over
     direct quotes, how to correctly paraphrase a source,
     and how to combine a paraphrase and direct quote in
     the same sentence.

        The video will stop at different points to test your
     knowledge. Make sure you answer the questions.
     Additionally, take note of the 5 steps for paraphrasing
     as you watch.

                          An interactive H5P element has been

398 |
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=628#h5p-51

     Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/paraprocess

As the video states, paraphrasing is when you put source text
in your own words and alter the sentence structure to avoid
using direct quotes. Paraphrasing is the preferred way of using
a source when the original wording isn't important. This way,
you can incorporate the source's ideas so they're stylistically
consistent with the rest of your document and thus better
tailored to the needs of your audience. Also, paraphrasing a
source into your own words proves your advanced
understanding of the source text. The video lists five steps for
paraphrasing a source. They are:

                                                                                                   | 399
 1. Read the source material until you fully understand the
      author's meaning. This may take 3-4 readings to
      accomplish.

2. Take notes and list key terms that you can use in your
      paraphrase

 3. Write your own paraphrase without looking at the source
      material. You should include the key terms that you wrote
      down

4. Check that your version captures the intent of the original
      and all important information

 5. Provide in-text (parenthetical) citation

We will go through this in a bit more detail below. However, if
you feel like you understand, feel free to skip down to the next
part.

An In-Depth Look at Paraphrase

A paraphrase must faithfully represent the source text by
containing the same ideas as the original in about the same
length. Let's walk through the five steps mentioned in the
video above to create a paraphrase for the following text:

          Students frequently overuse direct quotation
       [when] taking notes, and as a result they overuse
       quotations in the final [research] paper. Probably
       only about 10% of your final manuscript should
       appear as directly quoted matter. Therefore, you
       should strive to limit the amount of exact

                                                                                                   | 401
       transcribing of source materials while taking notes.
          Lester, J. D. (1976). Writing research papers: A

       complete guide. Pearson Scott Foresman.

Step 1: Read the Source Material Until You Fully
Understand It

What are these three sentences about? What information do
they give us?

   They discuss how students rely too much on direct
quotations in their writing. It also explains just how much of a
final paper should include direct quotes. Seems clear enough,
so lets move on to the next step.

Step 2: Take Notes and List Key Terms for Your
Paraphrase

The key terms you come up with for your paraphrase will
depend on what information you want to convey to the reader.
For our purposes, let's say you want to use Lester (1976) to
highlight how much students over-quote in their papers. You
may focus on the following key terms:

  · 10%
  · students
  · research.

Notice that this is only 3 words from the original text, which has

402 |
over 50 words! This may not seem like much, but it's definitely
enough words for our paraphrase.

Step 3: Using Key Terms, Write Your Own
Paraphrase Without Looking at Original

Let's try to put together a paraphrase. As a matter of good
writing, you should try to streamline your paraphrase so that
it tallies fewer words than the source passage while still
preserving the original meaning. An accurate paraphrase of
the original passage above, for instance, can reduce the three-
line passage to two lines without losing or distorting any of
the original points. Here's our attempt with the key terms
highlighted in yellow:

          Lester (1976) advises against exceeding 10%
       quotation in your written work. Since students
       writing research reports often quote excessively
       because of copy-cut-and-paste note-taking, they
       should try to minimize using sources word for word
       (Lester, 1976).

This isn't necessarily a perfect example of a paraphrase, but it
is certainly a good start! Time to move on to the next step.

Step 4: Compare Your Paraphrase to the Original

Here is the original text with our paraphrase:

                                                                                                  | 403
          Original: Students frequently overuse direct
       quotation [when] taking notes, and as a result they
       overuse quotations in the final [research] paper.
       Probably only about 10% of your final manuscript
       should appear as directly quoted matter. Therefore,
       you should strive to limit the amount of exact
       transcribing of source materials while taking notes.

          Paraphrase: Lester (1976) advises against
       exceeding 10% quotation in your written work. Since
       students writing research reports often quote
       excessively because of copy-cut-and-paste note-
       taking, they should try to minimize using sources
       word for word (Lester, 1976).

Notice that, even though we only have three key terms, we
didn't have to repeat any two-word sequences from the
original. This is because we have changed the sentence
structure in addition to most of the words. This can definitely
take a couple of tries, so if you don't get it right away, that's
okay. If you're still stuck, check in with your instructor or the
University of Saskatchewan Writing Centre.

Step 5: Provide an In-Text Citation

We've already done this step twice in our paper: once at the
start of our paper with "Lester (1976) advises..." and once at the
end with "(Lester, 1976)." We'll talk about how to do this more
in-depth in the next chapter.

404 |
Common Plagiarism Issues with
Paraphrase

As we mentioned in the previous section, when
paraphrasing, it is important to change both the words and
sentence structure of the original text. However, many
students struggle with the first part. They will typically only
substitute major words (nouns, verbs, and adjectives) here and
there while leaving the source passage's basic sentence
structure intact. This inevitably leaves strings of words from the
original untouched in the "paraphrased" version, which can be
dangerous because including such direct quotation without
quotation marks will be caught by the plagiarism-busting
software that college instructors use these days.

   Consider, for instance, the following poor attempt at a
paraphrase of the Lester (1976) passage that substitutes words
selectively. Like last time, we have included the original text
with the incorrect paraphrase. We have also highlighted the
unchanged words in yellow.

          Original Quote: Students frequently overuse
       direct quotation [when] taking notes, and as a result
       they overuse quotations in the final [research]
       paper. Probably only about 10% of your final
       manuscript should appear as directly quoted
       matter. Therefore, you should strive to limit the
       amount of exact transcribing of source materials
       while taking notes (Lester, 1976).

          Poor Paraphrase: Students often overuse
       quotations when taking notes, and thus overuse

                                                                                                  | 405
       them in research reports (Lester, 1976). About 10% of
       your final paper should be direct quotation. You
       should thus attempt to reduce the exact copying of
       source materials while note taking (Lester, 1976).

As you can see, several strings of words from the original are
left untouched because the writer didn't change the sentence
structure of the original. Plagiarism-catching software, like
Turnitin, specifically look for this kind of writing and produce
Originality Reports to indicate how much of a paper is
plagiarized. In this case, the Originality Report would indicate
that the passage is 64% plagiarized because it retains 25 of
the original words (out of 39 in this "paraphrase") but without
quotation marks around them.

   Correcting this by simply adding quotation marks around
passages such as "when taking notes, and" would be
unacceptable because those words aren't important enough
on their own to warrant direct quotation. The fix would just
be to paraphrase more thoroughly by altering the words and
the sentence structure, as shown in the paraphrase a few
paragraphs above.

     Exercise #4: Paraphrase Practice

        Now try it on your own. Below are three pieces of
     original text from the McCroskey, MacLennan, and
     Booth readings from this course. Try writing your own

406 |
paraphrases for each one and compare them to the
examples below. Note that the key words in the
examples are highlighted. If your version is different
that's okay as long as you follow the steps we listed out.
If you're not sure if you're paraphrase is correct, check
with your instructor.

   (1) "Rhetorical communication is goal-directed. It
seeks to produce specific meaning in the mind of
another individual. In this type of communication there
is specific intent on the part of the source to stimulate
meaning in the mind of the receiver" (McCroskey, 2015,
p. 22).

   (2) "The successful professional must therefore be
able to present specialized information in a manner
that will enable non-specialist readers to make policy,
procedural, and funding decisions. In order to do this, a
technical specialist's communication, like that of any
other professional, must establish and maintain
credibility and authority with those who may be
unfamiliar with technical subjects (MacLennan, 2009, p.
4)

   (3) The common ingredient that I find in all of the
writing I admire--excluding for now novels, plays and
poems--is something that I shall reluctantly call the
rhetorical stance, a stance which depends on
discovering and maintaining in any writing situation a
proper balance among the three elements that are at
work in any communicative effort: the available
arguments about the subject itself, the interests and
peculiarities of the audience, and the voice, the implied
character, of the speaker. I should like to suggest that it

                                                                                            | 407
     is this balance, this rhetorical stance, difficult as it is to
     describe, that is our main goal as teachers of rhetoric
     (Booth, 1963, p. 141).

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=628#h5p-50

Summary

Summarizing is one of the most important skills in professional
communication. Professionals of every field must explain to
non-expert customers, managers, and even co-workers the
complex concepts on which they are experts, but in a way that
those non-experts can understand. Adapting the message to
such audiences requires brevity but also translating jargon-
heavy technical details into plain, accessible language.

   Fortunately, the process for summarizing is very similar to
paraphrasing. Like paraphrasing, a summary is putting the
original source in your own words. The main difference is that
a summary is a fraction of the source length--anywhere from
less than 1% to a quarter depending on the source length and
length of the summary.

   A summary can reduce a whole novel or film to a single-

408 |
sentence blurb, for instance, or it could reduce a 50-word
paragraph to a 15-word sentence. It can be as casual as a
spoken overview of a meeting your colleague was absent from,
or an elevator pitch selling a project idea to a manager. It can
also be as formal as a memo report to your colleagues on a
conference you attended on behalf of your organization.

   When summarizing, you will follow the same process as a
paraphrase, but with a few additional steps:

 1. Determine how big your summary should be (according
      to your audience's needs) so that you have a sense of how
      much material you should collect from the source.

2. Pull out the main points, which can usually be found in
      places like the summary portion of a report, the
      introduction, the abstract at the beginning of an article, or
      a topic sentence at the beginning of a paragraph.

         Disregard detail such as supporting evidence and
            examples. These elements belong in a paraphrase, not
            a summary.

         How many points you collect depends on how big your
            summary should be (according to audience needs).

 3. Don't forget to cite your summary.

     Exercise #5: Summary Practice

        You have already had a lot of practice summarizing
     in your daily life. Any time you tell someone about a
     book, movie, or TV show you like, you are summarizing.

                                                                                                  | 409
     You are obviously not going to spend time going over
     every chapter, every scene, or every episode in
     excruciating detail. Instead, you will just talk about the
     main points, the number of which will depend how
     long your summary needs to be.

        Here are some examples. Below are summaries for
     two very different sources: the Harry Potter franchise
     and the Nine Axioms reading you did a few weeks ago.
     There are three summaries for each source: one that is
     45 words long, one that is 30 words long, and one that
     is 15 words long. What information is cut to make the
     summaries more succinct? Are there any important
     details lost between the different summaries?

        What's Harry Potter about?

        45 word summary: It's about a British boy named
     Harry Potter who finds out he is a wizard. He goes to a
     magic school called Hogwarts where he becomes
     friends with Ron and Hermione. Together, they learn
     how to cast spells and fight an evil wizard named
     Voldemort (Rowling, 2015).

        30 word summary: It's about a boy named Harry
     Potter who finds out he is a wizard. He goes to a school
     called Hogwarts where he learns magic and fights an
     evil wizard (Rowling, 2015).

        15 word summary: It's about a boy named Harry who
     attends a magic school and fights evil wizards
     (Rowling, 2015).

        What are MacLennan's Nine Axioms?

        45 word summary: The Nine Axioms of
     Communication are nine interconnected principles

410 |
that can help us design effective messages. They
explain why communication works and, just as
importantly, why it doesn't. More specifically, they are
tools that will help us identify effective communication
strategies and diagnose communication problems
(MacLennan, 2009).

   30 word summary: They are nine interconnected
principles of communication that MacLennan (2009)
wrote to help us understand how communication
works. They also help us identify effective
communication strategies and diagnose any
communication problems.

   15 word summary: They're nine principles that show
how communication works, identify effective
communication strategies, and diagnose problems
(MacLennan, 2009).

   Again, notice that neither summary goes into great
detail about the topic. They just stress the main points.
The Harry Potter summary doesn't go into all the
adventures that happen in the books, and the Nine
Axioms summary doesn't list out all Nine Axioms.
Knowing what information to keep is essential in
writing a good summary.

   Now it's your turn. Pick a movie, TV show, or book
that you really like. Write three summaries about the
thing you selected: one that is 45 words long, one that
is 30 words long and one that is 15 words long. You
don't need to include a citation. For an extra challenge,
try to make your summaries the exact number of
words.

   Once you are done, compare your three summaries.

                                                                                              | 411
     What is different between them? How did the different
     length requirements affect your writing? What
     elements did you have to cut? Why were those
     elements not as important?

     Key Takeaways

          · Avoiding plagiarism should always be a
             concern when you are doing research for a report.
             Even in the professional world, it's important to
             make sure you are integrating your sources in an
             ethical way. Not doing so can result in fines and
             even termination from your job.

          · Many students struggle with this on an
             organizational level. They tend to think they can
             just stack quotes on top of quotes and that will be
             enough, but it is definitely not!

          · Instead, you should always use three things
             when integrating outside sources into your
             writing: a lead-in, the source, and analysis.
             Having a balance of all three will make your
             writing more persuasive.

          · You can include ideas from a source in one of
             three ways: direct quotes, paraphrase, and
             summary.

          · Direct quotes are best when the language of
             the original source is the best possible phrasing

412 |
             or imagery and a paraphrase/summary could not
             be as effective. It is also preferable if you are
             planning to analyze the specific language in the
             quotation (such as a metaphor or rhetorical
             strategy).
          · Paraphrasing is best when the original wording
             of a source is not important. This means that you
             can incorporate a source's ideas in such a way
             that they're stylistically consistent with the rest of
             your document. This allows you flexibility to better
             tailor your writing to the needs of your audience.
          · A Summary is best when you want to focus on
             only the main ideas of a source. The length of
             your summary will depend on your needs, but it's
             not uncommon for a summary to be less than 1%
             to a quarter the length of the original source.

References

Dickens, C. (2017). A tale of two cities. Alma Books Ltd.
   Lester, J. D. (1976). Writing research papers: A complete

guide. Pearson Scott Foresman.
   Petroski, H. (2012). The obligation of an engineer. In To forgive

design: Understanding failure (pp. 175-198). Harvard University
Press. https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674065437

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from Technical Writing Essentials (on

                                                                                                   | 413
BCcampus) by Suzan Last and Candice Neveu. It is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License.

   This chapter is also adapted from Business Communications
for Fashion (on openpress.usask.ca) by Anna Cappuccitti. It is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

414 |
Chapter 28: How to Use
APA Style

                                                                Chapter 28: How to Use APA
                                                                                          Style | 415
Learning Objectives

   By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:

     · Explain how accurately citing sources can have
        an impact on your ethos as a professional
        communicator

     · Identify the four parts of a reference: the author,
        the date, the title, and the source

     · Differentiate between a parenthetical citation
        and narrative citation, and explain how they are
        examples of the author-date citation system

     · Create narrative citations that use signal verbs
        to identify the rhetorical purpose of an author

Key Terms and Concepts

     · APA Style
     · ethos
     · reference entry
     · references page
     · in-text citation
     · parenthetical citation
     · narrative citation

                               | 417
          · author-date citation system
          · signal verbs

It's time to talk about citing sources. You've seen citations in
action throughout this text, and we mentioned it briefly in the
previous chapter. Now it's time to go over how to put them in
your paper. This chapter will focus on how you do that from
a mechanical perspective. Specifically, we will look at how you
can use in-text citations and create reference entries using
the American Psychological Association Style Guide, better
known as APA Style.

   However, we want to be clear about something. APA
Style--and all style guides for that matter--have rules about
more than just how to cite sources. Specifically, they have rules
around formatting papers such as where page numbers
should go, how to create a title page, how to design headers,
etc. You don't have to worry about that because we have our
own formatting system in RCM 200 that we want you to follow.
This will be covered in the next chapter. All we want you to
focus on with APA style is how to cite your sources and create
reference entries.

Why Did We Pick APA Specifically?

It's important to note that APA style is one of several citation
styles that exist for students and professionals engaging in
academic conversations. You may have already encountered
these styles if you have taken classes in different departments

418 |
at the University of Saskatchewan. For example, the English
department uses the Modern Language Association (MLA)
style, whereas the Indigenous Studies department uses the
Chicago Manual of Style. Combined with APA style, these are
the three most well-known citation styles used in North
America.

   Do you have to learn all the different styles in the world to be
a successful student and professional? Depending on the the
classes you take, and your career choice, you might. However,
once you settle in to your upper division courses in your
program, you will most likely only be using one style guide
through out. However, what further complicates this issue is
that, even within the same department, individual programs
can have their own preferred citation style that you might have
to learn. For example, the Mechanical Engineering program
and the Electrical Engineering program each have their own
preferred style that students in those programs will need to
learn eventually.

   For RCM 200, we have chosen to require the APA style for
your reports because it is the most similar to how citation and
referencing is done in scientific fields. You'll see what that
means in a moment, but in general, this means if you can
handle citation and referencing in APA style, you should be
able to handle citations in your field, whether it's engineering,
agriculture, kinesiology, or another field entirely.

   One important note about all style guides is that they receive
updates every couple of years. This means that the rules and
expectations will change somewhat with each new edition. For
our purposes, we are using the 7th of edition of the APA style
guide, which came out in 2020.

   Why do style guide publishers do this? It may seem like a
hassle to have to relearn the rules every ten years or so, but
there are two main reasons. The first is keep up with the
evolution of research. For example, the first edition of the APA
style guide came out back in 1953. Back then, researchers

                                                                                                   | 419
didn't need to worry about citing sources such as YouTube
videos or websites or even Tweets. Now, in the latest edition,
there are rules for how to do that.

   The second reason is to keep up with the evolution of the
English language. In previous editions there was no guidance
around gender and preferred pronoun usage. Now, there is
specific guidance on both of those topics in addition to how to
avoid implying gender binaries in your writing.

Why Use a Style Guide At All?

Using APA Style, or any style guide for that matter, is important
for establishing your credibility, or your ethos, as a professional
communicator. Every in-text citation you use will correspond
to an entry on the references page at the end of your report.
This allows readers to quickly check the back of your report
to see where your sources are from. In doing so, you are able
to show that you have taken the report seriously be engaging
with legitimate, professional sources in the field.

   Additionally, style guides ensure that your report is
consistent. You may think that having slight differences in how
you use an in-text citation may seem like a non-issue, but
people notice these things! If they see you are not paying
attention to specific details, they may wonder where else you
are not paying attention, and you will lose credibility.

   As a professional communicator, it falls onto you to ensure
you understand these guidelines and can apply them in your
own writing.

     Exercise #1: Citation Pre-Assessment

420 |
   Let's begin with a quick pre-assessment. You
probably already have some idea about how to cite
sources already. Below are five multiple choice
questions. At the top of each question, you will see the
full reference entry for a source we have used in this
text. Pick the example in-text citation that cites that
source correctly. If you're not sure which is correct,
that's okay. This is just for you to see what you already
know.

          An interactive H5P element  has been
          excluded from this version  of the text.
You can view it online here:
https://openpress.usask.ca/
rcm200/?p=1531#h5p-58

How to Use APA

For the reminder of this chapter, we will discuss the mechanics
of APA style. There will be two parts:

 1. How to create a references page
2. How to add in-text citationsto your paper

Before we go into each part, please note that rules we show you
will be the basic requirements. Depending on the source, you
may need to add more information to your reference entry, or
adjust how you write the in-text citation. To learn more about
all these differences, check out Purdue OWL. Their website

                                                                                                   | 421
provides a good overview, with examples, of the different ways
to write your references and in-text citations.

   If you would like some in-person feedback, or have questions,
please visit the USask Writing Centre in the Murray Library. You
can meet with someone in-person or online to discuss your
questions.

References Page

Perhaps surprisingly, we are going to start with the end of your
paper, the references page. This is because all in-text citations
are based on this section of your report.

   The references page allows your reader to easily find any
work you cite in your paper. This is because all of your sources
will be written up as reference entries on the page. These
works should only be ones that you used in your paper. This
means you must include entries for all the sources that support
the ideas, claims, and concepts you are presenting.

   Please note a reference page is different from a bibliography
(which you may have had to create in high school). While both
will include the sources you used to write your paper, a
bibliography will also include works you used for background
reading, even if they're not cited in your paper. Put another
way, if you use a source for background research, but don't use
the source's content to write your paper, then it doesn't go in
your references page.

   Again, please keep in mind that we will not be able to cover
all the variations on how to do a reference entry, because there
are just too many. Instead we will look at the basic principles.
If you need help citing a specific resources, we highly
recommend checking out the Purdue Owl, visiting the USask
Writing Centre, or speaking with your instructor.

422 |
What's in a Reference Entry?

In APA style, a reference entry needs, at minimum, four
elements. These elements tell the reader specific information
about where you got your source. They are:

 1. the author (who wrote the work?)
2. the date (how recent is the information you are using?)
 3. the title (what is the name of the original source?)
4. the source (where can the reader find this work if they

      want to use it for their own research?)
Every reference entry you write should have these four
elements. However, each type of reference entry ( a book, a
journal article, an online video, etc.) can have some slight
variation on what those four elements look like.

     Exercise #2: Identify the Four Elements of a Reference Entry

        Take a look at the three reference entry examples
     below from sources we've used in this course. Can you
     find all four elements? How are all three references
     similar? How are they different?

                (1) Book
             MacLennan, J. (2009). Effective
             communication for the technical professions

                                                                                                   | 423
             (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

             (2) Journal Article
             Booth, W. C. (1963). The rhetorical
             stance. College Composition and
             Communication, 14(3), 139-145. https://doi.org/
             10.2307/355048

             (3) YouTube Video
             Wordvice Editing Services. (2018, April 1). How
             to paraphrase in research papers (APA,
             AMA) [Video].
             YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
             watch?v=1VACN6X2eF0

You should notice that each source type is a little different from
the others. For example, (1) and (2) use an author name, but
(3) uses an organization name. The title for sources (1) and (3)
are italicized, but not for (2). Instead, the name of the journal
is italicized. There are other differences as well, but the point is
that you realize that how you format a specific reference entry
will depend on the source type.

   This is because there are dozens of different source types,
and one might be formatted slightly differently than another.
To be clear, we don't expect you to know how to format every
type of source. That's why there are citation managers and
citation creator websites (more on that below). What we want
you know is what information to include when you make your

424 |
own references page, and know where to go when you have
questions.

   To make this easier on you, there are websites like CiteFast
that will help you generate reference entries. There are also
computer programs called Reference Managers that will
automatically generate a references page for you once you
put in the relevant information. The University of Saskatchewan
library has a list of reference managers that they recommend
using and offers workshops throughout the term on how to use
them.
One word of caution though. Though these services make
writing reference entries easier, they are not always perfect.
Sometimes they make mistakes and it is up to you to check
to make sure the reference entry is written and formatted
correctly.

Formatting your References Page

The final step with a references page is making sure you
format it correctly. A lot of students will skip over or ignore this
element of the report, but it's important that you follow the
formatting expectations regardless of the style guide you use.
Let's show you what we mean.

     Exercise #3: Comparing Reference Pages

        Below are two examples of the same reference page.

                                                                                                   | 425
     One follows the correct formatting rules. The other
     does not. Can you tell which is better and why?

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=1531#h5p-47

426 |
Clearly, using proper format makes a huge difference, and
using the correct citation format will add to your credibility as
a researcher.

Fortunately, the two rules for formatting a references page are
pretty simple they are:

 1. Put references in alphabetical order by the author's last
      name or organization's name

2. If the reference runs over to multiple lines, make sure to
      indent each successive line in the reference.

In-Text Citations

An in-text citation is a mechanical way that a writer (you)
acknowledges the work of others. That means, you should "cite
the work of those individuals whose ideas, theories, or research
have directly influenced your work" (American Psychological
Association, 2019, p. 253). The information that follows the quote
in the previous is an example of a citation.

   If you went to high school in Canada, you are probably at least
somewhat familiar with citations. You most likely did it in your
high school English class.

   APA style uses what is known as the author-date citation
system for citing references in texts. This means that, at
minimum, your citations will have:

 1. the last name of the author (or authors)
2. the year the source was published

If you include a direct quote, such as the sentence above, you
will also need to include the page number.

                                                                                                   | 427
          A Very Important Note

       Typically, APA Style only requires you to include
       page numbers if you are using a direct quote in
       your writing. However, for RCM 200, your
       instructors want you to include page
       numbers every time you cite a source in your
       report. That means, whether you use a direct
       quote, paraphrase, or summary, include the page
       number. This will allow you more opportunities to
       practice your in-text citation skills.

   An in-text citation is commonly found in the body of your
report. However, they can also be found in tables, appendixes,
and figures. They are important because they show the reader
where your information comes from for the claims you are
making. If the reader is interested in the source, they can then
flip to your references page at the end of your report and learn
more about the source.

   Here are two versions of what an in-text citation can look
like using the same information. The first one is known as a
parenthetical citation and the second is a narrative citation:

          1. A concept that will directly impact your
       relationship with someone is your footing, which is
       the "foundation upon which your credibility rests in
       a given interaction" (MacLennan, 2009, p. 10).

          2. MacLennan (2009) explains that one concept

428 |
       that will directly impact your relationship with
       someone is your footing, which is the "foundation
       which your credibility rests in a given interaction" (p.
       10).

The first example, a parenthetical citation, is the one that most
people are familiar with. The second one, a narrative citation,
is probably unfamiliar, but it is not difficult to apply once you
know how. Ideally, you should use a combination of both
methods in your writing.

Parenthetical Citation

First, let's start with parenthetical citations because they are
the ones most students are already know. At it's core, a
parenthetical citation needs the surname of the author (or
authors) that wrote the original source material you are using
and the year the information is published.

   For our RCM 200 course, you will need to also include the
page number regardless of whether you are using a direct
quote, paraphrase, or summary. It will look like this:

          (MacLennan, 2009, p. 10)

If the information you are citing goes onto more than one page,
the citation will look like this:

                                                                                                   | 429
          (MacLennan, 2009, pp. 10-11)

And that's it.
   Parenthetical citations are almost always placed at the end

of the sentence. One thing that students often mistake is
where to position the period in a parenthetical citation. Notice
in example (1) in the previous section that the period goes
after the citation. Not before the closing quotation mark, which
is where most students want to put it. Some students will also
try to put a period before the quotation mark and after the
citation, but this is wrong! You only need one period, and it
goes after the citation.

   One important note is that the content of your citation will
change depending on the number of authors and if the there
is a group author like an organization. The year will also change
slightly if you are citing the same author who published
multiple papers in the same year. This page from Purdue OWL
provides guidelines on how to format these situations.

Narrative Citation

A narrative citation uses the same author-date citation
system as a parenthetical citation. The difference is that
instead of the citation occurring at the end of the text, it occurs
in the text itself. The author's name will be in the text and this
is immediately followed by the publication year in parenthesis.
The page number will come at the end of the sentence:

430 |
             Bashar (2009) explains...communication (p. 10).
                   Jones (1994) advocates...theory (p. 41).

               Tanaka (2020) agrees... study (pp. 245-246)

Using Signal Verbs

                                                                                                   | 431
You probably noticed that a verb followed the three narrative
citation examples above. These are known as signal verbs.
They are special verbs that help you tell the reader how
someone is expressing their ideas. Signal verbs are typically
more active and descriptive than other verbs like "says" or
"writes" or "discusses."

                                                                                                   | 433
Read the three examples below. What do the different verbs
indicate about the author?

          (1) Smith (2020) challenges...
       (2) Smith (2020) illustrates...
       (3) Smith (2020) verifies...

Each verb provides different information about the rhetorical
purpose of the author. It's your job as a writer to make sure
you capture that purpose accurately.
When choosing a signal verb, ask yourself: what is the author
doing in the passage I'm citing? Is the author describing
something? Explaining something? Arguing? Giving
examples? Estimating? Recommending? Warning? Urging?
Be sure the verb you choose accurately represents the
intention of the source text. For example, don't use "concedes"
if the writer isn't actually conceding a point. Look up any
words you don't know and add ones that you like to use.
Table #1 below shows different signal verbs you can use in your
own writing

Table #1: Commonly Used Signal Verbs

                                                                                                   | 435
Making a                    Disagreeing                    Expressing Additio Signal
claim                                                      Agreement Verbs
              Recommending or              Showing
argue
                            Questioning

              advocate      challenge illustrates          agree                                          respon

assert        call for      complicate     conveys         admire                                         assum
   believe       demand        criticize      reveals         endorse                                        spec
   claim         encourage     qualify        demonstrat      support
   emphasiz      exhort        counter                        affirm                                      es
                 implore       contradict  es                 corrobora                                      deba
e                plead         refute         proposes                                                       estim
   insist        recommend     reject         points out   te
   remind        urge          deny           exemplifies     verify                                      es
   suggest       warn          question       indicates       reaffirm                                       expla
   hypothesi                                                                                                 impl
                                                                                                             uses
ze
   maintains

How Do I Choose Which Citation To Use?

One thing to keep in mind is that you will never mix
parenthetical citations and narrative citations in the same
sentence. You will only use one.

   But how do you know which one to use? There are several
reasons why you would use one of the other, but here are the
main two:

 1. If you want to highlight the author, use a narrative
      citation. You might do this because the author is well-
      known in your field and you want to add some authority to
      your own argument. Alternatively, if you are arguing
      against something the author is saying, you may want to
      mention them directly

2. If you want to highlight the information, use a
      parenthetical citation. You might do this if you are trying
      make a point about the topic or provide some general
      information. Also, if you want to focus in on the argument
      a source is making, and not who made the argument, you

                                                                                                   | 437
      would use this form.
438 |
Key Takeaways

     · When writing a report, it is important to
        establish your ethos by consistently and
        accurately citing your sources. Using a style guide
        can help you do this.

     · For RCM 200, we want you to APA style for your
        reference entries, references page, and in-text
        citations, but not for formatting.

     · A references page is a list of all the all source
        you are citing in your paper. Each individual
        source is turned into a reference entry.

     · The in-text citations go into the body of your
        report. Anytime you use information that is not
        yours, you must cite it either using
        a parenthetical citation or a narrative citation.
        Though both types of citations are formatted and
        implemented differently, both follow the author-
        date citation system.

     · For our course, every in-text citation you
        include should have the author, date of
        publication, and page number (if available).

     · A parenthetical citation goes at the end of a
        sentence, with the author and date and page
        number in parenthesis. For example: (MacLennan,
        2010, p. 10).

     · A narrative citation is embedded in the text.
        The author's name is combined with the date of
        publication followed by a signal verb. For

                                                                                             | 439
             example: MacLennan (2010) demonstrates...

Chapter Attributions

This chapter contains material from Technical Writing
Essentials (on BCcampus) by Suzan Last and Candice Neveu.
It is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License.

References

American Psychological Association. (2019). Publication
manual of the American Psychological Association (7th ed.).

440 |
Chapter 29: Formatting
the Report

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between the three parts of your
             written report: the front matter, the report body,
             and the back matter
          · List out the 12 elements that are present within
             a written report
          · Identify the different requirements found in a
             summary and introduction

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · front matter
          · report body
          · back matter

We've spent a lot of time on how to generate the content of
                                                                 Chapter 29: Formatting the
                                                                                       Report | 441
your formal written report. However, it's time to take a step
back and look at how you will format the report.

   Like any kind of project, technical reports have specifications.
These specifications can be for a number of different things
such as the report's layout, organization, and content; how to
format the headings and lists; and how to label graphics and
tables. The advantage of a required format for written reports
is that you or anyone else can expect them to be designed in a
familiar way.

   If someone hands you a report, and you want to read the
summary section first, you will know exactly where to look. This
is why different academic programs and career fields use style
guides like APA. Reports are usually read in a hurry because
readers want to quickly get the information they need, and a
standard report format helps them achieve that.

   For our purpose in RCM 200, you need to think of your formal
written report as having three distinct parts: a front matter, the
report body and the back matter. Within those three parts are
twelve elements you will need to include in your report.

   In order, these elements are:

 1. The Front Matter

         Cover Page
         Transmittal Document
         Title Page
         Summary
         Table of Contents
         List of Tables and Figures

2. The Report Body

         Introduction
         Discussion
         Conclusion

442 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
 3. The Back Matter

         Recommendations
         References
         Appendix

Ensuring you have all of the correct elements present in your
report--and that you write and format them correctly--is key
if you wish to create a professional report and receive a good
grade. We will now go into each element in detail. At the very
bottom of this page, you will be able to see an example formal
research report that includes most of these elements.

Front Matter

The first part of your report is the front matter. This
combination of elements, such as the title page and table of
contents, will be the first thing your reader sees of your report.
These elements are relatively easy to make, but if they are
completed sloppily, these elements can negatively impact the
reader's view of the credibility of your work before they even
read it.

Cover/Cover Page

It's not uncommon for formal reports to be bound. In these
cases, there is a usually a cover, like with any book, and on that
cover is the title of the report. If the report is produced by a
company, the cover will have the company's name and logo.

   You are not required to bind your formal research report

                                            Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 443
though. However, you will need a cover page. At minimum,
you will need to include the title of your report centered on
the page. If you want, you can also include the author name.
However, that is not required.

Transmittal Document

A transmittal document can either be a letter or memo. The
format you choose will depend on the audience who is
receiving the report, but ultimately the goal of this element
is to maintain goodwill with the client by adding a personal
component to the report.

   If you need a refresher on writing a memo or letter, revisit this
chapter from our text.

   For RCM 200 purposes though, your letter/memo should:

  · describe the topic
  · make a brief statement of the report's major findings

      while also acknowledging who helped form the report
  · express appreciation to the client and offer to provide

      follow-up with the report

Title Page

The title page is similar to the cover page. The main difference
is that the title page includes more detail.

   Your title page must have three things:

 1. the name of the report
2. the name and title of the author
 3. the date of submission

444 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
In certain circumstances, a title page can also include the
name and title of the person who commissioned the report.

   Despite this being the third page that your reader will see in
in your report, the title page is considered to be page Roman
numeral i for numbering purposes. Often this page is left
unnumbered in the report.

Summary

The summary gives the reader an overview of the report. It
allows them to quickly see what the content of your paper is
without having to read the entire document.

   In a professional context, you might have to search through
dozens, if not hundreds of reports to find information for your
own research. You obviously wouldn't have time to read all of
them, so looking at just the report's summary section would
help you quickly sort through your potential research materials.

   In a long report, like the one you are writing for this course,
the summary should be about 10% of the length of the entire
report. It should condense the information that is already in
the main document. This includes information like the report's
recommendations, justifications, and conclusions.

   The page number of this report (if numbered) would be
Roman numeral ii.

Table of Contents

A table of contents (TOC) lists out the sections of a report. This
means that the primary headings for each section are included
along with the page numbers where they appear. If your report
has secondary or lower headings, those should be included too.

   Make sure your organization is consistent. A TOC must

                                            Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 445
properly reflect the organization of your report. For example,
you wouldn't put the summary (which comes at the top of your
report) as the last entry of your TOC. Additionally, you must
proofread to ensure that the headings are worded the same in
the body of the report and the TOC.

List of Tables and Figures

The List of Tables and Figures operates similarly to the TOC. It
presents an organized list of all the graphics that you created
for your report with the page numbers where they are found.
This list will be a separate page that comes after your TOC,
which means that it needs to be in the TOC. Don't forget to
include it!

Report Body

The second part of your formal research report is the report
body. This is the main portion of the report that you have
already been working on with your research.

   You are probably familiar with the traditional five-paragraph
essay--which has an introduction, body, and conclusion. For
those kinds of essays, the introduction and conclusion are only
one paragraph long. That is not the case for written reports
where both of those elements can have multiple paragraphs.
Similarly, the discussion can be broken up into multiple sub-
sections, each with their own specific focus and multiple
paragraphs. The number of paragraphs for all three parts will
ultimately depend on the information you are trying to convey.

   Students often are unclear about the distinctions between

446 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
the Summary and Introduction sections of the report, so we
will spend a little more time on both of those parts.

Introduction

Your introduction sets the tone and expectations for your
report.

   First and foremost, your introduction is where you are trying
to demonstrate your good judgement and good character to
your reader through the use of rhetorical theory.

   To accomplish this, you must provide your reader with an
understanding of the purpose and scope of your report.
Additionally, you must illustrate why your topic is important by
describing the size and impact of the problem (the rhetorical
exigence) that you are analyzing. The inclusion of these details
will help establish your pathos appeal.

   Lastly, an introduction will provide essential context that is
required to understand the organization, language, and
approach you are using to produce the report. This context
contributes to your logos appeal and extends good will.

Summary vs Introduction

It's important to mention that many students will confuse the
purpose of a report's summary and introduction. The main
difference is that a summary provides an overview of the
report as a whole. This means that it include the results and
conclusions of the report. The introduction does not do this.
Instead, it's purpose is to prepare the reader by providing
background information to help ease the reader into the topic.

   Below is a representation of the differences in a table format:

                                            Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 447
Summary                       Introduction

· condenses information that  · introduces the report and
   is already present in the     explains it in brief
   main document

· can exist separately from   · prepares reader for report
   the main document             that follows

· written for a general       · covers the basic background
   audience                      information, justifies why
                                 report is being written

· includes report's           · written in an engaging
   recommendations,              manner clearly shows the
   justification, and            writer's aims and objectives
   conclusions

· sources not needed          · sources used to back claims

     Exercises

        Below is an example of former student's summary
     and introduction for their report. Read through both
     documents without clicking on the hotspots. After you
     are finished, see if you can answer the following
     questions. Once you have answered them, you may
     click on the hotspots to help break down both sections.

448 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
        Please keep in mind as you read that these are just
     examples, and your summary and introduction may
     look different from these.

         1. What differences do you see between the two
             sections?

        2. Based off the summary, what do you think the
             report is about? What topics will it cover?

        3. Based off the summary, what
             recommendations will this report make?

        4. Based off the introduction, what specific topics
             will the report cover?

        5. What sources are used to back up claims in the
             introduction? How do they help establish
             credibility?

        6. What is the background information in the
             introduction? How does it justify the report being
             written?

                          An interactive H5P element has been
                          excluded from this version of the text. You
              can view it online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=630#h5p-52

Discussion

The discussion is the main part of your report. This is where you

                                            Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 449
are defining the problem that you want to resolve. You do this
by laying out your argument and presenting the information
needed to support your conclusion. As a result, the discussion
section will have the most detailed information. It it typically
divided into multiple sections, each labeled with a heading that
establishes the structure of the argument.

Conclusion

By the end of the discussion section, your reader should have
a clear understanding of the problem you are addressing. The
conclusion explains why it's important. It answers the "so
what?" question that a reader will ultimately have by this stage
of your report. Put another way, after reading your report, the
reader will have all this new information you provided them --
"so what" are they supposed to do with it?

   To answer this question, you must start by summarizing,
section by section, the main claims of your report. You
shouldn't be adding any new information at this point, or going
into great detail. Rather, you are briefly explaining each point in
the order they come up in your report and explaining how they
connect to your main argument.

   Do not tell the reader what you think they should do at this
stage. That's for the recommendations section, which comes
next.

Back Matter

Congratulations! You are now done with the report body! Just
one more part to go.

450 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
   The third, and final, part of the report is made up of the
back matter. This is where the reader can find information
that helps them learn more about your topic. Specifically, this
is where you will put your recommendations, references page,
and appendix.

   Keep in mind that, for your formal written report for RCM 200,
the recommendations and appendix are optional. However,
you must include a references page.

Recommendations

This is where you will tell the reader how they should act based
on the conclusions you have come to in your report.

   Pay close attention to your tone here. Don't make it sound
like you are commanding or ordering the reader to do
something. Instead, try to recognize that the choice is up to the
reader to decide whether to take the recommended action.

References Page

We've already talked a bit about the references page in the
chapter on APA Style, so we will just review here. A references
page includes a full reference entry for each work you cite in
your report. These entries allow your reader to find the original
sources for the information you are using if they want them.

   Keep in mind that every source in your reference page must
appear in the body of your report as an in-text citation.

                                             Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 451
Appendix

The appendix section is for anything that needs to be attached
to a report.

   In general, a piece of content goes into the appendix if it
is too long or complex to include in the discussion. However,
don't just put anything in the appendix. The information
should help the reader more fully understand your topic by
supplementing the material in the body of the report.

   Each appendix item should contain only one type of material.
For example, all images should be under one heading, all tables
should be under a different heading, etc. Don't forget to
include appendix items in the table of contents!

A Sample Report

We just went through twelve different elements that you will
need to include in your formal report. That's a lot!

   To help you visual what your final RCM 200 formal research
report might look like, check out the example below.

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=630#h5p-42

452 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
Key Takeaways

     · Using a consistent format for your written
        reports is essential for establishing your
        credibility as a writer. If your paper's format is
        inconsistent or missing key elements, a reader
        may assume you are not taking the report
        seriously and question the reliability of your work.

     · A written report is made up of three parts: the
        front matter, the report body, and the back
        matter. Between these three parts, there are a
        total of 12 different elements that can be present
        in a report.

     · The front matter is the first thing your reader
        will see. This part sets the stage for what is to
        come because it presents an outline of your
        report.

     · The report body is the main portion of your
        report. This is where the majority of the research
        on your topic goes. Here is where you will be
        implementing all the rhetorical strategies you
        have learned in order to inform your audience.

     · The back matter is where your reader can learn
        more about the topic. If they want to look up a
        citation you used or review extra material you
        couldn't get in the report body, they will go here.

     · In terms of the 12 elements, most students
        struggle with differentiating between the
        summary and introduction sections. In brief, the
        summary provides an overview of the entire

                                       Chapter 29: Formatting the Report | 453
             report. This means it includes the report's
             conclusions and, if needed, its recommendations.
             The introduction, on the other hand, provides
             background information for the reader in order
             to help ease them into the topic.

454 | Chapter 29: Formatting the Report
Chapter 30: Graphics,
Tables, and Images

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Determine which type of graphic is best for the
             information you are trying to present
          · Evaluate the quality of different graphics using
             the five rules for integrating graphics into a
             document
          · Explain how graphics can be manipulated to
             benefit the writer/speaker and why this is
             ethically problematic

The more formal the report you are writing, the more likely the
need for non-textual material such as tables, graphs, charts,
maps, drawings, and photographs. Keep in mind that you are
required to use at least one type of graphic, correctly cited, in
your formal research report for RCM 200.

                                                        Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and
                                                                                      Images | 455
                                                     These visual elements can
                                                  take many different forms,
                                                  but they all have the same
                                                  basic purpose: to help clarify
                                                  information presented in the
                                                  report. They also help break
                                                  up a text-heavy report,
                                                  making it more visually
                                                  appealing.

                                                     The key concept to
                                                  remember here is that
visuals clarify, illustrate, and augment your written text. They
are not a replacement for written text. Similar to when you
present facts from an outside source to the reader in
your writing, you are responsible for interpreting your graphics
for your reader.
   The old adage, "a picture is worth a thousand words" does
not hold true in technical writing, but adding visuals may save
you a hundred words of additional explanation and
clarification. If you have visual elements in your document, they
must be based on and supplement your written content.
Throwing in "gratuitous graphics" just to decorate or take up
space can confuse your reader.
   It is important to choose the right kind of visual to convey
the story you want your reader to understand. If visuals are
poorly chosen or poorly designed for the task, they can actually
confuse the reader and have negative consequences. For
example, it's very likely that the first thing you noticed when
you opened this page was the image above. Did you wonder
why it is there? Has it distracted you? Our eyes are naturally
drawn to visuals that stand out, so make sure the ones you pick
for your reports are essential to your purpose.

456 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
Deciding Which Graphics to Include

As you review your research and consider possible visuals to
include in your report, the first step is to think about which
graphics are most appropriate given the data you wish to
convey.

   Table #1 below provides some general guidelines on the
kinds of graphics most suitable for different types of
information:

Table #1: General Guidelines for Graphics

Information to Convey               Visual Type
Numbers, percentages, categories    Tables, charts
Processes                           Flow charts
Geographic data                     Maps
Chronological or prioritized lists  Numbered lists
Non-chronological lists             Bulleted lists

For more specific reasoning for using individual types of
graphics, see table #2 below:

Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 457
Table #2 Common Types of Illustrative Graphics

Formatting Graphics

Once you have selected the correct graphic for your report, you
will need to create it. Unfortunately, there is no universal way
to format graphics. However, your employer may have an in-
house style guide that you are expected to use.

   For the purposes of our RCM 200 class, you are expected to
458 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
use the rules outlined in APA Style (7th Edition) for formatting
your tables and figures.

   The key takeaway here is to always aim of
consistency--especially if you are ever in a situation where you
do not have a style guide. This means that elements such as
titles, numbers, and headings should be formatted the same
across the entire document. Small inconsistencies may not
seem like a big deal, but they can imply to a supervisor or client
that you are not thorough or detail-oriented.

Placement and Context

As you develop visuals for your report, you will want to also
consider two things:

 1. where the visuals should be placed
2. what information you need to provide in your report to

      adequately prepare your readers for the message within
      that graphic

While there are different requirements depending on the
visual you choose, there are five main rules you should follow to
integrate your graphics:

              Five Rules For Integrating Graphics into your
                                       Document

           1. Give each visual a numbered caption that

                                   Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 459
                includes a clear descriptive title
          2. Refer to the caption number within the body

                text and discuss its content
           3. Label all units (x and y axes, legends, column

                box heads, parts of diagrams, etc.)
          4. Provide the source of the data and/or visual

                image if you did not create it yourself
           5. Avoid distorting the data or image.

In addition, visual elements should also be surrounded with
sufficient passive space to emphasize the image and enhance
its readability. If copying and pasting an image, make sure all
elements are clear and the print size is readable. A visual that
has been shrunk down to an unreadable size does not help the
reader understand your ideas.

     Exercise #1: Examine and Compare the Figures

        Examine Figure #1.1 below. Do you understand what
     the information conveys? What is missing? Use the five
     rules above to determine where this figure goes wrong.

460 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
                                                                              Figure #1.1

   If you look carefully, you might be able to guess what
story the graph above is telling. However, the lack of a
descriptive caption and labeling of axes makes it
impossible to know for sure.

   Compare that figure to Figure #1.2 below using the
same five rules.

                             Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 461
        Figure #1.2 Water Consumption in Edmonton during
     the 2010 Gold Medal Hockey Game (Flowingdata).

        Figure #1.2 has a numbered caption, a descriptive
     title, and it has properly labelled x and y axes and
     legends. It also cites the source the graph was retrieved
     from in the caption using an in-text citation. The
     original image has not been distorted in any way. Thus,
     it follows the five key rules listed above.

Putting Graphics in Context

The following examples show how you can introduce, present
and discuss a graphic in your paper. The first example is a
pie chart created with information the writer obtained from
an interview. Notice that the writer provides a name for the
visual, includes introductory sentences to provide context for
the graphic, lists source information at the bottom of the chart,
and finally, includes some closing remarks to tie it all together.

          Not all gardeners will experience success with
       growing vegetables in Central Oregon, and the town
       of Sisters is especially challenging because of the
       varied temperatures all year long and the chance of
       frost or even freezing temperatures during any
       month of the year. Central Oregon and Sisters

462 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
       resident, Jane Doe, had the greatest success with
       the following vegetables in the year 2015 as noted in
       the pie chart below.

          Table 1: Vegetables grown in 2015

        Source: Interview with Master Gardener, Jane Doe, 2 May
        2016.

          It is important to note that depending on the
       hardiness zone of the city, some vegetables may do
       better than others. Doe also commented that she
       protected her tomatoes either inside a green house
       or under a hoop house.

Here is a second example. This simple table conveys
information about plant hardiness zones for growers in Central
Oregon. Notice again that the table isn't simply inserted and
left on its own for readers to interpret; the writer introduces
the table with some remarks and also provides follow-up
commentary after the table.

                                   Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 463
   The U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes a
Plant Hardiness Zone Map which growers and
gardeners use to help determine which plants,
including vegetables and trees, will be most
successful at a particular location. The table below
shows the hardiness zone for four cities in Central
Oregon and includes the annual minimum winter
temperature--important information to keep in
mind when determining not only which vegetables
to plant but how long the growing season may be.

   Table 1: Hardiness Zones in Central Oregon

   Central      Hardiness     Winter
Oregon City  Zone          Temperature Range

   Sisters      6a            -10 to -5
                           (Fahrenheit)
   Bend         6b
   Redmond      6b            -5 to 0 (Fahrenheit)
   Tumalo       6b
                              -5 to 0 (Fahrenheit)

                              -5 to 0 (Fahrenheit)

   Source information: "United States Department of
Agriculture." USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map. 2012.
Web. 05 May 2016.

   Before purchasing any plants or vegetables for
your own garden, make sure you look at the
hardiness number on the label to be sure that item
will grow successfully in your climate zone.

Now that you have had a chance to learn about strategies for
creating effective graphics and have examined some strong
examples, let's look at a few that could use some revision.

464 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
Exercise #2: Evaluating Graphics for Revision

   As you look at the following visuals, note the possible
strengths and weaknesses of each one. Consider what
advice you might give the writer on how to improve
these graphics. You can use the five rules for
integrating graphics as a guide. The five rules are
below:

    1. Give each visual a numbered caption that
        includes a clear descriptive title

   2. Refer to the caption number within the body
        text and discuss its content

   3. Label all units (x and y axes, legends, column
        box heads, parts of diagrams, etc.)

   4. Provide the source of the data and/or visual
        image if you did not create it yourself

   5. Avoid distorting the data or image.

Figure #2: A Chemical
Flowchart

                             Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 465
Figure #3  Figure #4:
           An
           Example
           of a Pain
           Assessme
           nt Tool

Using Graphics Ethically

Like with everything we've discussed up to this point, the
graphics you use can have an impact on your modes of appeal.
If the graphics are misleading in any way, and your audience
realizes this, it can negatively impact how credible or
trustworthy they consider you.

     Exercise #3: The Ethics of Graphics

466 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
        Watch the video below on misleading graphics. After
     watching, answer the following questions:

          · Why might a person trying to persuade you
             toward their point of view use a graph to present
             information?

          · How can graphs present an opinion?
          · List three methods of "cherry picking data" and

             the advantages each provides.

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=644#oembed-1

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/spotbadgraphs

The next time that you feel persuaded by a graphic
representation of data, check the labels, numbers, scales and
context and ask yourself what story the picture is trying to tell.
As you edit your own report, check to make sure your own use
of graphics is ethical and complete.

     Key Takeaways

                                   Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 467
          · Graphics can take many different forms, but
             they all have the same purpose: to help clarify
             information. They also can make reports more
             visually appealing by breaking up the text.

          · Graphics should always clarify, illustrate, and
             augment your written text or presentation. They
             should always be explained to your audience in
             some capacity.

          · There are five rules for integrating graphics into
             your document or presentation:

                 1. Give each visual a numbered caption that
                      includes a clear descriptive title

                2. Refer to the caption number within the
                      body text and discuss its content

                 3. Label all units (axes, legends, column and
                      row headings, parts of a diagram, etc.)

                4. Provide the source of the data and/or
                      graphic if you did not create it yourself

                 5. Avoid distorting the data or image
          · Not following the five steps above can

             negatively impact your credibility. If the audience
             believes you have falsified your graphics, or it
             seems like you are misleading them, they are less
             likely to trust you.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing

468 | Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus) and is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

   This chapter is also adapted from "Technical
Writing" by Allison Gross, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris
Rubio, Jodi Naas, Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva (on Open
Oregon) and is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   Figures #2 - 4 are in the Public Domain from openclipart.org

References

Flowingdata. (2010, March 9). Canada: The country that pees
together stays together. https://flowingdata.com/2010/03/09/
canada-the-country-that-pees-together-stays-together/

                                   Chapter 30: Graphics, Tables, and Images | 469
PUBLIC SPEAKING

                                                                         Public Speaking | 471
Chapter 31: The
Rhetorical Nature of
Public Speaking

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
          · Explain why presentations are important in
             professional practice
          · Describe how the modes of appeal can impact
             your presentation and make it more persuasive
          · Differentiate between your formal written
             report and your extemporaneous speech

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · extemporaneous speech
          · modes of appeal
          · ethos
          · pathos

                                                        Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature
                                                                     of Public Speaking | 473
          · logos

Public Speaking in the Technical
Professions

As a professional, you will be making many speeches
throughout your career, whether in meetings to coworkers and
supervisors or in pitches to potential clients. You probably will
not be surprised to see that there are many reasons why public
speaking is such an important aspect of professional practice:

   Do you notice what all of those bullet points have in
common? Here's a hint: the primary concern is not about the
need to transmit information.

   All of these points emphasize the importance of how we
forge a relationship with our audience. In a professional
474 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
context, this relational element is key. Of course we want to
pass on information, but when we are giving speeches, we
need to do so in a way that allows us to connect with our
audience and make them care about or relate to our topic. The
modes of appeal are one of the ways to do this.

   A previous section of the textbook taught you about the Plan
- Produce - Polish process of designing a formal research
report. The next few chapters will walk you through the same
Plan - Produce - Polish process, but this time for an
extemporaneous speech that you will give to your classmates.
In the following chapters, we look at how we can design and
deliver presentations in order to engage our audience most
effectively.

   Your research report is meant to demonstrate your
accomplishments in the use of written rhetoric; the 5-minute
speech is now your chance to sharpen your oral rhetorical skills.

   In summary:

                 Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 475
The Modes of Appeal & Your Speech

How can rhetorical theory help you connect with your
audience and make them care about your topic? Once again,
we will use the three modes of appeal (ethos, pathos, and
logos) to help answer that question. Aristotle considered these
three modes the most important elements in a speaker's
arsenal. We will briefly review them now.

   In this chapter you will also see the example we used earlier
in the rhetoric and report writing chapter: Hamid's speech on
Lyme disease. Hamid's example is here to serve as a reminder
of how you might address the three modes of appeal when
designing your own speech.

Ethos

Recall that ethos refers to the speaker's character and
expertise. When you use ethos correctly, you are showing the
audience that you are credible and that they can believe what
you say. To cover this element in your speech, tell the audience
why they should listen to you. You can do this by
demonstrating your authority on your topic.

   For example, you could begin a persuasive speech on the
dangers of drinking and driving with a short story about how
you helped implement a "designated driver" program. This way
the audience will understand your relationship to the message
and form a positive perception of you. If you are trying to
persuade the audience to donate blood, your credibility on the
subject may come from your studies in the medical field or
from having volunteered at a blood drive.

476 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
Hamid - Ethos

   Hamid walks through three questions to determine
his ethos.

    1. Does my content show awareness of the needs
        of the audience?
              In general, Hamid's presentation is about
                 personal health and safety. From his
                 research, he knows that Lyme disease can
                 have a serious, negative impact on people's
                 lives. In order to establish his credibility, he
                 will need to show that concern through his
                 tone, body language, and use of detail. He
                 realizes that one way he can establish his
                 credibility is by discussing his own close call
                 with disease. This tactic will help him create
                 a personal connection with his audience
                 and help show why he thinks it is an
                 important topic for them to be aware of.

   2. Am I meeting the conventions of the
        presentation?
              The main purpose of the presentation is to
                 persuade the audience, but Hamid knows
                 he will have to do more than persuade them
                 that "Lyme Disease is a serious disease."
                 That is too easy, and the professor will
                 probably say he didn't go deep enough in

            Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 477
                      his argument. That is why he will end his
                      speech by discussing how his audience can
                      take protective measures to stop
                      themselves from catching the disease. If he
                      can give them a list of actions to take, like
                      checking for ticks when they go hiking, that
                      will be much more persuasive.
        3. Is the information presented fair and complete?
                   After thinking about his topic for some
                      time, Hamid realizes he could easily use
                      scare tactics to persuade his audience. He
                      could do this by focusing only on the most
                      severe consequences of Lyme Disease, like
                      how it affects your central nervous system
                      and can lead to paralysis. However, he also
                      realizes that this is a pretty transparent
                      tactic, and may turn his audience off his
                      message. Instead, he decides to use a more
                      balanced approach when describing the
                      disease's impact. By explaining the range of
                      health effects the disease can have, he will
                      show his audience that he has done his
                      research (making him appear more
                      credible), and allow them to come to the
                      conclusion that the disease is serious on
                      their own.

478 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
Pathos

As you may recall, the term pathos refers to the use of emotion
as a persuasive element, in addition to how a speaker connects
to the audience. You have probably seen commercials on
television for charities trying to raise funds for sick children or
mistreated animals, complete with sad images and music; this
is pathos at work. We don't always make decisions based only
on clear thinking. We can be moved by words, by a video clip, or
by a piece of music, which is also an effective way of persuading
the audience to take a particular action.

     Hamid - Pathos

        Hamid walks through the three questions to
     determine his pathos. It should be easy, since he has
     already determined her audience's needs by
     considering her rhetorical audience with Bitzer and
     how he will establish his credibility with ethos.
     Regardless, he still goes through the questions just to
     be sure.

         1. Does the quality of my research meet the
             expectations of the audience?
                   Hamid is already planning to use his first-
                      hand experience with Lyme Disease as his
                      hook to get his audience's attention.
                      However, he doesn't want to focus solely on
                      personal experience. He knows his audience

                 Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 479
                      will want to hear data about how Lyme
                      Disease is spreading in Canada. Since he
                      already has information from the Center for
                      Disease Control and Prevention, and several
                      articles from medical journals, Hamid feels
                      confident he will meet his audience's
                      expectations.

        2. Is the presentation designed to make it easy for
             the reader to understand?

                   After reviewing some of his resources,
                      Hamid starts to feel a little overwhelmed.
                      Several of his sources, especially the ones
                      from medical journals, have really detailed
                      information about the disease and use
                      terminology that he doesn't fully
                      understand. He could definitely get really
                      detailed in his speech but then realizes he
                      doesn't have that kind of time. His speech is
                      only 5 minutes long, after all. Also, if he
                      doesn't understand that level of detail, how
                      will he be able to explain it to his nonexpert
                      audience? Hamid decides to focus just on
                      the most basic information like where the
                      disease comes from, how it impacts the
                      body, and how the audience can protect
                      themselves against it.

        3. Are claims supported by credible evidence?

                   All of Hamid's evidence will come from
                      reputable medical organizations and

480 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
                      medical journals, so he's good there.
                      However, how will he show this evidence in
                      his speech? Unlike a written report, there
                      won't be a list of references at the end for
                      his audience to see. This means he will have
                      to mention the names of his sources his in
                      speech. For example, he might say "The
                      Public Health Agency of Canada provides
                      the criteria for diagnosing and treating
                      Lyme Disease." Mention the organizations or
                      journals directly will help here. However,
                      Hamid knows he'll have a hard time keeping
                      all those names straight, so he makes sure
                      to write them down on his notecard so he
                      doesn't forget.

Logos

As we discussed earlier, the term logos refers to in part to
your message's logic. To win your audience over using logic,
your speech must be carefully organized and present facts and
evidence. Depending on the general purpose of your speech,
particularly if its goal is to persuade, you may need to present
an argument. To do this, logos is key. Think about what
prosecutors do during a trial--particularly during closing
arguments. This is the place for facts and reason. Prosecutors
will argue that the scenario they have presented is the only
logical interpretation of the evidence. To use logos effectively,
incorporate expert testimony, statistics, and other reliable data,
and order your points carefully.

                  Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 481
     Hamid - Logos

        Hamid is almost done. He feels like his speech is
     really coming together. He goes through the final three
     questions to ensure his logos appeal is strong enough.

         1. Is the issue presented in a complete and
             balanced way?
                   Obviously, nobody is going to say that
                      Hamid should include an argument that is
                      pro-Lyme Disease. That doesn't make sense.
                      What matters here is that Hamid is neither
                      diminishing the severity of the disease or
                      overstating its effects. He also needs to
                      make sure that he will be providing his
                      audience with just enough information so
                      that are knowledgeable, but not
                      overwhelmed by the content.

        2. Does the presentation organize sections in a
             logical way?
                   After considering Bitzer's constraints and
                      using the speech outline provided by his
                      instructor, Hamid feels he has a good
                      structure for his speech. He knows he will
                      open by briefly talking about his own close
                      call with disease, then he will provide of an
                      overview of the disease. He will follow this
                      with explaining why testing for Lyme

482 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
                 Disease is challenging, how the disease is
                 spreading in Canada, and then provide his
                 audience with a list of strategies for fighting
                 the disease. It's a lot to fit into five minutes,
                 so Hamid is aware he will have to be very
                 selective of what information he includes.
   3. Is the argument positioned to recognize the
        audience's concerns?
              Hamid knows from personal experience
                 that medical issues can be pretty daunting.
                 He doesn't want to scare his audience, and
                 he also doesn't want them to be self-
                 defeated by the end of his presentation.
                 That is why his speech will end with a list of
                 strategies they can take to protect
                 themselves from the disease. By including
                 that content, he will empower his audience.

Exercise: The Modes of Appeal and Your Speech

   As a review, watch the video below on how the
modes of appeal can be used to plan your speech.
Afterwards, answer the questions below:

            Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 483
                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=1602#oembed-1

         1. What specific ethos appeals will you use in your
             speech? How will these appeals establish your
             good will, good judgement, and good character?

        2. What specific logos appeals will you use to
             persuade your audience? What research do you
             need to do to have sufficient evidence to support
             your claims? What structure will be the most
             persuasive?

        3. What specific pathos appeals will you use to
             connect your audience to your topic and to the
             action? To what needs, values, and expectations
             of the audience will you appeal? What emotional
             appeals will you use?

How is your Speech Different from
your Report?

Does all this sound familiar at all? It should, since we already
made the same points (and used similar examples) about the

484 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
modes of appeal when discussing your formal written report.
Though the format and purpose is completely different,
harnessing the same rhetorical concepts and implementing
them in your speech will make you successful.

   Below are two graphics that indicate how your speech's
purpose is different from the formal report:

                 Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking | 485
     Key Takeaways

          · You will give many oral presentations
             throughout your career. However, these
             presentations should do more than just transmit
             information. They should also connect with an
             audience and make them care about or relate to
             a topic.

          · In this course, you will give an extemporaneous
             speech. While the format and structure of this
             speech will be different from your formal written
             report, you will still apply rhetorical theory (the
             modes of appeal) to make sure your speech is
             persuasive in nature.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Professional Communications"
by Olds College (on Open Library). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

486 | Chapter 31: The Rhetorical Nature of Public Speaking
Chapter 32: Methods of
Speech Delivery

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Distinguish between four methods of speech
             delivery: the impromptu speech, the manuscript
             speech, the memorized speech, and the
             extemporaneous speech
          · List the advantages and disadvantages of the
             four types of speeches
          · Explain why an extemporaneous is the
             preferred delivery style when using rhetorical
             theory

Key Terms and Concepts

· impromptu
· manuscript
· memorized

                        Chapter 32: Methods of Speech
                                                 Delivery | 487
          · extemporaneous

We have established that presentations involve much more
than the transfer of information. Sure, you could treat a
presentation as an opportunity to simply read a report you've
written out loud to a group, but you would fail to both engage
your audience and make a connection with them. In other
words, you would leave them wondering exactly why they had
to listen to your presentation instead of reading it at their
leisure.

The Four Methods of Speech Delivery

One of the ways to ensure that you engage your audience
effectively is by carefully considering how best to deliver your
speech. Each of you has sat in a class, presentation, or meeting
where you didn't feel interested in the information the
presenter was sharing. Part of the reason for your
disengagement likely originated in the presenter's method of
speech delivery.

   For our purposes, there are four different methods--or
types--of speech delivery used in technical communication:

  · Impromptu
  · Manuscript
  · Memorized
  · Extemporaneous

488 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
     Exercise #1: The Four Methods of Speech Delivery

        What comes to mind when you think about the four
     methods of speech delivery? How do you think they
     are different from one another? Have you given a
     speech using any of these methods before?

        Watch the video below for a brief overview of each
     one. After you are finished, answer the questions
     below:

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=501#oembed-1

         1. Which method are you most comfortable with?
             Why?

        2. Which method are you the least comfortable
             with? Why?

        3. Which method do you think is the best for
             connecting with your audience? Why?

The public speaking section of this course will require you to
deliver a speech using an extemporaneous style, but let's take
a look at how all four differ in approach:

                                    Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 489
Impromptu Speeches

   Impromptu speaking is the presentation of a short message
without advanced preparation. You have probably done
impromptu speaking many times in informal, conversational
settings. Self-introductions in group settings are examples of
impromptu speaking: "Hi, my name is Shawnda, and I'm a
student at the University of Saskatchewan."

   Another example of impromptu speaking occurs when you
answer a question such as, "What did you think of the movie?"
Your response has not been pre-planned, and you are
constructing your arguments and points as you speak. Even
worse, you might find yourself going into a meeting when your
boss announces to you, "I want you to talk about the last stage
of the project" with no warning.

   The advantage of this kind of speaking is that it's
spontaneous and responsive in an animated group context.
The disadvantage is that the speaker is given little or no time
to contemplate the central theme of their message. As a result,
the message may be disorganized and difficult for listeners to
follow.

   Here is a step-by-step guide that may be useful if you are
called upon to give an impromptu speech in public:

490 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
 1. Take a moment to collect your thoughts and plan the
      main point that you want to make (like a mini thesis
      statement).

2. Thank the person for inviting you to speak. Do not make
      comments about being unprepared, called upon at the
      last moment, on the spot, or uneasy. In other words, try to
      avoid being self-deprecating!

 3. Deliver your message, making your main point as briefly
      as you can while still covering it adequately and at a pace
      your listeners can follow.

4. If you can use a structure, use numbers if possible: "Two
      main reasons. . ." or "Three parts of our plan. . ." or "Two side
      effects of this drug. . ." Past, present, and future or East
      Coast, Midwest, and West Coast are pre-fab structures.

 5. Thank the person again for the opportunity to speak.
6. Stop talking. It is easy to "ramble on" when you don't have

      something prepared. If in front of an audience, don't keep
      talking as you move back to your seat.

Impromptu speeches are generally most successful when they
are brief and focus on a single point.

   We recommend practicing your impromptu speaking
regularly. Do you want to work on reducing your vocalized
pauses in a formal setting? Great! You can begin that process
by being conscious of your vocalized fillers during informal
conversations and settings.

     Exercise #2: Impromptu Speech Example

        Below are two examples of an impromptu speech. In

                                     Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 491
     the first video, a teacher is demonstrating an
     impromptu speech to his students on the topic of
     strawberries. He quickly jots down some notes before
     presenting.

        What works in his speech? What could be improved?

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=501#oembed-3

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/
     impromptuteacher

        In the above example, the teacher did an okay job,
     considering how little time he had to prepare.

        In this next example, you will see just how badly an
     impromptu speech can go. It is a video of a best man
     speech at a wedding. Keep in mind that the speaker is
     the groom's brother.

        Is there anything that he does well? What are some
     problems with his speech?

                          One or more interactive elements has

492 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=501#oembed-4

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/
     badimpromptubestman

Manuscript Speeches

   Manuscript speaking is the word-for-word iteration of a
written message. In a manuscript speech, the speaker
maintains their attention on the printed page except when
using presentation aids.

   The advantage to reading from a manuscript is the exact
repetition of original words. This can be extremely important in

                                     Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 493
some circumstances. For example, reading a statement about
your organization's legal responsibilities to customers may
require that the original words be exact. In reading one word
at a time, in order, the only errors would typically be the
mispronunciation of a word or stumbling over complex
sentence structure. A manuscript speech may also be
appropriate at a more formal affair (like a funeral), when your
speech must be said exactly as written in order to convey the
proper emotion the situation deserves.

   However, there are costs involved in manuscript speaking.
First, it's typically an uninteresting way to present. Unless the
speaker has rehearsed the reading as a complete performance
animated with vocal expression and gestures (well-known
authors often do this for book readings), the presentation tends
to be dull. Keeping one's eyes glued to the script prevents eye
contact with the audience.

   For this kind of "straight" manuscript speech to hold
audience attention, the audience must be already interested
in the message and speaker before the delivery begins. Finally,
because the full notes are required, speakers often require a
lectern to place their notes, restricting movement and the
ability to engage with the audience. Without something to
place the notes on, speakers have to manage full-page
speaking notes, and that can be distracting.

   It is worth noting that professional speakers, actors, news
reporters, and politicians often read from an autocue device
such as a teleprompter. This device is especially common when
these people appear on television where eye contact with the
camera is crucial. With practice, a speaker can achieve a
conversational tone and give the impression of speaking
extemporaneously and maintaining eye contact while using an
autocue device.

   However, success in this medium depends on two factors:

 1. the speaker is already an accomplished public speaker

494 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
     who has learned to use a conversational tone while
     delivering a prepared script, and
2. the speech is written in a style that sounds conversational.

    Exercise #3: Manuscript Speech Example

       Below is a video that shows an example of a
    manuscript speech. In the video, US Presidential
    Historian, Doris Kearns Goodwin, gives a speech about
    different US presidents.

       What works in her speech? What could be improved?

                         One or more interactive elements has
                         been excluded from this version of the
             text. You can view them online here:
             https://openpress.usask.ca/
             rcm200/?p=501#oembed-5

       Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/goodwindepauw

                                    Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 495
Memorized Speeches

   Memorized speaking is reciting a written message that the
speaker has committed to memory. Actors, of course, recite
from memory whenever they perform from a script in a stage
play, television program, or movie. When it comes to speeches,
memorization can be useful when the message needs to be
exact and the speaker doesn't want to be confined by notes.

   The advantage to memorization is that it enables the speaker
to maintain eye contact with the audience throughout the
speech. Being free of notes means that you can move freely
around the stage and use your hands to make gestures. If your
speech uses presentation aids, this freedom is even more of an
advantage.

   Memorization, however, can be tricky. First, if you lose your
place and start trying to ad lib, the contrast in your style of
delivery will alert your audience that something is wrong. If
you go completely blank during the presentation, it will be
extremely difficult to find your place and keep going.
Obviously, memorizing a typical seven-minute classroom
speech takes a great deal of time and effort, and if you aren't
used to memorizing, it is very difficult to pull off.

496 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
Exercise #4: Memorized Speech Example

   Below is a video that shows an example of a
memorized speech. In the video, former Louisiana
governor, Bobby Jindal, responds to Barack Obama's
State of the Union address back in 2009.

   What works in his speech? What could be improved?
                    One or more interactive elements has
                    been excluded from this version of the

         text. You can view them online here:
         https://openpress.usask.ca/
         rcm200/?p=501#oembed-6

   Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/
jindalresponse2009

                               Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 497
Extemporaneous Speeches

   Extemporaneous speaking is the presentation of a carefully
planned and rehearsed speech, spoken in a conversational
manner using brief notes.

   Speaking extemporaneously has some advantages. It
promotes the likelihood that you, the speaker, will be perceived
as knowledgeable and credible since you know the speech
well enough that you don't need to read it. In addition, your
audience is likely to pay better attention to the message
because it is engaging both verbally and nonverbally.

   By using notes rather than a full manuscript (or everything
that you're going to say), the extemporaneous speaker can
establish and maintain eye contact with the audience and
assess how well they are understanding the speech as it
progresses. It also allows flexibility; you are working from the
strong foundation of an outline, but if you need to delete, add,
or rephrase something at the last minute or to adapt to your
audience, you can do so. The outline also helps you be aware of
main ideas vs. subordinate ones.

498 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
   Compared to the other three types of speech delivery, an
extemporaneous style is the best for engaging your audience
and making yourself sound like a natural speaker.

   The video below provides some tips on how to deliver a
speech using this method:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=501#oembed-2

Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/deliverextempres
   The slide below provides a brief overview of tips for preparing

your extemporaneous presentation:

                                     Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 499
     Exercise# 5: Extemporaneous Speech Example

        Below is a video that shows an example of an
     extemporaneous speech. In the video, a former
     University of Saskatchewan student tries to persuade
     her peers to spend more solo time outside.

        What works in her speech? What could be improved?

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://openpress.usask.ca/
              rcm200/?p=501#oembed-7

        Link to Original Video: tinyurl.com/rcm401speech

500 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
Key Takeaways

     · When designing any speech, it's important to
        consider how you will deliver that speech. In
        technical communication, there are four different
        types of speech delivery, each with their
        advantages and disadvantages. They are:
        impromptu, manuscript, memorized, and
        extemporaneous.

     · An impromptu speech can take many forms
        such as a toast at a wedding, being asked to give
        a project update at a meeting, or even simply
        meeting someone for the first time. While this
        type of speech can be spontaneous and
        responsive, the speaker generally has little to no
        warning that they will need to speak.

     · A manuscript speech is completely written out
        and read word for word. It is often a good style
        when you want to nail the specific wording and
        do not want to make an error. However, this type
        of speech is not very persuasive because it does
        not take advantage of the immediacy of public
        speaking. It also completely removes audience
        relation from the process.

     · A memorized speech is when a speaker
        commits an entire speech to memory. This style
        also harms relation with the audience because
        the speaker is more focused on remembering the
        text of the speech rather than communicating
        with the audience. Additionally, if you lose your

                                Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery | 501
             place and need to ad lib, it may be obvious to your
             audience.
          · An extemporaneous speech is done in a
             natural, conversational speaking style. While it is
             carefully planned, it is never completely written
             out like a manuscript. It is also not read or
             memorized. Instead, an outline is used to help
             guide the speaker. As a result, more attention can
             be paid to the audience, allowing the speaker to
             better connect with them and make adjustments
             as necessary. This is the style we want you to use
             for your presentation assignment in RCM 200.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Communication for Business
Professionals" by eCampusOntario (on Open Library). It is
licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.

   This chapter is also adapted from "Speak Out, Call In: Public
Speaking as Advocacy" by Meggie Mapes (on Pressbooks). It
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

502 | Chapter 32: Methods of Speech Delivery
Chapter 33: Speech
Structure

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Create a preparation outline and speaking
             outline for your extemporaneous speech
          · Use keywords from your outline to develop a
             3×5 cue card

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · outline
          · preparation outline
          · speaking outline
          · connective statements

As you saw in the last chapter, we want you to use an
extemporaneous style for your speech delivery. Many of you
may feel a bit uncomfortable with this idea if you are used

                                                                             Chapter 33: Speech
                                                                                   Structure | 503
to using a manuscript or memorized style. However, we want
to stress that you are not going to go into your presentation
unprepared. This chapter will show you how to outline your
speech and give you several different elements you can use
while designing it.

Outlining Your Speech

An outline provides a visual structure where you can compile
information into a well-organized document. The amount of
information you include will depend on your needs. For our
course, we want you to use a preparation outline, which is
a comprehensive form of outline that includes all of the
information in your speech. If someone were to read your
preparation outline, there should be enough depth to provide
a general idea of what will be accomplished.

   Generally, we recommend starting from this outline format:

504 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
 Sample Speech Outline

 I. Introduction
    a. Attention Getter / Hook

 b. Credibility Statement
 c. Exigence
 d. Action
 e. Survey: Forecast of Speech Points

 II. Main body

        1. First Main Point
             a. Evidence

        2. Second Main Point
             a. Evidence

        3. Third main Point
             a. Evidence

 III. Conclusion
 a. Summary: Review of Main Points
 b. Restate Thesis
 c. Clincher

This is just a start as you will need to make adjustments to fit
your needs. For example, each main point may have more than
one piece of evidence. In preparation for your extemporaneous
speech, you will need to complete a preparation outline for
your Speech Strategy Report assignment.

   You should think of the outline as the blueprint for your
speech. It is not the speech--that is what comes out of your
mouth in front of the audience. The outline helps you prepare
and, as such, they are a living document that you can adjust,
add, and delete. We recommend beginning to add information
right away. However, keep in mind that you will not have the

                                                     Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 505
whole document with you during your speech. Instead, you'll
use a speaking outline that you write on your 3×5 index card.

   A speaking outline is a keyword outline used to deliver an
extemporaneous speech. The notes you use to speak can aid
or hinder in an effective delivery. A keyword outline on your
3×5 card--which you'll use to rehearse and deliver--will allow
greater embodiment and engagement with the audience. As
you practice, you will be able to summarize the full preparation
outline down to more usable notes. In those notes, create a set
of abbreviated notes for the actual delivery. The more materials
you take up with you to speak, the more you will be tempted to
look at them rather than have eye contact with the audience,
reducing your overall engagement.

   Your speaking notes should be in far fewer words than the
preparation, arranged in key phrases, and readable for you.
Your speaking outline should provide cues to yourself to "slow
down," "pause," or "change slide." Our biggest suggestion is
to make the notes workable for you. More information on
structuring your cue card is included in the next section.

Using Cue Cards

An extemporaneous speech is a presentation that is carefully
planned and practiced ahead of time. A tool that can help you
in your speech is to use a 3.5×5 card effectively. Your card is
meant to help prompt you as you give your speech, and to keep
you on track. It is NOT meant to be a transcript where you write
out your speech.

506 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
Exercise: Evaluate Cue Cards
   Below are images of three cue cards. Look at Image

#1. Do you think this person's speech was successful
according to the constraints of an extemporaneous
speech? Why or why not?

                                               Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 507
                                                                                     Image #1

        Obviously, Image #1 is an example of what not to do
     when using a cue card. Keep in mind that your card is a
     tool for you to consult while you speak. You do not
508 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
need to write everything on it that you would like to
say.

   Now let's look at two more cue cards (Images #2 and
#3). What is it that makes these two cards better? How
are they different from Image #1?

                                                                              Image #2

                                              Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 509
                                                                                     Image #3

Your card is meant to be recognized by you (the speaker), and
you alone--so you can use abbreviations (similar to the `SHR'
used in Image #2 above) or have shorthand notes that will
help to jog your memory. Recognize that you probably will NOT
need to write as much on your cue card as you may think you
need to.

   As you practice, make sure to practice using the same card.
510 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
Setting Up Your Speech

Introductions and conclusions serve to frame the speech and
give it a clearly defined beginning and end. They help the
audience see what is to come in the speech, and then let them
mentally prepare for the end. In doing this, introductions and
conclusions provide a "preview/review" of your speech as a
means to reiterate to your audience what you are talking about.
Because speeches are auditory and live, you need to make sure
that audiences remember what you are saying.

   The general rule is that the introduction and conclusion should
each be about 10% of your total speech, leaving 80% for the body
section. It can be tempting to have longer introductions, but that
often leaves less time to introduce key research and warrant your
ideas through the main points. Since your speech for this course
is five minutes long, that means your introduction and conclusion
should each be about 30 seconds.

Structuring the Introduction

Many speakers struggle with how to start their speech because
they're often worried that their words won't be memorable,
attention-capturing, and clever enough to get their audience
interested. This is a problem for many of us because the first words
you say, in many ways, set the tone for the rest of your speech.
There may not be any one "best" way to start a speech, but we can
provide some helpful guidelines that will make starting a speech
much easier.

                                                      Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 511
 Common Errors to Avoid in Introductions

   · rambling and meandering; not getting to the point;
   · starting with a vocalized pause;
   · saying the specific purpose statement first;
   · beginning to talk as you approach the platform;.
   · reading your introduction directly from your notes;
   · talking too fast.

With that in mind, there are five basic elements that you will
want to incorporate into your introduction and speech outline.

Element 1: Get the Audience's
Attention--the Hook

The first major purpose of an introduction is to gain your
audience's attention and make them interested in what you
have to say. The first words of a speech should be something
that will perk up the audience's ears. Starting a speech with
"Hey everybody. I'm going to talk to you today about soccer"
has not tried to engage the individuals in the audience who
don't care about soccer.

   To create interest, the key is selecting an option that's
appropriate and relevant to your specific audience. You will
also want to choose an attention-getting device appropriate for
your speech topic. Ideally, your attention-getting device should
have a relevant connection to your speech. Below are a number
of possibilities for crafting an attention getter.

Anecdotes and Narratives

An anecdote is a brief account or story of an interesting or
humorous event. Notice the emphasis here is on the word

512 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
"brief." An example of an anecdote used in a speech about the
pervasiveness of technology might look something like this:

          In July 2009, a high school girl named Miranda
       Becker was walking along a main boulevard near
       her home on Staten Island, New York, typing in a
       message on her cell phone. Not paying attention to
       the world around her, she took a step and fell right
       into an open construction hole.

Notice that the anecdote is short and has a clear point. From
here the speaker can begin to make their point about how
technology is controlling our lives.

   A personal story is another option here. You may consider
starting your speech with a story about yourself that is relevant
to your topic. Some of the best speeches are ones that come
from personal knowledge and experience. If you are an expert
or have firsthand experience related to your topic, sharing this
information with the audience is a great way to show that you
are credible during your attention getter.

Startling Statement/Statistic/Fact

Another way to start your speech is to surprise your audience
with startling information about your topic. Often, startling
statements come in the form of statistics and strange facts.
The goal of a good startling statistic is that it surprises the
audience and gets them engaged in your topic. For example,
if you're giving a speech about oil conservation, you could start
by saying:

                                                      Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 513
          A Boeing 747 airliner holds 57,285 gallons of fuel.

You could start a speech on the psychology of dreams by
noting:

          The average person has over 1,460 dreams a year.

A strange fact, on the other hand, is a statement that does not
involve numbers but is equally surprising to most audiences.
For example, you could start a speech on the gambling
industry by saying:

          There are no clocks in any Las Vegas casino.

Although startling statements are fun, it is important to use
them ethically. First, make sure that your startling statement
is factual. Second, make sure that your startling statement is
relevant to your speech and not just thrown in for shock value.

A Rhetorical Question

A rhetorical question is a question to which no actual reply is
expected. For example, a speaker talking about the history of
Mother's Day could start by asking the audience:

514 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
          Do you remember the last time you told your
       mom you loved her?

In this case, the speaker does not expect the audience to shout
out an answer, but rather to think about the questions as the
speech goes on.

Quotation

Another way to capture your listeners' attention is to use the
words of another person that relate directly to your topic.
Maybe you've found a really great quotation in one of the
articles or books you read while researching your speech. If not,
you can also use a number of Internet or library sources that
compile useful quotations from noted individuals. Quotations
are a great way to start a speech, so let's look at an example
that could be used during the opening of a commencement
address:

          The late actress, fashion icon, and social activist
       Audrey Hepburn once noted that, "Nothing is
       impossible. The word itself says `I'm possible'!"

Element 2: Establish or Enhance Your
Credibility

Whether you are informing, persuading, or entertaining an

                                                      Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 515
audience, they will expect you to know what you're talking
about. The second element, then, is to let your audience know
that you are a knowledgeable and credible source for this
information, in other words, you must establish your ethos. To
do this, you will need to explain how you know what you know
about your topic.

   For some people, this will be simple. If you are informing your
audience about a topic that you've researched or experienced
for years, that makes you a fairly credible source. You probably
know what you are talking about. Let the audience know! For
example:

          I've been serving with Big Brothers Big Sisters for
       the last two years.

However, you may be speaking on a subject with which you
have no history of credibility. If you are just curious about when
streetlights were installed at intersections and why they are
red, yellow, and green, you can do that. But you will still need
to give your audience some sort of reason to trust your
knowledge. Since you were required to do research for this
assignment, you are at least more knowledgeable on the
subject that anyone else in the class.

Element 3: Establish Relevance through
Rapport

Next, you must establish rapport with your audience. Rapport
is basically a relationship or connection you make with your
audience, similar to incorporating pathos appeals in your
speech. In everyday life, we say that two people have a rapport

516 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
when they get along really well and are good friends. In your
introduction, you will want to explain to your audience why you
are giving them this information and why it is important or
relevant to them. You will be making a connection through this
shared information and explaining to them how it will benefit
them.

Element 4: State your Thesis

After you get the audience's attention, you must reveal the
purpose of your speech to your audience. Have you ever sat
through a speech wondering what the basic point was? Have
you ever come away after a speech and had no idea what the
speaker was talking about? An introduction should make the
topic, purpose, and central idea clear. Remember rhetorical
exigence from previous chapters? This is essentially what your
thesis is doing: you are addressing a problem that your
audience has and showing them you have the answer.

   When stating your topic in the introduction, be explicit with
regard to exactly what your topic is. Spell it out for them if
you have to. If an audience is unable to remember all your
information, they should at least be able to walk away knowing
that the purpose of your presentation was. Make sure your
logos appeals are solid.

Element 5: Preview Your Main Points--the
Survey

Just like previewing your topic, previewing your main points
helps your audience know what to expect throughout the
course of your speech. In RCM 200, we call this part of your
speech the speech's survey. Your preview of main points

                                                      Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 517
should be clear and easy to follow so that there is no question
in your audience's minds what they are. Long, complicated, or
verbose main points can get confusing.

   Be succinct and simple in your survey:

          Today, in our discussion of Abraham Lincoln's life,
       we will look at his birth, his role a president, and his
       assassination.

From that there is little question as to what specific aspects of
Lincoln's life the speech will cover. However, if you want to be
extra sure they get it, you can always enumerate them:

          In discussing how to make chocolate chip cookies,
       first we will cover what ingredients you need,
       second we will talk about how to mix them, and
       third we will look at baking them.

What these five elements do is prepare your audience for the
bulk of the speech (i.e. the body section) by letting them know
what they can expect, why they should listen, and why they
can trust you as a speaker. Having all five elements starts your
speech off on much more solid ground that you would get
without having them.

518 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
The Body: Connecting Your Points Using
Signposts

At this point, you may be realizing that preparing for public
speaking does not always follow a completely linear process.
In writing your speech, you might begin outlining with one
organizational pattern in mind, only to re-craft the main points
into a new pattern after more research has been conducted.
These are all okay options.

   Wherever your process takes you, however, you will need
to make sure that each section of your speech outline uses
connective statements or signposts. A Connective
statement--also called "signpost"--is a broad term that
encompass several types of statements or phrases. They are
generally designed to help "connect" parts of your speech to
make it easier for audience members to follow. Connectives are
tools for helping the audience listen, retain information, and
follow your structure.

   Signposts perform a number of functions:

  · Remind the audience of what has come before
  · Remind the audience of the central focus or purpose of

      the speech
  · Forecast what is coming next
  · Help the audience have a sense of context in the

      speech--where are we? (this is especially useful in a longer
      speech of twenty minutes or so)
  · Explain the logical connection between the previous main
      idea(s) and next one, or previous subpoints and the next
      one
  · Explain your own mental processes in arranging the
      material as you have
  · Keep the audience's attention through repetition and a
      sense of movement

                                                     Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 519
Signposts can include internal summaries, numbering or
internal previews. Each of these terms all help connect the
main ideas of your speech for the audience, but they have
different emphases and are useful for different types of
speeches.

Types of connectives and examples

Signposts emphasize the physical movement through the
speech content and let the audience know exactly where they
are. Signposting can be as simple as "First," "Next," "Lastly" or
using numbers such as "First," "Second," Third," and "Fourth."
Signposts can also be lengthier, but in general signposting is
meant to be a brief way to let your audience know where they
are in the speech. It may help to think of these like the mile
markers you see along interstates that tell you where you are
or like signs letting you know how many more miles until you
reach your destination.

   Internal summaries emphasize what has come before and
remind the audience of what has been covered.

          So far I have shown how the designers of King
       Tut's burial tomb used the antechamber to scare
       away intruders and the second chamber to prepare
       royal visitors for the experience of seeing the
       sarcophagus.

Internal previews let your audience know what is coming up
next in the speech and what to expect with regard to the
content of your speech.

520 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
          In this next part of the presentation I will share
       with you what the truly secret and valuable part of
       the King Tut's pyramid: his burial chamber and the
       treasury.

Transitions serve as bridges between seemingly disconnected
(but related) material, most commonly between your main
points. At a bare minimum your transition is saying,

          Now that we have looked at (talked about, etc.) X,
       let's look at Y.

Connectives are an important way to assist the audience in
understanding a) where you're going, b) where you are, and c)
where you've been. We recommend labeling them directly in
your outline to make sure that they're integrated and clear.

Wrapping up: The Summary

Similar to the introduction, the conclusion has three specific
elements that you will want to incorporate in order to make it
as strong as possible.

                                                      Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 521
 Common Errors to Avoid in Conclusions

   · signal the end multiple times. In other words, no "multiple
       conclusions" or saying "As I close" more than once;

   · ramble; if you signal the end, end;
   · talk as you leave the platform or lectern;
   · indicate with facial expression or body language that you were

       not happy with the speech.
   · conclude with an abrupt "thank you.

Given the nature of these elements and what they do, these
should generally be incorporated into your conclusion in the
order they are presented below.

Element 1: Review Main Points

Remember, introductions preview your main points; the
conclusion provides a review. One of the biggest differences
between written and oral communication is the necessity of
repetition in oral communication. Your audience only has one
opportunity to catch and remember the points you are trying
to get across in your speech, so the review assists in repeating
key ideas that support your thesis statement.

   Because you are trying to remind the audience of your main
points, you want to be sure not to bring up any new material
or ideas. For example, if you said, "There are several other issues
related to this topic, such as...but I don't have time for them,"
that would make the audience confused and perhaps wonder
why you did not address those in the body section. The
hardcore facts and content are in the body.

522 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
Element 2: Restate the Thesis

Make sure to restate your thesis because this is the main
argument that you're leaving the audience with. While this
may come before or after the review of your main points, it's
important because it often directs the audience and reminds
them why they're present. Concluding without reiterating your
thesis statement requires the audience to remember an idea
from the introduction--which can feel like a long time ago.

Element 3: Clincher

The third element of your conclusion is the clincher, or
something memorable with which to conclude your speech.
The clincher is sometimes referred to as a concluding thought.
These are the very last words you will say in your speech, so you
need to make them count.

   In many ways the clincher is the inverse of the attention-
getter. You want to start the speech off with something strong,
and you want to end the speech with something strong. To
that end, similar to what we discussed above with attention
getters, there are a number of ways you can make your clincher
strong and memorable.

                                                     Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 523
Strategies for Effective Concluding Thoughts

Conclude       A challenge is a call to engage in some kind of
with a         activity that requires
Challenge

Conclude with  Select a quotation that's related to your topic
a Quotation

Visualize the  Help your audience imagine the future you
Future         believe can occur.

Conclude by    Use inspiration to stir someone's emotions in a
Inspiration    specific manner.

Conclude with  Ask a rhetorical question that forces the audience
a Question     to ponder an idea.

Refer to the   Come full circle by referencing an idea, statistic,
Introduction   or insight from the attention getter

Conclude with  Select a brief story aimed at a strong emotional
a Story        appeal

For the conclusion, make sure your purpose--informative,
persuasive, entertaining--is honored.

Key Takeaways

· The organization and outlining of your speech
   may not be the most interesting part to think
   about, but without it, great ideas will seem
   jumbled and confusing to your audience. To help
   you prepare for your presentation, you will need
   to create a preparation outline.

· Use keywords from your speaking outline to
   create a cue card. This piece of paper will help
   guide you through your speech; however, it

524 | Chapter 33: Speech Structure
             should serve as more of a reminder of your points
             instead of a resource you keep going back to.
          · Your introduction is what gets your audience
             interested in your topic. You can do this by
             getting their attention with a hook, establishing
             your credibility, establishing rapport, stating your
             thesis, and survey your main points.
          · In your body, good signposts or connective
             statements will ensure your audience can follow
             you and understand the logical connections you
             are making with your main ideas, introduction,
             and conclusion.
          · The conclusion provides a review of what you
             just talked about. Ideally, the conclusion should
             remind your audience what you talked about and
             why it matters to them. You can do this in your
             summary by reviewing the main ideas, restating
             the thesis, and ending the speech in a
             memorable way with a clincher.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Speak Out, Call In: Public
Speaking as Advocacy" by Meggie Mapes (on Pressbooks). It
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

                                                     Chapter 33: Speech Structure | 525
Chapter 34: Delivery

     Learning Objectives

          · Distinguish between visual delivery and verbal
             delivery

          · Utilize specific techniques to enhance vocal
             delivery

          · Describe the importance of nonverbal delivery
             in public speaking

          · Highlight common non-verbal pitfalls
          · Utilize specific techniques to enhance non-

             verbal delivery

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · visual delivery
          · verbal delivery
          · verbal communication
          · nonverbal communication
          · projection
          · vocal enunciation
          · rate

526 | Chapter 34: Delivery
          · vocal pauses

You've done the research. You've written the information down
into an outline, and transferred all of that onto a 3×5 cue card
using keywords. Now it's finally time to practice.

   By now, you should recognize that a presentation--like all
communication--is more than just transferring information
from one person to another. It's all about how you
communicate that information. Ultimately, your delivery is
going to be a big part of that. More specifically, your visual
delivery and verbal delivery will have a huge impact on how
your message is received and the overall experience of your
audience. Rather than a check-list of skillsets, we invite you to
read these as a series of inter-related behaviors and practices.

Visual Delivery

Have you played charades? Many of you have likely "acted out"
a person, place, or a thing for an audience, using only your
body and no words. Charades, like many games, demonstrates
the heightened or exaggerated use of nonverbal
communication--through acting out, the game highlights
how powerful this communication method can be.

   When speaking, similar to charades, your job is to create a
captivating experience for your audience that leads them to
new information or to consider a new argument. Nonverbals
provide an important part of that experience by accentuating
your content and contributing to an aesthetic experience.

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 527
   As we discussed earlier, public speaking is embodied, and
your nonverbals are a key part of living and communicating in
and through your body. Here are the nonverbals that we will
discuss in this section:

  · eye contact
  · facial expressions
  · attire
  · gestures and hands
  · feet and posture
  · moving in the space

All of the above enhance your message and invite your
audience to give their serious attention to it--and to you. Your
credibility, your sincerity, and your knowledge of your speech
become apparent through your nonverbal behaviors.

Eye Contact

Imagine bringing in two qualified applicants for a job opening
that you were responsible to fill. Each applicant will sit directly
across from you and three other colleagues who are assisting.

   While answering questions, Applicant 1 never breaks eye
contact with you. It's likely that, as the interview progresses,
you begin to feel uncomfortable, even threatened, and begin
shifting your own eyes around the room awkwardly. When the
applicant leaves, you finally take a deep breath but realize that
you can't remember anything the applicant said.

   Applicant 2 enters and, unlike the first, looks down at their
notes and never makes direct eye contact. As you try to focus
on their answers, they seem so uncomfortable that you aren't
able to concentrate on the exchange.

   Both approaches are common mistakes when integrating
eye contact into a speech. We have likely all seen speakers who

528 | Chapter 34: Delivery
read their presentation from notes and never look up. It's also
common for a speaker to zoom in on one audience member
(such as the teacher!) and never break their gaze.

   The general rule is that 80% of your total speech time should
be spent making eye contact with your audience. When you're
able to connect by using eye contact, you create a more
intimate, trusting, and transparent experience.

   It's important to note that you want to establish genuine
eye contact with your audience, and not "fake" eye contact.
There have been a lot of techniques generated for "faking" eye
contact, and none of them look natural. For example, these
approaches aren't great:

  · Three points on the back wall - One technique says you
      can just pick three points on the back wall and look at
      each point. What ends up happening, though, is you look
      like you are staring off into space and your audience will
      spend the majority of your speech trying to figure out
      what you are looking at. This technique may work better
      for a larger audience, but in a more intimate space (such
      as the classroom), the audience is close enough to be
      suspicious. Put simply: we can tell you aren't looking at us.

  · The swimming method - This happens when someone is
      reading their speech and looks up quickly and briefly, not
      unlike a swimmer who pops their head out of the water
      for a breath before going back under. Eye contact is more
      than just physically moving your head; it is about looking
      at your audience and establishing a connection.

Instead, work to maintain approximately three seconds of eye
contact with audience members throughout the room. You
are, after all, speaking to them, so use your eyes to make
contact. This approach may also reduce some anxiety because
you can envision yourself speaking directly to one person at a
time, rather than a room full of strangers.

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 529
Facial Expressions

Picture being out to dinner with a friend and, as you finish
telling a story about a joke you played on your partner, you look
up to a grimacing face.

   "What?" you ask.
   "Oh, nothing," they reply. But their face says it all.
   Realizing that their face has "spilled the beans" so to speak,
your friend might correct their expression by shrugging and
biting their lip--a move that may insinuate nervousness or
anxiety. You perceive that they didn't find your story as
humorous as you'd hoped.
   Facial expressions communicate to others (and audiences) in
ways that are consistent or inconsistent with your message. In
the example above, your friend's feedback of "oh, nothing" was
inconsistent with their facial expressions. Their words didn't
trump their facial expressions, however, and their nonverbal
feedback was part of the communication.
   In the context of your speech, your facial expressions will
matter. Your audience will be looking at your face to guide
them through the speech, so these expressions are an integral
part of communicating meaning to your audience.
   In fact, if your facial expressions seem inconsistent with or
contradictory to the tone of the argument, an audience may
go so far as to feel distrust toward you as a speaker. Children
might, for example, say, "I'm fine" or "It doesn't hurt" after
falling and scraping their knee, but their face often
communicates a level of discomfort. In this case, their facial
expression is inconsistent with their verbal message. If you're
frowning while presenting information that the audience
perceives to be positive, they may feel uneasy or unsure how
to process that information. So, consistency can increase your
ethos.
   Similarly, your facial expressions, like the soundtrack of a
movie or commercial, can assist in setting the aesthetic tone;

530 | Chapter 34: Delivery
they are part of developing pathos. Given the amount of
information that we all encounter daily, including information
about global injustices, it's often insufficient to merely state
the problem and how to solve it. Audience members need
buy-in from you as the speaker. Using facial expressions to
communicate emotions, for example, can demonstrate your
commitment to and feelings about an issue.

   To be clear, facial expressions, like other forms of nonverbal
communication, can greatly impact an audience member's
perception of the speaker, but not all audiences may interpret
your expressions the same.

Attire

What you wear can either enhance or detract from the
audience's experience. Like facial expressions, you want your
attire to be consistent with the message that you're delivering.
Context is important here, since the purpose and audience will
inform appropriate attire.

   We recommend considering two questions when selecting
your attire:

   First, what attire matches the occasion? Is this a casual
occasion? Does it warrant a more professional or business-
casual approach? If you're speaking at an organization's rally,
for example, you may decide to wear attire with the
organization's logo and jeans. Other occasions, such as a
classroom or city council meeting, may require a higher level of
professional attire.

   Second, ask yourself, "have I selected any attire that could
be distracting while I'm speaking?" Certain kinds of jewelry, for
example, might make additional noise or move around your
arm, and audiences can focus too much on the jewelry. In
addition to noise-makers, some attire can have prints that
might distract, including letters, wording, or pictures.

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 531
   Your attire can influence how the audience perceives you as
a speaker--that is, your credibility--which, as we've discussed,
is key to influencing listeners.

Movement

When you (and your body) move, you communicate. You may,
for example, have a friend who, when telling exciting stories,
frantically gestures and paces the room--their movement is
part of how they communicate their story. They likely do this
unconsciously, and that's often how much of our informal
movement occurs.

   Many of us, like your friend, have certain elements of
movement that we comfortably integrate into our daily
interactions. In order to determine how to integrate
movements most effectively into your speech, ask yourself,
"how can I utilize these movements (or put them in check) to
enhance the audience's experience?" In this section, we will
introduce how and why movement should be purposefully
integrated into your speech. We'll focus on your hands and your
feet, and consider how to move around the space.

   Not sure what nonverbals you commonly use when
communicating? Ask a friend! Your friends are observant, and
they can likely tell you if you over-gesture, look down, stay
poised, etc. Use this inventory to determine areas of focus for
your speeches.

Gestures and Hands

Everyone who gives a speech in public gets scared or nervous.
Even professionals who do this for a living feel that way, but
they have learned how to combat those nerves through

532 | Chapter 34: Delivery
experience and practice. When we get scared or nervous, our
bodies emit adrenaline into our systems so we can deal with
whatever problem is causing us to feel that way. In a speech,
that burst of adrenaline is going to try to work its way out of
your body and manifest itself somehow. One of the main ways
is through your hands.

   Three common reactions to this adrenaline rush are:

  · Jazz hands! It may sound funny, but nervous speakers can
      unknowingly incorporate "jazz hands"--shaking your
      hands at your sides with fingers opened wide--at various
      points in their speech. While certainly an extreme
      example, this and behaviors like it can easily becoming
      distracting.

  · Stiff as a board. At the other end of the scale, people who
      don't know what to do with their hands or use them "too
      little" sometimes hold their arms stiffly at their sides,
      behind their backs, or in their pockets, all of which can also
      look unnatural and distracting.

  · Hold on for dear life! Finally, some speakers might grip
      their notes or a podium tightly with their hands. This
      tendency might also result in tapping on a podium, table,
      or another object nearby.

It's important to remember that just because you aren't sure
what your hands are doing does not mean they aren't doing
something. Fidgeting, making jazz hands, gripping the
podium, or keeping hands in pockets are all common and
result in speakers asking, "did I really do that? I don't even
remember!"

   Are you someone who uses gestures when speaking? If so,
great! Use your natural gestures to create purposeful aesthetic
emphasis for your audience. If you were standing around
talking to your friends and wanted to list three reasons why you
should all take a road trip this weekend, you would probably

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 533
hold up your fingers as you counted off the reasons ("First,
we hardly ever get this opportunity. Second, we can..."). Try
to pay attention to what you do with your hands in regular
conversations and incorporate that into your delivery. Be
conscious, though, of being over the top and gesturing at every
other word. Remember that gestures highlight and punctuate
information for the audience, so too many gestures (like jazz
hands) can be distracting.

   Similarly, are you someone who generally rests your arms at
your sides? That's OK, too! Work to keep a natural (and not
stiff) look, but challenge yourself to integrate a few additional
gestures throughout the speech.

Feet and Posture

Just as it does through your hands, nervous energy might try
to work its way out of your body through your feet. Common
difficulties include:

  · The side-to-side. You may feel awkward standing without
      a podium and try to shift your weight back and forth. On
      the "too much" end, this is most common when people
      start "dancing" or stepping side to side.

  · The twisty-leg. Another variation is twisting feet around
      each other or the lower leg.

  · Stiff-as-a-board. On the other end are speakers who put
      their feet together, lock their knees, and never move from
      that position. Locked knees can restrict oxygen to your
      brain, so there are many reasons to avoid this difficulty.

These options look unnatural, and therefore will prove to be
distracting to your audience.

   The default position for your feet, then, is to have them
shoulder-width apart, with your knees slightly bent. Since

534 | Chapter 34: Delivery
public speaking often results in some degree of physical
exertion, you need to treat speaking as a physical activity.
Public speaking is, after all, a full body experience. Being in-
tune and attuned to your body will allow you to speak in a way
that's both comfortable for you and the audience.

   In addition to keeping your feet shoulder-width apart, you'll
also want to focus on your posture. By focusing on good
posture over time, it will eventually become habitual.

Moving in the Space

We know that you're likely wondering, "Should I do any other
movement around the room?"

   Unfortunately, there isn't an easy answer. Movement
depends on two overarching considerations:

             1) What's the space?
             2) What's the message?
   First, movement is always informed by the space in which
you'll speak. Consider the two following examples:

  · You'll be a giving a presentation at a university where a
      podium is set up with a stable microphone.

  · You're speaking at a local TedTalk event with an open
      stage.

Both scenarios provide constraints and opportunities for
movement.

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 535
In the university space, you

must stay planted behind the

microphone to guarantee

sound. While somewhat

constraining, this setup does

allow a stable location to

place your notes and a

microphone to assist in          Image #1: Using a lectern provides
projecting, and it allows you    nonverbal opportunities and
to focus on other verbal and     constraints

nonverbal techniques.

In the TedTalk example, you are not constrained by a stable

microphone and you have a stage for bodily movement. The

open stage means that the entire space becomes part of the

aesthetic experience for the audience. However, if you are less

comfortable with movement, the open space may feel

intimidating because audiences may assume that you'll use

the entire space.

Once you have knowledge of the speaking space and speech

content, you can start using movement to add dimension to

the aesthetic experience for your audience.

One benefit of movement is that it allows you to engage with

different sections of the audience. If you are not constrained to

one spot (in the case of a podium or a seat, for example), then

you are able to use movement to engage with the audience

by adjusting your spatial dynamic. You can literally move your

body to different sides of the stage and audience. Such a use

of space enables each side of a room to be pulled in to the

content because you close the physical distance and create

clear pathways for eye contact.

536 | Chapter 34: Delivery
                              Without these changes,

                              sections of the audience may

                              feel lost or forgotten.

                              Consider your role as a

                              student.  Have              you

                              experienced a professor or

                              teacher who stays solitary

Image #2: Some speech stages  and does not move to
allow, even expect, movement  different sides of the room? It

                              can be difficult to stay

motivated to listen or take notes if a speaker is dominating one

area of the space.

Changing the spatial dynamics goes beyond moving from

side-to-side. You can also move forward and backward. This

allows you to move closer to the audience or back away

depending on what experience you're trying to create.

In addition to engaging with the audience, movement often

signals a transition between ideas or an attempt to visually

enunciate an important component of your information. You

may want to signal a change in time or mark progression.

If you're walking your audience through information

chronologically, movement can mark that temporal

progression where your body becomes the visual marker of

time passing.

When you speak, moving in the space can be beneficial. As

you plan your purposeful movement, be aware of the message

you're providing and the space in which you're speaking.

Verbal Delivery

Humans are communicators. We rely on communication
processes to make sense of our world, and we rely on others'

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 537
communicating with us to create shared meaning. Through
symbols, we use and adapt language with one another and our
communities.

   The same is true for speeches, but what symbols you select
and how you portray them--what we'll call verbal delivery--
are dependent on your audience and how they experience or
comprehend what you say.

   For example, consider your favorite podcaster or podcast
series. We love crime podcasts! Despite being reliant on verbal
delivery only, the presenters' voices paint an aesthetic picture
as they walk us through stories around crime, murder, and
betrayal. So, how do they do it? What keeps millions of people
listening to podcasts and returning to their favorite verbal-only
speakers? Is it how they say it? Is it the language they choose?
All of these are important parts of effective verbal delivery.

   Below, we begin discussing verbal delivery, looking at the
following topics:

 1. projection
2. vocal enunciation
 3. rate
4. vocal pauses

Projection

"Louder!"
   You may have experienced a situation where an audience

notified a speaker that they couldn't be heard. "Louder!" Here,
the audience is letting the speaker know to increase their
volume, or the relative softness or loudness of one's voice. In
this example, the speaker needed to more fully project their
vocals to fit the speaking-event space by increasing their
volume. In a more formal setting, however, an audience may

538 | Chapter 34: Delivery
be reluctant to give such candid feedback, so it is your job to
prepare.

   Projection is a strategy to vocally fill the space; thus, the
space dictates which vocal elements need to be adapted
because every person in the room should comfortably
experience your vocal range. If you speak too softly (too little
volume or not projecting), your audience will struggle to hear
and understand and may give up trying to listen. If you speak
with too much volume, your audience may feel that you are
yelling at them, or at least feel uncomfortable with you
shouting. The volume you use should fit the size of the
audience and the room.

Vocal Enunciation

Vocal enunciation is often reduced to pronouncing words
correctly, but enunciation also describes the expression of
words and language.

   Have you ever spoken to a friend who replied, "Stop that!
You're mumbling." If so, they're signaling to you that they aren't
able to understand your message. You may have pronounced
the words correctly but had poorly enunciated the words,
leading to reduced comprehension.

   One technique to increase enunciation occurs during
speech rehearsal, and it's known as the "dash" strategy: e-nun-
ci-ate e-ve-ry syll-a-bal in your pre-sen-ta-tion.

   The dashes signify distinct enunciation to create emphasis
and expression. However, don't go overboard! The dash
strategy is an exaggerated exercise, but it can lead to a choppy
vocal delivery.

   Instead, use the dash strategy to find areas where difficult
and longer words need more punctuated emphasis and,
through rehearsal, organically integrate those areas of
emphasis into your presentational persona.

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 539
Rate

The rate is how quickly or slowly you say the words of your
speech. A slower rate may communicate to the audience that
you do not fully know the speech. "Where is this going?" they
may wonder. It might also be slightly boring if the audience is
processing information faster than it's being presented.

   By contrast, speaking too fast can be overly taxing on an
audience's ability to keep up with and digest what you are
saying. It sometimes helps to imagine that your speech is a jog
that you and your friends (the audience) are taking together.
You (as the speaker) are setting the pace based on how quickly
you speak. If you start sprinting, it may be too difficult for your
audience to keep up and they may give up halfway through.
Most people who speak very quickly know they speak quickly,
and if that applies to you, just be sure to practice slowing down
and writing yourself delivery cues in your notes to maintain a
more comfortable rate.

   You will want to maintain a good, deliberate rate at the
beginning of your speech because your audience will be
getting used to your voice. We have all called a business where
the person answering the phone mumbles the name of the
business in a rushed way. We aren't sure if we called the right
number. Since the introduction is designed to get the
audience's attention and arouse interest in your speech, you
will want to focus on clear vocal rate here.

   You might also consider varying the rate depending on the
type of information being communicated. While you'll want to
be careful going too slow consistently, slowing your rate for a
difficult piece of supporting material may be helpful. Similarly,
quickening your rate in certainly segments can communicate
an urgency.

   Although the experience might seem awkward, watching
yourself give a speech via recording (or web cam) is a great way
to gauge your natural rate and pace.

540 | Chapter 34: Delivery
Vocal Pauses

The common misconception for public speaking students is
that pausing during your speech is bad, but vocal pauses can
increase both the tone and comprehension of your argument.
This is especially true if you are making a particularly important
point or wanting a statement to have powerful impact: you will
want to give the audience a moment to digest what you have
said. You may also be providing new or technical information to
an audience that needs additional time to absorb what you're
saying.

   For example, consider the following statement:

          Because of issues like pollution and
       overpopulation, in 50 years the earth's natural
       resources will be so depleted that it will become
       difficult for most people to obtain enough food to
       survive.

Following a statement like this, you want to give your audience
a brief moment to fully consider what you are saying.

   Use audience nonverbal cues and feedback (and provide
them as an audience member) to determine whether
additional pauses may be necessary for audience
comprehension. Audiences are generally reactive and will use
facial expressions and body language to communicate if they
are listening, if they are confused, angry, or supportive.

   Of course, there is such a thing as pausing too much, both
in terms of frequency and length. Someone who pauses too
often may appear unprepared. Someone who pauses too long
(more than a few seconds) runs the risk of the audience feeling

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 541
uncomfortable or, even worse, becoming distracted or letting
their attention wander.

   Pauses should be controlled to maintain attention of the
audience and to create additional areas of emphasis.

     Key Takeaways

          · How you communicate your speech--and how
             the audience interprets the information--will be
             depend on your visual delivery and verbal
             delivery.

          · Your visual delivery will depend on the
             nonverbal elements of your speech, which
             include eye contact, facial expressions, attire, and
             movement.

          · Your verbal delivery will depend on how you
             say the words themselves. Are you speaking loud
             enough? Clear enough? How fast are you
             speaking? Are you pausing enough to let your
             words resonate with audience? All of these things
             will impact how the audience interprets and
             retains what you say.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Speak Out, Call In: Public
Speaking as Advocacy" by Meggie Mapes (on Pressbooks). It
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

542 | Chapter 34: Delivery
   This chapter is also adapted from "Speak Out, Call In: Public
Speaking as Advocacy" by Meggie Mapes (on Pressbooks). It
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

   Image #1: "Michael Ondaatje Tualane Lecturn 2010" (on
Wikimedia Commons) is used under a Creative
Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic License

   Image #2: "TED Talk Santa Barbara, CA" (on Wikimedia
Commons) is used under a Creative Commons Attribution-
Share Alike 4.0 International License

                                                                   Chapter 34: Delivery | 543
Chapter 35: Speech
Feedback and
Evaluation

     Learning Objectives

        By the end of this chapter, you should be able to:
          · Identify strategies for managing stress and
             anxiety before and during your presentation
          · Utilize techniques for handling unexpected
             mistakes and surprises during your presentation
          · Reflect on your presentation to determine your
             strengths and areas you can improve
          · Provide feedback to other presenters using
             non-verbal and verbal cues

     Key Terms and Concepts

          · non-verbal feedback
          · verbal feedback

544 | Chapter 35: Speech
Feedback and Evaluation
It's finally here: presentation day! Hopefully, you are feeling
confident because you have already prepared so much;
however, maybe you're still feeling anxious at the idea of
speaking in front of your peers. That's okay! Feeling anxious is
perfectly normal.

   In this chapter, we will discuss ways to manage that anxiety
and how to adapt when things don't go according to plan.
We will also talk about how you can provide feedback to other
presenters as well as help you reflect on the presentation
process as a whole.

During the Presentation

We want to stress that it is okay to be nervous. It's a very
common response to public speaking. Fortunately, there are
many strategies for dealing with your anxiety.

Managing Anxiety

Studies have been done to assess how nervous or stressful
people typically get during presentations by examining
people's physiological responses at three intervals:

  · one minute before the presentation
  · the first minute of the speech
  · the last minute of the speech.

They found that nervousness usually peaked at one of these
intervals. Which one do you think it is?

   They discovered that nervousness usually peaked at the

                             Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 545
anticipation stage that occurs one minute before the
presentation. They also found that as the speech progresses,
nervousness tends to go down. If you find yourself feeling this
way right before your speech, here are some things you can try:

  · Practice/rehearse in similar conditions/setting as your
      speech

  · Be organized
  · Think positively
  · Analyze your audience
  · Adapt your language to speaking style

During the presentation itself, there are four main areas where
you can focus attention to manage your anxiety:

 1. Observing your body's reaction
2. Interacting non-verbally with the audience
 3. Keeping a sense of humour
4. Using common stress management techniques

Observing your Body's Reaction

Physical movement helps channel some of the excess energy
that your body produces in response to anxiety. If at all possible,
move around the front of the room rather than remaining
imprisoned behind the lectern or gripping it for dear life (avoid
pacing nervously from side to side, however). Move closer to
the audience and then stop for a moment. If you are afraid that
moving away from the lectern will reveal your shaking hands,
hold on to your note card. This will give your hands something
to do. Other options include performing vocal warm-ups right
before your speech, having water (preferably in a non-spillable
bottle with a spout) nearby for dry mouth, and doing a few
stretches before going on stage.

546 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
   Deep breathing will also help to counteract the effects of
excess adrenaline. Like we saw in our note card examples, you
can place cues or symbols in your notes, such as "slow down" or
 that remind you to pause and breathe during points in your
speech. It is also a good idea to pause a moment before you
get started to set an appropriate pace from the onset. Look at
your audience and smile. It is a reflex for some of your audience
members to smile back. Those smiles will reassure you that
your audience members are friendly.

Interacting Non-verbally with the Audience

During your speech, make a point of establishing direct eye
contact with your audience members. By looking at
individuals, you establish a series of one-to-one contacts similar
to interpersonal communication. An audience becomes much
less threatening when you think of them not as an anonymous
mass but as a collection of individuals.

   A gentleman once shared his worst speaking experience:
right before starting his speech, he reached the front of the
room and forgot everything he was supposed to say. When
asked what he saw when he was in the front of the room, he
gave a quizzical look and responded, "I didn't see anything. All
I remember is a mental image of me up there in the front of
the room blowing it." The moral of this story is that speaking
anxiety becomes more intense if you focus on yourself rather
than concentrate on your audience and your material.

Keeping a Sense of Humour

No matter how well we plan, unexpected things happen. That

                             Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 547
fact is what makes public speaking so interesting. When the
unexpected happens to you, do not let it rattle you.

   Here's an example. At the end of a class period late in the
afternoon of a long day, a student raised her hand and asked
the professor if he knew that he was wearing two different
coloured shoes, one black and one blue. He looked down and
saw that she was right; his shoes did not match. He laughed
at himself, complimented the student on her observational
abilities, and moved on with the important thing, the material
he had to deliver. Don't be afraid to laugh at yourself.

Stress Management Techniques

Even when we use positive thinking and are well prepared,
some of us still feel a great deal of anxiety about public
speaking. When that is the case, it can be more helpful to use
stress management than to try to make the anxiety go away.

   Here are two main tools that can help:

  · Visualization: imagining the details of what a successful
      speech would look and sound like from beginning to end;
      a way of hypnotizing yourself into positive thinking by
      using your mind's eye to make success real.

  · Systematic desensitization: Gradual exposure to the thing
      that causes fear--in this case, giving a speech--can
      ultimately lead to decreased anxiety. Basically, the more
      practice you get speaking in front of people, the less fear
      and anxiety you'll have about public speaking.
      Organizations like Toastmasters that help people confront
      their fears by providing a supportive environment to learn
      and practise is a good option if you have a true phobia
      around presenting or public speaking. There's even a
      student club you can join at the University of
      Saskatchewan!

548 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
A Note about Microphones

If you are using a microphone during your speech, there are
a few potential issues to be aware of. First, make sure you do
a sound check and that you know how the microphone
works--how to turn it on and off, how to mute it, and how to
raise or lower it. If possible, have it positioned to the height you
need before you go onstage. Make sure the microphone does
not block your face.

   If you will be using a clip-on microphone (called a lavaliere
mic), you'll need to wear something with a lapel or collar that
it can be clipped to. Make sure your hair and jewelry are out of
the way to avoid rustling noises, and place the microphone 8 to
10 inches below your chin.

   Finally, do not get too close to the microphone. Many people
stand too close to the mic and end up hunched over it, creating
bad posture and an uncomfortable position. If you get too
close, the mic will pick up your breathing as well as your words
and can also create that screeching feedback that will make
your audience jump in their seats. Doing a sound check and
getting comfortable with the equipment before you go
onstage will prevent the majority of errors when using a
microphone.

Coping with Mistakes and Surprises

Even the most prepared speaker will encounter unexpected
challenges from time to time. Here are a few strategies for
combating the unexpected in your own presentations.

                            Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 549
Speech Content Issues

What if a note card goes missing or you unintentionally skip
important information at the beginning of your speech? While
situations like these might seem like the worst nightmare of
a novice public speaker, they can be easily overcome. Pause
for a moment to think about what to do. Is it important to
include the missing information, or can it be omitted without
hindering the audience's ability to understand your speech?

   If it needs to be included, does the information fit better now
or in a later segment? If you can move on without the missing
element, that is often the best choice, but pausing for a few
seconds to decide will be less distracting to the audience than
sputtering through a few "ums" and "uhs." Situations like these
demonstrate why it's a good idea to have a glass of water with
you when you speak. Pausing for a moment to take a sip of
water is a perfectly natural movement, so the audience may
not even notice that anything is amiss.

Technical Difficulties

Technology has become a very useful aid in public speaking,
allowing us to use audio or video clips, presentation software,
or direct links to websites. It does break down occasionally,
though! Web servers go offline, files will not download, or
media content may be incompatible with the computer in the
presentation room. Always have a backup plan in case of
technical difficulties. As you develop your speech and visual
aids, think through what you will do if you cannot show a
particular graph or if your presentation slides are garbled. Your
beautifully prepared chart may be superior to the verbal
description you can provide, but your ability to provide a
succinct verbal description when technology fails will give your

550 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
audience the information they need and keep your speech
moving forward.

External Distractions

Unfortunately, one thing that you can't control during your
speech is audience etiquette, but you can decide how to react
to it. Inevitably, an audience member will walk in late, a cell
phone will ring, or a car alarm will go off outside. If you are
interrupted by external events like these, it is often useful and
sometimes necessary to pause and wait so that you can regain
the audience's attention.

   Whatever the event, maintain your composure. Do not get
upset or angry about these glitches. If you keep your cool and
quickly implement a "plan B" for moving forward, your
audience will be impressed.

Reading Your Audience

Recognizing your audience's mood by observing their body
language can help you adjust your message and see who
agrees with you, who doesn't, and who is still deciding. With
this information, you can direct your attention--including eye
contact and questions--to the areas of the room where they
can have the most impact.

   As the speaker, you are conscious that you are being
observed. But your audience members probably don't think of
themselves as being observed, so their body language will be
easy to read.

                              Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 551
Handling Q&A

Question-and-answer sessions can be trickier to manage than
the presentation itself. You can prepare for and rehearse the
presentation, but audience members could ask a question you
hadn't considered or don't know how to answer. There are
three important elements to think about when incorporating
Q&A's as part of your presentation:

 1. Audience Expectations
2. Timing of Q&As
 3. Knowing How to Respond

Audience Expectations

At the beginning of your speech, give the audience a little bit of
information about who you are and what your expertise on the
subject is. Once they know what you do (and what you know),
it will be easier for the audience to align their questions with
your area of expertise--and for you to bow out of answering
questions that are outside of your area.

Timing of Q&A's

Questions are easier to manage when you are expecting them.
Unless you are part of a panel, meeting, or teleconference, it
is probably easier to let the audience know that you will take
questions at the end of your presentation. This way you can
avoid interruptions to your speech that can distract you and
cause you to lose time. If audience members interrupt during
your talk, you can then ask them politely to hold on to their
question until the Q&A session at the end.

552 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
Knowing How to Respond

Never pretend that you know the answer to a question if you
don't. The audience will pick up on it! Instead, calmly apologize
and say that the question is outside of the scope of your
knowledge but that you'd be happy to find out after the
presentation (or, suggest some resources where the person
could find out for themselves).

   If you are uncertain about how to answer a question, say
something like "That's really interesting. Could you elaborate
on that?" Such a response will make the audience member feel
good because they have asked an interesting question, and it
will give you a moment to comprehend what they are asking.

   Sometimes presenters rush to answer a question because
they are nervous or want to impress. Pause for a moment,
before you begin your answer, to think about what you want
to say. This approach will help you to avoid misinterpreting the
question, or taking offense to a question that is not intended
that way.

   A final tip is to be cautious about how you answer, so that
you don't offend your audience. You are presenting on a topic
because you are knowledgeable about it, but your audience
is not. It is important not to make the audience feel inferior
because there are things that they don't know. Avoid
comments such as "Oh, yes, it's really easy to do that..." Instead,
say something like "Yes, that can be tricky. I would
recommend..." Also, avoid a bossy tone. For example, phrase
your response with "What I find helpful is..." rather than "What
you should do is..."

                             Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 553
Evaluating a Speech

Feedback is an essential part of the presentation experience. It
is often said that we are our own worst critic. Many people are
hard on themselves and may exaggerate how poorly a speech
or presentation went. Other times, there's not much
exaggeration. In both cases, it helps to do a post-examination
of your performance as a presenter.

   For your RCM 200 presentation, you will be asked to provide
feedback on how you think your presentation went as well as
provide feedback to your classmates.

Self-Reflection

In the 30-60 second reflective debrief following your
extemporaneous speech, give yourself a moment to reflect
with your professor and fellow students about how your speech
went. Taking time to reflect after a stressful experience is one
way to build your lifelong learning skills, and can help you grow
your public speaking skills that much quicker.

   One reflective method to consider the What? So what? Now
what? framework. The video below will explain this framework:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=1679#oembed-1

554 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
What? What did you do in your speech? Did you say everything you wanted to say? Did you forget anything?

So     What did you wish you could have done differently in your
what?  speech? Is there anything that you are especially proud of
       doing in your speech? Did anything surprise you about the
       experience?

Now    How has this experience changed your mind about public
what?  speaking? How will knowing what you know now change
       your future public speaking experiences?

To provide a slightly more objective approach to analyzing the
delivery of your speech or presentation, consider the following
questions:

· Did you make the most of your unique voice? Did the
   audience seem to understand you?

· Did you make the most of using body language? Did your
   body confidently support what you were saying?

· Did you use a coherent structure? Did the audience seem
   to make sense of your presentation? Was it logical?

· Did you show enthusiasm? Did you show the audience
   you cared about your presentation?

· Did you demonstrate expertise? Did you show your
   credibility by citing reliable sources and making a
   distinction between facts and your opinion?

· Did you show you practised and prepared? Did your
   confidence show because you implemented a plan that
   included sufficient rehearsal, contingency plans, and other
   success strategies?

Honestly asking yourself these questions with the intention of
uncovering your strengths and weaknesses should help you
to become a better presenter. While it is important to review
other kinds of feedback, whether from the audience, your
peers, or an instructor, it is also useful to have a realistic
understanding of your own performance. This understanding
is part of gaining experience and improving as a presenter.

       Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 555
Feedback as an Audience Member

Audience members are vital in helping speakers understand
how they are doing both during and after the presentation.
In the public speaking rounds you will have the chance to
practice your active listening skills and the concept of
conscious listening. Knowing what it feels like to be on stage is
often motivation enough for many people to give non-verbal
feedback or verbal feedback.

   Your instructor will guide the evaluation sessions and will
provide some prompting questions to help you give some
constructive feedback to your classmates. Part of your
professionalism mark will be determined by your participation
in being a good audience member for your classmates'
speeches.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=1679#oembed-2

With the above video in mind, let's look at how you can provide
non-verbal and verbal feedback to a speaker.

Non-Verbal Feedback

Effective listening is more than just using your ears. In fact,
Boothman (2008) recommends listening with your whole
body, not just your ears. Consider how confident you would feel
speaking to a room full of people with their eyes closed, arms
and legs crossed, and bodies bent in slouches. These listeners

556 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
are presenting non-verbal cues communicating that they are
uninterested and unimpressed. Meanwhile, listeners sitting up
straight, facing you with an intent look on their face, are more
likely to offer reassurance that the speaker's words are being
understood.

   Eye contact is another non-verbal cue to the speaker that
you are paying attention. You don't want to be bug-eyed and
unblinking; the speaker might assume there is a tiger behind
them and begin to panic as you seem to be doing. However,
attentive eye contact can indicate you are listening and help
you to stay focused too. There are some cultures where
maintaining eye contact would cause discomfort, so keep that
in mind. Also, you may be someone who listens better with
eyes closed to visualize what is being said. This can be difficult
for a speaker to recognize, so if this is you, consider
incorporating one of the following non-verbals while you listen
with eyes closed.

   Nodding your head affirmatively and making responses such
as "Yes," "Umhum," or "OK" can help the speaker gauge your
interest. Even the speed of your head nod can signal your level
of patience or understanding (Pease & Pease, 2006). Leaning
in as a listener is far more encouraging than slumping in your
seat. Nevertheless, sending too many non-verbal responses to
the speaker can go wrong, too. After all, a conference room
full of people shifting in their seats and nodding their heads
may translate as a restless audience that the speaker needs to
recapture.

Verbal Feedback

While speakers sometimes want all questions held until the
end of a presentation, asking questions when the opportunity
presents itself can help you as a listener. For one, you have to
listen in order to be able to ask a question. Your goal should

                             Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 557
be to ask open-ended questions ("What do you think about....?"
rather than "We should do ..., right?"). You can use questions
to confirm your understanding of the speaker's message. If
you're not entirely sure of a significant point, you might ask
a clarifying question. These are questions such as "What did
you mean?" "Can you be more specific?" or "What is a concrete
example of your point?" Such questions can help your
comprehension while also offering the speaker feedback.
When asking questions, approach the speaker in a positive,
non-threatening way. A good listener doesn't seek to put the
speaker on the defensive. You want to demonstrate your
objectivity and willingness to listen to the speaker's response.

   Finally, paraphrasing what has been said in your interactions
with the speaker can be another useful tool for a good listener.
Imagine the difference if, before you respond to an upset
colleague, you take a moment to say, "I understand you are
disappointed we didn't consult you before moving forward
with the product release..." before you say, "we didn't have time
to get everyone's input." Reflecting back the speaker's point of
view before responding allows the speaker to know you were
listening and helps foster trust that everyone's voice is being
heard.

558 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
Non-Verbal Feedback               Verbal Feedback (constructive)
(constructive)
Listen with whole body            Ask open-ended questions
Use appropriate eye contact
                                  Questions confirm
Nod affirmatively (mmm hmm,       understanding of message
yes, OK)
                                  Ask clarifying questions (can you
Use listener's lean               give an example of/did you
                                  mean...)

                                  Use paraphrasing to
                                  demonstrate accurate
                                  understanding

Non-Verbal Feedback (not          Verbal Feedback (not
constructive)                     constructive)
Closed body position              Asking closed questions
                                  Asking questions that don't
No eye contact                    relate to speaker's message

Inattentive, distracted (playing  Asking rhetorical questions
with phones, engaging in side
conversations etc.)               Making your own speech instead
                                  of asking a question
Slumping, yawning

Receiving Feedback

Being open to receiving feedback is the only way to have a
better picture of your performance as a presenter or speaker.
Combining self-analysis with the feedback of your audience or
peers is your opportunity to better understand your strengths
as a presenter and what resonated well with your audience.

   It may be a bit more uncomfortable to look at things that
did not go well, or receive feedback that's judgemental, biased,
or otherwise laden with emotion. When receiving and making
sense of feedback, it is very important to be self-aware and
honest with yourself. This honesty will help you distinguish

Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 559
between an environmental situation, a situation that lies with
the audience member, or a situation with the presenter.

     Key Takeaways

          · It is okay to be anxious about public speaking.
             Fortunately, there are many strategies you can
             use to help you before and during the
             presentation. Coming to your speech prepared
             will make a huge difference. During the speech,
             however, you try things like observing your bodies
             reaction and interacting non-verbally with the
             audience.

          · After your speech is done, you should reflect on
             what went well and areas where you can improve.
             You can do this by using the "What? So What?
             Now What?" framework, or considering the
             questions outlined in this chapter.

          · Once your speech is done, you still have
             responsibilities as an audience member. As you
             listen to a person's speech, be mindful of the non-
             verbal and verbal feedback you are showing.

References

Boothman, N. (2008). How to make people like you in 90
seconds or less. NY: Workman Publishing.

   Pease, A., & Pease, B. (2006). The definitive book of body
language. New York: Bantam Books.

560 | Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation
Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Professional Communications"
by Olds College (on Open Library). It is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

                             Chapter 35: Speech Feedback and Evaluation | 561
APPENDICES

                                                                               Appendices | 563
Appendix A: What is
Rhetoric?

What is Rhetoric?

Rhetoric is a discipline built on the notion that language
matters. It's a discipline that's been around for over 2,500 years,
and at different times, people who have studied it have been
interested in different things. While their interests have led
them to focus on different aspects of rhetoric, there are several
common characteristics of rhetoric that modern readers and
writers value.

Rhetoric is Communicative

It's about conveying ideas effectively in order to promote
understanding among people.

   I.A. Richards, an early 20th-century philosopher, defined
rhetoric as "the study of misunderstandings and their
remedies." Language is messy. It is difficult, contextual, and
based on individual experience. We use language and privilege
particular languages based on who we are, where we come
from, and who we interact with. In essence, communicating
with others is complicated and fraught with potential
misunderstandings based on our experiences as individuals.
Rhetoric gives you a way to work within the messiness of
language. It helps writers think through the varied contexts
in which language occurs, giving them a way

                                                                            Appendix A: What is
                                                                                   Rhetoric? | 565
to--ideally--effectively reach audiences with very different
experiences.

Rhetoric is About Discovery

It's about inquiring into and investigating the communication
situations we participate in.

   Aristotle defined rhetoric as "the faculty of discovering in
any given case the available means of persuasion." Often, the
word "persuasion" is emphasized in this definition; however,
the concept of "discovery" is also key here. In order to have
ideas to communicate, we have to learn about the case--or
situation--we're commenting on. Kenneth Burke likened this
process to a gathering in a parlor, where you arrive with a
conversation already in progress. You have to actively listen
to the conversation--carefully observe the situation you will
participate in and the subject(s) that you will comment
on--finding out the different participants' positions and
justifications for those positions before you can craft an
informed opinion of your own. Rhetoric is a tool that helps you
think through and research the situation as you prepare to
communicate with others.

Rhetoric is about Doing Things

Jeff Grabill, a contemporary writing teacher, asks, "What are
people doing when they are said to be doing rhetoric?" In
response, he argues that rhetoric is a kind of work that creates
things of value in the world. In other words, rhetoric creates
attention to the world around us and particular people, places,
and ideas in it. Paying attention to others around us helps us
identify and make connections with others and their ideas,

566 | Appendix A: What is Rhetoric?
needs, and interests, and ultimately this can deepen our
relationships with others. Importantly, connecting with others
leads to action that alters the physical world around us, leading
to the production of art and music, protests and performances,
and even new buildings and spaces for people to conduct their
lives. Understanding that rhetoric makes things can provide a
reason to care about it and motivation to practice it.

Rhetoric is Systematic

One characteristic that influences each of the previous three is
that rhetoric is systematic. It provides both readers and writers
with a purposeful and methodical approach to
communicating, discovering, and generating with language. It
provides a set of skills and concepts that you can consistently
use in order to critically think, read, research, and write in ways
that allow you to achieve your communication goals. It's
important to realize, though, that rhetoric is not a one-size-fits-
all formula. It's not a series of steps that you follow the same
way every time. Every communication situation is different,
with different goals, contexts, and audiences, and thinking
rhetorically is a flexible process that allows you to adapt to, as
Aristotle put it, "any given situation." You can think of rhetoric
like a toolbelt. When using your tools, you don't always use
a tape measure first, then a hammer, then a screwdriver. In
fact, you don't always carry the same tools to different jobs.
Depending on the job, you use different tools in different ways
and in different orders to accomplish your task. Rhetoric is the
same way.

                                                   Appendix A: What is Rhetoric? | 567
Rhetoric is Transferable

Perhaps the most important part of rhetoric is that it's
transferable. Rhetoric isn't just a tool that you use in English
classes; thinking rhetorically is a way to methodically approach
any writing situation that you may run across in your academic,
professional, or personal lives. You use rhetorical analysis in the
chemistry classroom to dissect complex equations and then
to communicate that knowledge to others, just like you use it
to decipher what a TV commercial is attempting to make you
believe about a given service or product. You use persuasion
to pitch business ideas just as you use it when constructing
a resume. Considerations of audience are vital for Facebook
posts as well as job interviews. Understanding genre helps you
to create effective lab reports as well as office e-mails. Learning
to think and write rhetorically can impact every area of your
life. Rhetoric is everywhere that language is. And language is
everywhere.

References

Aristotle. On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse. Translated
   by George Kennedy. New York and London: Oxford University
   Press, 1991.

Burke, Kenneth. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in
   Symbolic Action. Berkley: University of California Press, 1941.

Grabill, Jeff. "The work of rhetoric in the commonplaces: An
   essay on rhetorical methodology." JAC: A Journal of
   Composition Theory 34, no. 1 (2014): 247-267.

Richards, I.A. The Philosophy of Rhetoric. New York and
   London: Oxford University Press, 1936.

568 | Appendix A: What is Rhetoric?
Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Open English @ SLCC" by Chris
Blankenship and Justin Jory (on Open SLCC). It is licensed
under licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 International License.

                                                   Appendix A: What is Rhetoric? | 569
Appendix B:
Reader-Centered
Writing

Writing can be conceptualized as writer-centred or reader-
centred. Things like diaries and journals are primarily writer-
centred, in that they are written for the benefit of the writer.
Your schoolwork may also have been somewhat writer-centred,
in that often your goal was to "show what you know" and
thereby "get a good grade." Technical communications require
that you shift this mindset and write for the benefit of your
reader--or design the content and structure of your
communication for your "user." This mindset should be
informed by an understanding of your audience. Use these
guidelines and ask yourself the following questions:

  · Who is my target audience? Are they internal or external
      readers? Upstream, downstream or lateral from you? Do I
      have multiple readers?

  · What is their perspectives on the topic, on me, and on
      the document I will write? What are they expecting to do
      with the document? What is the document meant to
      accomplish? Why has it been requested? What is my role
      and relationship to my readers? What does the reader
      need to know? Already know? What does my reader NOT
      need to have explained?

  · What is my goal or purpose in writing to these
      readers? What am I trying to communicate? What do I
      want them to do as a result of reading this document?
      How can I plan the content to meet my readers' needs?

  · What is my reader's goal? Why does this audience want

570 | Appendix B:
Reader-Centered Writing
      or need to read this document?

Getting a clear understanding of your audience is important in
communicating effectively. It also enables you to imagine your
audience as you write and revise. Keep asking yourself whether
what you have said would be clear to your audience. How could
you say it better?

     EXERCISE 2.2 Audience analysis

        Choose one of the topics below. Then perform an
     audience analysis, using the questions above to gain an
     understanding of the needs of different audiences.
     Write a profile of your intended reader(s) and consider
     what sort of information they will need and why?

         1. You have been asked to write a report
             on Maintaining Internet Privacy for
             a) A new internet user who just signed up for
             internet service
             b) A start up e-commerce website developer

        2. Prepare a document on Food-born Diseases for
             a) Restaurant workers (servers and kitchen staff)
             b) For a health inspector training course

        3. Provide information on a proposed New Bus
             Shelter Design to
             a) Mayor's office
             b) Contractor
             c) Newspaper reporter writing an article on the
             issue

                                        Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing | 571
Professional Tone

"Tone" refers to the attitude that a document conveys towards
the topic and/or the reader. You have likely read something
that sounded angry, or optimistic, or humorous, or cynical, or
enthusiastic. These words characterize the tone. Technical
communication tends to avoid displaying an obvious emotion,
and instead strives for a neutral tone.

   Tone is created through word choice (diction), word order
(syntax), sentence construction, and viewpoint. Consider a
piece of academic writing that you may have read. It creates
a formal tone through its use of specialized terminology,
sophisticated vocabulary, complex sentence structures, and
third person voice. This style suits the genre because it is
directed at experts and scholars in the field, and seeks to
convey complex information densely and objectively, with an
emphasis on reason, logic, and evidence.

   Now consider a piece of business writing that you may have
read. The tone may be sightly less formal but not colloquial. The
language is direct and plain, and the sentences are shorter and
more straightforward. It may make use of the second person
("you"). This style suits business writing because it is directed
at colleagues, management, or clients who are seeking
information clearly and quickly and who may need to take
action on it.

Writing Constructively

Striking the appropriate tone involves understanding your
purpose, context, and audience. It also involves an
understanding that workplaces are often hierarchical, and that
cooperation and teamwork are required. Therefore, it is

572 | Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing
important to consider how you want your reader to feel, and
what may make your reader feel that way. Your goal is to write
constructively, which means to use positive phrasing to convey
your message to your reader. Table 2.1.1 illustrates the
differences between destructive/negative and constructive/
positive feelings the reader may experience as a result of the
tone used in a document.

TABLE 2.1.1 Differences between
     destructive/negative and
        constructive/positive

Negative    Constructive

misunderstood understood

outraged    conciliatory

disgusted   pleased

guilty      capable

belittled   empowered

patronized  respected

defensive   proud

chastised   valued

humiliated  honoured

excluded    a sense of belonging

resentment  contentment

Considering how your reader may feel after reading your
document is an important part of revision. Did your tone come
across like you hoped it would? Could it be misconstrued?
Often this is where peer reviewing can be helpful. Asking a
colleague to review your document before sending it off to its
intended audience is a common professional practice.

   Sometimes, you will need to communicate information that
is unpleasant, such as delivering bad news or rejecting a
request. Communicating constructively is possible--and
arguably even more important--in these situations. Regardless

                     Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing | 573
of message, how can you ensure you are communicating
constructively?

· Adopt an adult-to-adult approach: that is to say, avoid
   talking down to your reader in a patronizing tone, and
   likewise avoid sounding petulant or unwilling to take
   responsibility. Aim to communicate respectfully,
   responsibly, confidently, and cooperatively -- as one
   responsible adult to another.

· Be courteous: focus on the reader as much as possible.
   Use "you" unless it results in blaming (one effective use of
   passive verbs is to avoid assigning blame: "mistakes were
   made"). Use traditionally accepted forms of courtesy and
   politeness. Use gender-neutral phrasing and plural forms,
   unless you are referring to a specific person and you know
   their gender.

· Focus on the positive: emphasize what you can do rather
   than what you can't. Try to avoid negative wording and
   phrasing (no, not, never, none, isn't, can't, don't, etc.).
   Focus on what can be improved.

· Be genuine: apologize if you have made a mistake. Take
   responsibility and promise to do better. Be authentic in
   your expression. Avoid sounding like marketing material
   (ad-speak). Make reasonable claims that can be backed
   with evidence.

Consider the following perspectives:

Writer-Centred (I, we)                  Reader-Centred (you)
If I can answer any questions, I'll be
happy to do so.                         If you have any questions,
                                        please ask.
We shipped the order this morning.
                                        Your order was shipped this
I'm happy to report that ...            morning.

                                        You'll be glad to know that
                                        ...

574 | Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing
Negative Phrasing                     Constructive Phrasing

We cannot process your claim          Your claim can be
because the necessary forms have      processed as soon as we
not been completed                    receive the necessary forms

We do not take phone calls after      You try ...
3:00pm on Fridays

We closed your case because we
never received the information
requested in our letter of April ...

EXERCISE 2.3 Revise an email for appropriate tone

   A colleague has asked you to review his email before
sending. What revisions to content, tone, and style
would you suggest?

From: Jake Burns

To:  J. Parsons, Project Co-ordinator

Date: 12 December 2015

Subject: Two Problems

   Hi Ms. P

   Say, we may need to increase the budget
on this project by $12,000. Sam screwed up
when he calculated material costs. Now we
don't have enough budgeted to add the

     Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing | 575
             additional G3 servers with the 36GB 15k hot
             pluggable hard drives. I know you don't know
             what all that means, but trust me. WE NEED
             THOSE SERVER UPGRADES!!!

                Also, I would like to talk about getting my
             office moved closer to the rest of the IT
             department. All the running back and forth
             is disturbing other employees. I am so far
             away from everyone that I figure I must need
             to change deodorant or something. ; )

                JB

     EXERCISE 2.4 Revise for constructive tone

        How do you think the following memo will make the
     recipients feel? How would you revise the following
     memo to more constructively address the problem?

576 | Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing
From: Ann Onymous

To:  All Employees

Date: Feb. 3, 2011

Subject: Littering

   For some time now, smoking has been
strictly prohibited within five metres of the
Main Building entrance. Do NOT smoke
anywhere near the doors!

   Some of you still insist on smoking and
have been doing so inside this area. As a
result, the areas near the rear exit and
around the picnic tables are constantly
littered with smoking-related debris (filter
tips, half-smoked cigarettes, empty lighters,
etc.), creating an eyesore and making more
work for my staff, who have to keep cleaning
up this mess.

   Starting Monday, sand buckets will be
provided outside the read doors and in the
picnic area. Use them!

     Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing | 577
          For further reading, see "Communication in the
       Workplace: What Can NC State Students Expect?" a
       study based on the responses of over 1000
       professionals from various fields, including
       engineering, on how important business, technical
       and scientific communication is to their work.

          This work is included with permission and is
       licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
       International License.

Attributions

This chapter is adapted from "Technical Writing
Essentials" by Suzan Last (on BCcampus) and is licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
CC licensed content, Specific attribution

  · License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright

578 | Appendix B: Reader-Centered Writing
Appendix C: The Seven
Cs

Polishing the Report

So far we have discussed the importance of writing with the
reader in mind; of striking the right tone for your audience,
message, and purpose; of writing constructively; and of writing
persuasively. Now we move onto the actual writing itself. Two
key characteristics of professional technical communication
are that it is precise and concise. This precision and concision
must be evident at all levels, from the overall document, to
paragraphing, to sentence structure to word choice, and even
to punctuation. Every word or phrase should have a distinct
and useful purpose. If it doesn't, cut it or revise.

The 7 Cs of Professional Writing

The 7 C's are simply seven words that begin with C that
characterize strong professional style. Applying the 7 C's of
professional communication will result in writing that is

  · Clear
  · Coherent
  · Concise
  · Concrete
  · Correct
  · Complete
  · Courteous.

                                                          Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 579
CLEAR writing involves knowing what you want to say before
   you say it because often a lack of clarity comes from unclear
   thinking or poor planning; this, unfortunately, leads to
   confused or annoyed readers. Clear writing conveys the
   purpose of the document immediately to the reader; it
   matches vocabulary to the audience, avoiding jargon and
   unnecessary technical or obscure language while at the
   same time being precise. In clarifying your ideas, ensure that
   each sentence conveys one idea, and that each paragraph
   thoroughly develops one unified concept.

COHERENT writing ensures that the reader can easily follow
   your ideas and your train of thought. One idea should lead
   logically into the next through the use of transitional words
   and phrases, structural markers, planned repetition,
   sentences with clear subjects, headings that are clear, and
   effective and parallel lists. Writing that lacks coherence often
   sounds "choppy" and ideas seem disconnected or
   incomplete. Coherently connecting ideas is like building
   bridges between islands of thought so the reader can easily
   move from one idea to the next.

CONCISE writing uses the least words possible to convey the
   most meaning while still maintaining clarity. Avoid
   unnecessary padding, awkward phrasing, overuse of "to be"
   forms (is, are, was, were, am, be, being), long preposition
   strings, vagueness, unnecessary repetition and redundancy.
   Use active verbs whenever possible, and take the time to
   choose a single word rather than a long phrase or cliched
   expression. Think of your word count like a budget; be cost
   effective by making sure every word you choose does
   effective work for you. Cut a word, save a buck! As William

580 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
     Zinsser asserts, "the secret of good writing is to strip every
     sentence to its cleanest components."1
  CONCRETE writing involves using specific, precise language to
     paint a picture for your readers so that they can more easily
     understand your ideas. If you have to explain an abstract
     concept or idea, try to use examples, analogies, and precise
     language to illustrate it. Use measurable descriptors
     whenever possible; avoid vague terms like "big" or "good." Try
     to get your readers to "see" your ideas by using specific terms
     and descriptions.
  CORRECT writing uses standard English punctuation,
     sentence structure, usage, and grammar. Being correct also
     means providing accurate information, as well as using the
     right document type and form for the task.
  COMPLETE writing includes all requested information and
     answers all relevant questions. The more concrete and
     specific you are, the more likely your document will be
     complete as well. Review your checklist of specifications
     before submitting your document to its intended reader.
  COURTEOUS writing entails designing a reader-friendly, easy-
     to-read document; using tactful language and appropriate
     modes of addressing the audience; and avoiding potentially
     offensive terminology, usage, and tone. As we have discussed
     in an early section, without courtesy you cannot be
     constructive.
     In some cases, some of these might come into conflict: what
  if being too concise results in a tone that sounds terse, or an
  idea that seems incomplete? Figure 2.2.1 illustrates one
  method of putting all the 7Cs together.

1. W. Zinsser, "Simplicity," [Online]. Available: http://www.geo.umass.edu/
  faculty/wclement/Writing/zinsser.html

                                                             Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 581
  Figure 2.2.1 Putting all the 7Cs together 2 [Image description]
  Be mindful of the tradeoffs, and always give priority to being
  clear: writing that lacks clarity cannot be understood and
  therefore cannot achieve its purpose. Writing that adheres to
  the 7 C's helps to establish your credibility as a technical
  professional.

        EXERCISE 2.5 Revise for clarity

           Revise the following memo so that it adheres to the 7
        Cs; make it clear, coherent, concrete and concise, while
        also being complete, courteous and correct.

2. Figure 2.2.1 created by Alyssa Zicari and Jenna Hildemann; used with
   permission
   582 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
                MEMO
                When workloads increase to a level
             requiring hours in excess of an employee's
             regular duty assignment, and when such
             work is estimated to require a full shift of
             eight (8) hours or more on two (2) or more
             consecutive days, even though unscheduled
             days intervene, an employee's tour of duty
             shall be altered so as to include the hours
             when such work must be done, unless an
             adverse impact would result from such
             employee's absence from his previously
             scheduled assignment.

Sentence Variety and Length

While variety makes for interesting writing, too much of it can
also reduce clarity and precision. Technical writing tends to use
simple sentence structures more often than the other types.
That said, simple does not necessarily mean "simplistic," short,
or lacking in density. Remember that in grammatical terms,
simple just means that it has one main clause (one subject
and one predicate). You can still convey quite a bit of concrete
information in a simple sentence.

   The other consideration for precise writing is length. Your

                                                          Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 583
sentences should vary in length just as they can vary in type.
However, you want to avoid having too many long sentences
because they take longer to read and are often more complex.
That is appropriate in academic writing but less so in technical
writing. The goal is to aim for an average of around 20 to 30
words per sentence. Reserve the short sentences for main
points and use longer sentences for supporting points that
clarify or explain cause and effect relationships. If you feel the
sentence is too long, break it into two sentences. You do not
want your reader to have to read a sentence twice to
understand it. If you make compound or complex sentences,
ensure that you use appropriate coordinating or subordinating
strategies to make the relationship between clauses perfectly
clear. See Appendix E to review specific information on simple,
compound, and complex sentence structures.

Precise Wording

Technical writing is precise writing. Vague, overly general,
hyperbolic or subjective/ambiguous terms are simply not
appropriate in this genre. You do not want to choose words and
phrasing that could be interpreted in more than one way. For
example, if you asked someone to define what makes a "good
dog," you might get responses like "obedient, effective hunter/
retriever, well-behaved, affectionate, loyal, therapeutic, goofy"
and "all dogs are good!" Choose words that most precisely,
concisely, and accurately convey the idea you want to convey.
Below are some guidelines and examples to follow for using
precise wording.

584 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
1. Replace abstract nouns with verbs.

Verbs, more than nouns, help convey ideas concisely, so where
possible, avoid using nouns derived from verbs. Often these
abstract nouns end in -tion and -ment. See examples in the
following chart.

Abstract Noun   Verb
acquisition     acquire
analysis        analyze
recommendation  recommend
observation     observe
application     apply
confirmation    confirm
development     develop
ability         able, can
assessment      assess

2. Prefer short words to long words and
phrases.

The goal is to communicate directly and plainly so use short,
direct words whenever possible. In other words, don't use long
words or phrases when short ones will do. Write to express, not
impress.

                Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 585
Long                            Short
cognizant; be cognizant of      aware, know
commence; commencement          begin, beginning
utilize; utilization            use (v), use (n)
inquire; make an inquiry        ask
finalize; finalization          complete, end
afford an opportunity to        permit, allow
at this point in time           now, currently
due to the fact that            because, due to
has the ability to              can

3. Avoid clichés.

Clichés are expressions that you have probably heard and used
hundreds of times. They are over-used expressions that have
largely lost their meaning and impact.

Clichés                         Alternatives
as plain as day                 plainly, obvious, clear
ballpark figure                 about, approximately
few and far between             rare, infrequent
needless to say                 of course, obviously
last but not least              finally, lastly
as far as ___ is concerned      ?

4. Avoid cluttered constructions.

This category includes redundancies, repetitions, and "there is/
are" and "it is" constructions.

586 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
combine/join              Redundancies    unite as one
together
                     fill completely      emphasize/stress
finish entirely                           strongly
                     refer/return/revert  better/further
examine (closely)    back to              enhance

eventually evolve    suddenly interrupt   rely/depend heavily
over time
plan ahead           strictly forbid      protest against
completely surround                       gather/assemble
on all sides         harshly condemn      together
clearly articulate   estimate/            successfully prove
future plan          approximate roughly  years of age
in actual fact       carefully consider   end result/product
                     mutual agreement
                     positive benefits

5. Use accurate wording.

Sometimes this requires more words instead of fewer, so do
not sacrifice clarity for concision. Make sure your words convey
the meaning you intend. Avoid using words that have several
possible meanings; do not leave room for ambiguity or
alternate interpretations of your ideas. Keep in mind that
readers of technical writing tend to choose literal meanings,
so avoid figurative language that might be confusing (for
example, using the word "decent" to describe something you
like or think is good). Separate facts from opinions by using
phrases like "we recommend," "we believe," or "in our opinion."
Use consistent terminology rather than looking for synonyms
that may be less precise.

   Qualify statements that need qualifying, especially if there is
possibility for misinterpretation. Do not overstate through the
use of absolutes and intensifiers. Avoid overusing intensifiers
like "extremely," and avoid absolutes like "never, always, all,

                                                          Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 587
none" as these are almost never accurate. Remember Obiwan
Kenobi's warning:

                         "Only a Sith deals in absolutes."3

We tend to overuse qualifiers and intensifiers, so below are
some that you should be aware of and consider whether you
are using them effectively.

                    Overused Intensifiers

absolutely actually assuredly certainly clearly             completely

considerably definitely effectively extremely fundamentally drastically

highly     in fact  incredibly inevitably indeed            interestingly

markedly   naturally of course particularly significantly surely

totally    utterly very      really      remarkably         tremendously

                    Overused Qualifiers

apparently arguably basically essentially generally hopefully

in effect  in       kind of  overall     perhaps quite
           general

rather     relatively seemingly somewhat sort of virtually

For a comprehensive list of words and phrases that should

be used with caution, see Kim Blank's "Wordiness, Wordiness,
Wordiness List." 4

3. Star Wars: Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005). [Film]. Directed by
   G. Lucas

4. K. G. Blank, "Wordiness list," Department of English, University of
   Victoria [Online]. Available: http://web.uvic.ca/~gkblank/wordiness.html

   588 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
6. Prefer the active voice.

The active voice emphasizes the person/thing doing the action
in a sentence. For example, The outfielder throws the ball. The
subject, "outfielder" actively performs the action of the verb
"throw." The passive voice emphasizes the recipient of the
action. In other words, something is being done to something
by somebody: The ball was thrown (by the outfielder). Passive
constructions are generally wordier and often leave out the
person/thing doing the action.

       Active                             Passive

S V O                              S V O

Subject  actively does the         Subject  passively receives the
action of the verb  to the object  action of the verb  from the
of the sentence                    object

Subject  acts  on object           Subject  is acted upon  by the
                                   object

While the passive voice has a place--particularly if you want
to emphasize the receiver of an action as the subject of the
sentence, or the action itself, or you want to avoid using first
person--its overuse results in writing that is wordy, vague, and
stuffy. When possible, use the active voice to convey who or
what performs the action of the verb.

   Precise writing encapsulates many of the 7 C's; it is clear,
concise, concrete, and correct. But it is also accurate and active.
To write precisely and apply the 7 C's, it is important to look
critically at your sentences, perhaps in a way you may not have
done before. You need to consider the design of those
sentences, from the words to the phrases to the clauses, to
ensure that you are communicating your message effectively.

                                   Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 589
Image descriptions

Figure 2.2.1 image description:
   A priority list of the 7 Cs.

 1. Clear: Plan ahead! Know your purpose and convey your
      ideas in a unified manner.

2. Coherent: Organize your thoughts in a logical, structured
      progression.

 3. Concise: Budget your words wisely; ensure your writing
      contains only what's necessary.

4. Concrete: Use specific and precise language, use
      measurable descriptors and avoid vague language.

 5. Correct: Adhere to proper grammar, punctuation, and
      document structure.

6. Complete: Give all the important information and answer
      all relevant questions.

 7. Courteous: Format so that the document is easy to read.
      Use appropriate and tactful language.

[Return to Figure 2.2.1]

References

 1. W. Zinsser, "Simplicity," [Online]. Available:
      http://www.geo.umass.edu/faculty/wclement/Writing/
      zinsser.html 

2. Figure 2.2.1 created by Alyssa Zicari and Jenna Hildemann;
      used with permission 

 3. Star Wars: Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005). [Film].
      Directed by G. Lucas 

4. K. G. Blank, "Wordiness list," Department of English,
      University of Victoria [Online].

590 | Appendix C: The Seven Cs
      Available: http://web.uvic.ca/~gkblank/wordiness.html 

Attributions

This chapter is from Technical Writing Essentials by Suzan Last
(on BCcampus). It is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License.

                                                           Appendix C: The Seven Cs | 591
Appendix D:
Understanding and
Documenting
Information

592 | Appendix D: Understanding
and Documenting Information
Understanding and Documenting
Information

Remember, our own ethos relies, in part, on the quality of the
secondary research sources we use. That is, the sources we use
can either add or detract from our overall credibility. Therefore,
reviewing, processing, and documenting information is an
integral part of the research process. Below, we discuss a
variety of strategies for effectively understanding and
documenting sources.

Skimming

Skimming is the process of reading key parts of a text in order
to get an overview of an author's argument and main ideas.
There are many different methods for skimming, so you will
have to determine which works best for you and your particular
source.

   Well-written texts such as essays, articles, and book chapters
are generally formatted in similar ways:

   Introduction: provides the main idea/thesis as well as
overview of the text's structure
Body: provides claims, arguments, evidence, support and so on
to support thesis
Conclusion: provides connections to larger contexts, suggests
implications, ask questions, and revisit the main ideas

   Ideally, the main ideas will be presented in the introduction,
elaborated on in detail in the body, and reviewed in the
conclusion. Further, many sources will contain headings or
subheadings to organize points and examples, and well-
written paragraphs generally have clear topic sentences, or
sentences that provide the main idea(s) discussed in the

                                                                                                   | 593
paragraph. All of these aspects will help you skim while
developing a sense of the argument and main ideas.

   When you skim a source, consider the following process:

 1. Read the introduction (this could be a few paragraphs
      long).

2. Scan the document for headings. In a shorter article, there
      may not be any headings or there may be only a couple.

 3. Whenever you see a new heading, be sure to read at least
      the first few sentences under the heading and the final
      few sentences of the section.

4. Read the conclusion.

         Example: Skimming a Book

        When we encounter a text for a first time, it's a good
     idea to skim through to see if we need to take a further
     look at it in our research. One method for doing this
     is referred to as the First Sentence Technique, which
     entails reading the introduction, the first sentence of
     each paragraph, and the conclusion. This approach can
     be useful for taking notes and creating summaries of
     sources.

        A slightly more in-depth approach can deepen your
     understanding of the text and help you identify
     particular sections or even other resources that might
     be helpful:

          · Scan the preface, acknowledgements, and
             table of contents. (This identifies the methods
             and framework for the book.)

          · Scan the notes at the end of chapters to better

594 |
             understand the author's research.
          · Scan the index to see if the book covers the

             information you need.
          · Read the introductory paragraphs for each

             chapter. (This can help you better understand the
             structure and arguments of the book.)

Taking Notes

Taking notes is a central component of the research process.
While you skim the articles, record important information,
beginning with publication information. Publication
information provides a sense of the rhetorical situation for the
source, such as intended audience and context. As you
encounter texts in your research, consider their role in your
project and take note of the publication information as noted.
Recording the publication information as you go will help
avoid problems or mistakes when citing and building the
reference list.
[Add HP5 CONTENT from this PAGE]

                                                                                                   | 595
You may think, "what should I record from the sources other
than the publication information?" The goal of research notes
is to help you remember information and quickly access
important details. You should write down the following details:

  · Thesis statement
  · Keywords
  · Major points or claims
  · Evidence, support and/or examples
  · Headings (depending on the source)

You may want to write down the thesis, points, and claims
exactly as they appear in the source. However, whenever you
copy the language exactly, be sure to use quotation marks to
indicate that the information is coming directly from a source/
author.

Restating the Information in Your Own
Words

After taking the time to skim and take notes, you should also
put the author's thesis and ideas into your own words. Doing so
ensures that you truly understand the source and the author's
points. There are two major ways to approach this process:
summary and paraphrase. We will touch on both of these more
when we talk about producing the report, but in this instance,
please know that you are using both methods for your own
knowledge, not necessarily for content in your report.

Summary

Summaries are condensed versions of the original source, in
your own words. Summaries focus on the main ideas, but do

                                                                                                   | 597
not copy any of the original language. A 500 page book or a
2 hour movie could be summarized in a sentence. Summaries
do not contain the same level of detail as the original source.

         Example: Summary

        The following text demonstrates a summary of an
     original passage:

        Original Text
        "Lead can enter drinking water when service pipes
     that contain lead corrode, especially where the water
     has high acidity or low mineral content that corrodes
     pipes and fixtures. The most common problem is with
     brass or chrome-plated brass faucets and fixtures with
     lead solder, from which significant amounts of lead can
     enter into the water, especially hot water."
        Summary
        Water becomes contaminated by lead when lead
     pipes, solder, or certain types of fixtures degrade, and
     hot water can increase the amount lead released.
        Environmental Protection Agency. (2016). Basic
     information about lead in drinking water. Retrieved
     from https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-
     water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water

Paraphrase

Similarly, paraphrases are restatements of source material, in
your own words, but the difference is that paraphrases tend to

598 |
be closer in length to the original source. Paraphrases have the
same level of detail as the original. Remember, though, if you
copy from the original even two or three words in a row you
must provide quotation marks around those words.

         Example: Paraphrase

        Original
        "Lead can enter drinking water when service pipes
     that contain lead corrode, especially where the water
     has high acidity or low mineral content that corrodes
     pipes and fixtures. The most common problem is with
     brass or chrome-plated brass faucets and fixtures with
     lead solder, from which significant amounts of lead can
     enter into the water, especially hot water."
        Paraphrase
        Water becomes contaminated by lead when lead
     pipes or lead solder degrades. Certain types of fixtures,
     such as those plated with chrome and brass, as well as
     hot water, acidic water, and water with lower amounts
     of minerals can make lead contamination significantly
     worse.

Regardless of whether you choose to directly quote,
summarize, or paraphrase a source, you must document the
source material. Failure to do so is plagiarism and can lead to
allegations of academic or workplace dishonesty.

                                                                                                   | 599
Attribution

This chapter is adapted from A Guide to Technical
Communications: Strategies & Applications by Lynn Hall & Leah
Wahlin (on ohiostate.pressbooks.pub). It is licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License.

600 |
Appendix E: Academic
Integrity and the
Professional Space

If you haven't already, make sure you complete all three
assigned Library tutorials on Academic Integrity accessed
through the following links:

  · Understanding Academic Integrity
  · Understanding Your Rights and Responsibilities
  · Developing Skills that Prevent Misconduct

Depending on where you are in your college career, the idea
of "academic integrity" is probably not new. If anything, the
library tutorials are probably a review, since academic integrity
is typically discussed by most professors. However, let's look
forward and briefly consider what the larger idea of integrity
means outside of academia and in the professional workspace.

   Integrity is all about how you conduct yourself. Are your
actions ethical? Do they potentially cause harm to others,
either intentionally or unintentionally? You will need to
consider your integrity throughout your career. Let's apply this
idea to the three modes of appeal (ethos, logos, and pathos).
How do they connect to integrity issues in the workplace?
Below you'll find a example of someone making a decision that
could negatively impact one of the modes of appeal. Can you
identify which mode of appeal they are breaking, how they are
doing it, and a possible consequence?

                                                           Appendix E: Academic Integrity
                                                         and the Professional Space | 601
Scenario #1

Mateo has a problem. He is trying to put together a pitch for a
potential client so his company can get a lucrative construction
contract from the province. However, the data he needs to
highlight just isn't available right now. He knows the evidence
exists because his friends who do research says it does, but it
just hasn't been verified in a peer-reviewed journal. He decides
to include data from a friend's article in a non-peer reviewed
journal, but not directly state that fact in his pitch.

   Which mode of appeal is Mateo breaking?

Logos: Mateo is using evidence that has not been verified in his
pitch. Yes, it may be from a journal and people in the industry
that he trusts, but that doesn't mean its okay to include in
a report. Additionally, choosing to not mention this to the
organization he's pitching is potentially illegal. This choice
could result in fines for the company and Mateo might lose his
job.

                    An interactive H5P element has been excluded
                    from this version of the text. You can view it online
        here:
        https://openpress.usask.ca/rcm200/?p=1655#h5p-7

 Scenario #2

   Personal connections are important. Susie knows their value
after several years in social work, since she requires them to It's
help her audience connect with her presentation. The problem
is she doesn't really have a personal connection to her field:
drug addiction. She is passionate about helping people

602 | Appendix E: Academic Integrity and the Professional Space
overcome addiction, but when she talks about it to crowds,
she notices that the audience seems to not pay close enough
attention because she usually just states facts. So, instead, she
decides to create a fictional story of a family member who
eventually went to jail for using illegal drugs. She has worked
with many drug addicts during her career, so she combines
a bunch of their stories in order to make her own. Since the
story doesn't belong to anyone, it's probably going to be fine,
especially if it helps other people seek treatment.

   Which mode of appeal is Susie breaking?
   Pathos: While Susie's intention to evoke an emotional
response from the audience is good in principle, the way she
goes about it is completely wrong. She is, in fact, lying about
her personal experience to get the audience to feel empathy.
She is by no means the only person to do this, but the
consequences can be bad for her career if anyone finds out.

Scenario #3

Martin works a large agricultural corporation that is looking for
land to test some of its new seeds. The company is looking for
land that they think will be relatively inexpensive to use, and
decides to try to reach out to a First Nation on the prairies.
He sets up a meeting with the Elders, and in this meeting, he
promises that the company will provide the community with
the tools and supplies necessary to farm the seeds. Martin also
insists that the company has the community's best interests at
heart and this partnership would be a great advantage for their
community.

   Which mode of appeal is Martin breaking?
   Ethos: There is an issue of credibility. Yes, Martin may
genuinely believe that partnering with this Indigenous
community will be mutually beneficial, and it may very well be,
but that does not take into consideration the long history of

       Appendix E: Academic Integrity and the Professional Space | 603
Indigenous peoples being taking advantage of by government
and business, especially within the agricultural sphere.
Indigenous Peoples have often been told that something was
being done for their benefit, which often resulted in very little
positive gains for them. In an agricultural context, when Plains
nations were moved to reserves, they were told they would
be provided with proper tools and supplies, which is not what
happened. Martin's company may not be directly responsible
for this historical legacy, but that does not mean they will be
outright trusted by the members of the community.

   The modes of appeal are important because they help
people listen to our ideas. Also, they identify us a person of
integrity who can be trusted to do good work. However,
challenges may arise that push us to forget or ignore one, if not
all, of those modes of appeal. Ultimately, how we respond to
these challenges is what defines us as professionals.

604 | Appendix E: Academic Integrity and the Professional Space
Appendix F:
Presentation Aids

     Learning Objectives

          · Explain reasons why presentation aids are
             important in public speeches;

          · Detail how presentation aids function;
          · Discuss strategies for implementing and

             integrating presentation aids.

When you give a speech, you are presenting much more than
just a collection of words and ideas. Because you are speaking
live, your audience members will aesthetically experience your
speech through all five of their senses: hearing, vision, smell,
taste, and touch. In addition to your verbal and nonverbal
embodiment, presentation aids assist in amplifying your
content for the audience's overall experience.

   Presentation aids are the resources beyond the speech itself
that a speaker uses to enhance the message conveyed to the
audience. The type of presentation aids that speakers most
typically make use of are visual aids: pictures, diagrams, charts
and graphs, maps, and the like. Audible aids include musical
excerpts, audio speech excerpts, and sound effects. A speaker
may also use fragrance samples or food samples as olfactory
(sense of smell) or gustatory (sense of taste) aids. Finally,
presentation aids can be three-dimensional objects or they can

                                                                    Appendix F: Presentation
                                                                                          Aids | 605
change over a period of time, as in the case of a how-to
demonstration. As you can see, you have a range of
presentation aids at your disposal.

   Effective presentation aids are guided by two questions:

 1. How can I best represent an idea in my speech through a
      presentation aid?

2. When is best to introduce it to the audience?

If you're able to answer these two main questions, the audience
is more likely to understand your idea more fully. Each
presentation aid a speaker uses must be a direct, uncluttered
example of a specific element of the speech. It is
understandable that someone presenting a speech about
Abraham Lincoln might want to include a photograph of him,
but if there's a high probability that the audience knows what
Lincoln looked like, the picture would not contribute much
to the message unless, perhaps, the message was specifically
about the changes in Lincoln's appearance during his time in
office.

   In this example, other visual artifacts may be more likely to
deliver relevant information--a diagram of the interior of Ford's
Theater where Lincoln was assassinated, a facsimile of the
messy and much-edited Gettysburg Address, or a photograph
of the Lincoln family, for example. The key is that each
presentation aid must directly express an idea in your speech.

   Moreover, presentation aids must be used at the time when
you are presenting the specific ideas related to the aid. For
example, if you are speaking about coral reefs and one of your
supporting points is about the location of the world's major
reefs, it would make sense to display a map of these reefs while
you're talking about location. If you display it while you are
explaining what coral actually is, or describing the kinds of fish
that feed on a reef, the map will not serve as a useful aid--in
fact, it's likely to be a distraction.

606 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
   In this chapter, we will discuss some principles and strategies
to help you incorporate effective presentation aids into your
speech. We will begin by discussing the functions that good
presentation aids fulfill. Next, we will explore some of the many
types of presentation aids and how best to design and utilize
them. We will also describe various media that can be used for
presentation aids.

Functions of Presentation Aids

Why should you use presentation aids? If you have prepared
and rehearsed your speech adequately, shouldn't a good
speech with a good delivery be enough to stand on its own?
While it is true that impressive presentation aids will not rescue
a poor speech, it is also important to recognize that a good
speech can often be made even better by the strategic use
of presentation aids. Remember that your speech is an
experience rather than the isolated transmission of
information, so presentation aids can enhance or detract from
the aesthetics.

   Presentation aids can fulfill several functions:

  · improve your audience's understanding of the information
      you are conveying;

  · enhance audience memory and retention of the message;
  · add variety and interest to your speech;
  · enhance your credibility as a speaker.

Let's examine each of these functions.

                                                   Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 607
Improving Audience Understanding

Human communication is a complex process that often leads
to misunderstandings. If you are like most people, you can
easily remember incidents when you misunderstood a
message or when someone else misunderstood what you said
to them. Misunderstandings happen in public speaking just as
they do in everyday conversations.

   One reason for misunderstandings is that perception and
interpretation are highly complex, individual processes
(remember that communication is always cultural and
contextual rather than a universal set of symbols). Most of us
have seen the image in which, depending on your perception,
you see either the outline of a vase or the facial profiles of two
people facing each other, known as the Rubin's vase (Hasson et
al, 2001). Or you may have listened to a song for years only to
have a friend say, "uh, those aren't the lyrics!" These examples
demonstrate how interpretation can differ, and it means that
your presentations must be based on careful thought and
preparation to maximize the likelihood that your listeners will
understand your presentation as you intend them to.

   As a speaker, one of your basic goals is to help your audience
understand your message. To reduce misunderstanding,
presentation aids can be used to clarify or to emphasize. Use
table 10.1 to identify questions that underly clarifying or
emphasizing ideas.

608 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
              Improving Audience Understanding

To clarify :  Am I              If your speech is about the impact
Simplifying   describing a      of the Coriolis Effect on tropical
complex       complex           storms, for instance, you will have
information   process that      great difficulty clarifying it without
              could             a diagram because the process is a
              represented       complex one.
              differently?

              Am I
              referencing
              ideas that are
              visual or
              sensory in
              nature?

To            Is there an idea  Let's say that you're describing the
emphasize     or aspect of      increased prevalence of super
: Impress     the speech        tornadoes across the state of
your          that needs to     Kansas over the last 30 years. You
listeners     be                may decide that a map will visually
with the      underscored?      underscore the sudden increase in
importance                      storms.
of an idea

                                Table 10.1

Aiding Retention and Recall

The second function that presentation aids can serve is to
increase the audience's chances of remembering your speech.
An article by the U.S. Department of Labor (1996) summarized
research on how people learn and remember. The authors
found that "83% of human learning occurs visually, and the
remaining 17% through the other senses--11% through hearing,
3.5% through smell, 1% through taste, and 1.5% through touch."

   For this reason, exposure to an image can serve as a memory
aid to your listeners. When your graphic images deliver
information effectively and when your listeners understand

                                                   Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 609
them clearly, audience members are likely to remember your
message long after your speech is over.

   An added plus of using presentation aids is that they can
boost your retention and memory while you are speaking.
Using your presentation aids while you rehearse your speech
will familiarize you with the association between a given place
in your speech and the presentation aid that accompanies that
material.

Adding Variety and Interest

A third function of presentation aids is simply to make your
speech more interesting. For example, wouldn't a speech on
community gardens have a greater impact if you accompanied
your remarks with pictures of such gardens? You can imagine
that your audience would be even more enthralled if you had
the ability to display produce for your audience live. Similarly, if
you were speaking to a group of gourmet cooks about spices,
you might want to provide tiny samples of spices that they
could smell and taste during your speech.

Enhancing a Speaker's Credibility

The final function of a presentation aid is to increase your
ethos, or credibility. A high-quality presentation will contribute
to your professional image. Thus, in addition to containing
important information, your presentation aids must be clear,
clean, uncluttered, organized, and large enough for the
audience to see and interpret correctly. Misspellings and poorly
designed presentation aids can damage your credibility as a
speaker. Even if you give a good speech, you run the risk of

610 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
appearing unprofessional if your presentation aids are poorly
executed.

   In addition, make sure that you give proper credit to the
source of any presentation aids that you take from other
sources. Using a statistical chart or a map without proper credit
will detract from your credibility, just as using a quotation in
your speech without credit would. This situation will usually
take place with digital aids such as PowerPoint slides. The
source of a chart or the data shown in a chart form should be
cited at the bottom of the slide and orally in your speech.

   If you focus your efforts on producing presentation aids that
contribute effectively to your meaning, that look professional,
and that are handled well, your audience will most likely
appreciate your efforts and pay close attention to your
message. That attention will help them learn or understand
your topic in a new way and will thus help the audience see you
as a knowledgeable, competent, and credible speaker. With
the prevalence of digital communication, the audience
expectation of quality visual aids has increased.

Avoiding COMMON PRESENTATION AID
PITFALLS

Using presentation aids can come with some risks. However,
with a little forethought and adequate practice, you can choose
presentation aids that enhance your message and boost your
professional appearance in front of an audience.

   One principle to keep in mind is to use only as many
presentation aids as necessary to present your message or
clarify a component of your idea. Too often, speakers fall into a
"must have long and detailed presentational aids for the entire
speech"--in these cases, the aid can overshadow or distract
from the content, rather than clarify or add emphasis. Instead,

                                                     Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 611
simplify as much as possible, emphasizing the information you
want your audience to understand rather than overwhelming
them with too much text and too many images.

   Another important consideration is context. Remember to
survey the literal context of your speech to decide what aid
is possible--is there technology? Is there a poster stand or a
white board? Are there speakers? Is there WiFi? Keep your
presentation aids within the limits of the working technology
available to you. Whether or not your technology works on
the day of your speech, you will still have to present. As the
speaker, you are responsible for arranging the things you need
to make your presentation aids work as intended. Carry a roll
of duct tape so you can display your poster even if the easel is
gone. Find an extra chair if your table has disappeared. Test the
computer setup. Have your slides on a flash drive AND send it
to yourself as an attachment or post to a cloud service. Have
an alternative plan prepared in case there is some glitch that
prevents your computer-based presentation aids from being
usable. Most importantly, be sure you know how to use the
technology.

   Finally, presentation aids do not "speak for themselves."
When you display a visual aid, you should explain what it
shows, pointing out and naming the most important features.
If you use an audio aid such as a musical excerpt, you need
to tell your audience what to listen for. Similarly, if you use
a video clip, it is up to you as the speaker to point out the
characteristics in the video that support the point you are
making--but probably beforehand, so you are not speaking
over the video. At the same time, a visual aid should be quickly
accessible to the audience. This is where simplicity comes in.
Just as in organization of a speech you would use 3-5 main
points, not 20 main points, you should limit categories of
information on a visual aid.

612 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
Types of Presentation Aids

Now that we've explored some basic hints for preparing
presentation aids, the next step is determining what type of
presentation aid is best. We'll discuss types of aids that fall into
two categories: representations of data and/or representations
that display a real process, idea, person, place, or thing. In other
words, ask yourself: "what type of information do I think needs
to be accentuated? A statistic? An image of an idea?" Once you
answer, the categories below can help you determine which
aid would be the best to display that type of information.

Representations of Data

If you are looking to clarify a complex piece of data or piece
of evidence from your speech, you may decide that a chart,
graph, or diagram is best. Charts, graphs, and diagrams help
represent statistics, processes, figures, or other numeric
evidence that may be otherwise difficult to comprehend if just
spoken.

   Chart: A chart is commonly defined as a graphical
representation of data or a sketch representing an ordered
process. Whether you create your charts or do research to find
charts that already exist, it is important for them to exactly
match the specific purpose in your speech. Figure 10.1
("Acupuncture Chart") shows a chart related to acupuncture
and may be useful in a speech about the history and
development of acupuncture. However, if your goal is to show
the locations of meridians (the lines along which energy is
thought to flow) and the acupuncture points, you may need to
select an alternative image.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 613
                               Figure 10.1

There are two common types of charts: statistical charts and
sequence-of-steps chart.

  · Statistical Charts: For most audiences, statistical
      presentations must be kept as simple as possible, and
      they must be explained. When visually displaying
      information from a quantitative study, you need to make
      sure that you understand the material and can
      successfully and simply explain how one should interpret
      the data. This is surely an example of a visual aid that,
      although it delivers a limited kind of information, does not
      speak for itself. As with all other principles of public
      speaking, KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE.

  · Sequence-of-Steps Charts: Charts are also useful when
      you are trying to explain a process that involves several

614 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
      steps. If you are working with a scientific or medical
      argument, you may need to visually map the sequence
      because the process is otherwise difficult to follow.

Graph: A graph is a pictorial representation of the relationships
of quantitative data using dots, lines, bars, pie slices, and the
like. Graphs show how one factor (such as size, weight, number
of items) varies in comparison to other items. Whereas a
statistical chart may report the mean (or average) ages of
individuals entering college, a graph would show how the
mean age changes over time. A statistical chart may report
the number of computers sold in the United States, while a
graph will use bars or lines to show the breakdown of those
computers by operating systems such as Windows, Macintosh,
and Linux.

   Public speakers can show graphs using a range of different
formats. Some of those formats are specialized for various
professional fields. Very complex graphs often contain too
much information that is not related to the purpose of a
speech. If the graph is cluttered, it becomes difficult to
comprehend. If you find a graph that has useful information,
ask: "do I need to represent this graph as-is or can I represent a
key portion of the graph that's most relevant to my data?"

   There are 3 types of graphs that we'll introduce: line graphs,
bar graphs, and pie graphs.

  · Line Graph: A line graph is designed to show trends over
      time. You could, for example, use a line graph to chart
      Enron's stock prices over time.

  · Bar Graph: Bar graphs are useful for showing the
      differences between quantities. They can be used for
      population demographics, fuel costs, math ability in
      different grades, and many other kinds of data. The graph
      in Figure 10.2 ("Suicide vs. Homicide") is well designed. It is
      relatively simple and is carefully labeled, making it easy for

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 615
      you to guide your audience through the recorded
      numbers of each type of death. The bar graph is designed
      to show the difference between rates of suicides and
      homicides across various age groups. When you look at
      the data, the first grouping clearly shows that eighteen- to
      twenty-four-year-olds are more likely to die because of a
      homicide than any of the other age groups.
  · Pie Graph: Pie graphs are usually depicted as circles and
      are designed to show proportional relationships within
      sets of data; in other words, they show parts of or
      percentages of a whole. They should be simplified as
      much as possible without eliminating important
      information.

                                         Figure 10.2
   Diagrams: Diagrams are visual representations that simplify
a complex process. They may be drawings or sketches that
outline and explain the parts of an object, process, or
phenomenon that cannot be readily seen. When you introduce
a diagram, you are working to label parts of a process for your
audience. For example, you may decide to diagram how

616 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
human communication occurs because simply describing that
process would be too complex.

   Charts, graphs, and diagrams can present challenges in
being effective but also in being ethical. To be both ethical
and effective, you need a good understanding of what statistics
mean, and you need to create or use graphs that show
amounts clearly. Remember that clarifying is a key goal of
presentational aids, so ask: is my graph or chart making my
information more or less difficult to comprehend?

Representations of Real Processes or Things

In contrast, a second set of presentational aids represents real
processes, things, persons, places, or ideas. While charts and
graphs simplify more complex or abstract ideas, data, or
evidence, this set of presentational aids attempts to add
emphasis to actual people, places, or objects. Such aids may
include maps, photos, videos, audio recordings, and objects
(diagrams can also fall into this category, depending on what
you're mapping).

   Maps: Maps are extremely useful if the information is clear
and limited. There are all kinds of maps, including population,
weather, ocean current, political, and economic maps, so you
should find the right kind for the purpose of your speech.
Choose a map that emphasizes the information you need to
deliver and are trying to represent. For example, you might
decide that a map outlining the Hawaiian Islands would be
helpful to clarify the spatial dimensions of the state. Although
the map may not list the names of the islands, it is helpful
in orienting the audience to the direction and distance of the
islands to other geographic features, such as the Pacific Ocean.

   Photographs and Drawings: Sometimes a photograph or a
drawing is the best way to show an unfamiliar but important
detail. For example, if you gave a speech about the impact

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 617
of plastics on ocean life, you may decide to include a photo
of a beached whale who had suffered from plastic inhalation.
The photo may emphasize the impact of plastic that speaking
otherwise doesn't capture.

   Video or Audio Recordings: Another very useful type of
presentation aid is a video or audio recording. Whether it is
a short video from a website such as YouTube or Vimeo, a
segment from a song, or a piece of a podcast, a well-chosen
video or audio recording may be a good choice to enhance
your speech.

   There is one major warning to using audio and video clips
during a speech: do not forget that they are supposed to be
aids to your speech, not the speech itself! In addition, be sure
to avoid these four mistakes that speakers often make when
using audio and video clips:

  · Avoid choosing clips that are too long for the overall
      length of the speech.

  · Practice with the audio or video equipment prior to
      speaking. If you are unfamiliar with the equipment, you'll
      look foolish trying to figure out how it works. Be sure that
      the speakers on the computer are on and at the right
      volume level.

  · Cue the clip to the appropriate place prior to beginning
      your speech, and try to avoid any advertisement
      interruptions (which can make the aid look
      unprofessional).

  · The audience must be given context before the video or
      audio clip is played, specifically what the clip is and why it
      relates to the speech. At the same time, the video should
      not repeat what you have already said, but add to it.

Objects: Objects refer to anything you could hold up and talk
about during your speech. If you're talking about the
importance of not using plastic water bottles, you might hold

618 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
up a plastic water bottle and a stainless-steel water bottle as
examples.

Ways to Display Your Presentation Aid

Above, we've discussed why you might use a presentation aid
and what aid might work best. "How do I display these?" you
might be wondering. For example, if you decide that a graph
would be helpful in clarifying a complex idea, you have options
on how to present that graph to the audience, including
presentation software or more low-tech means. We'll talk
through each below.

Using Presentation Software

Presentation software and slides are a common mechanism
to display information for your audience. You are likely familiar
with PowerPoint, but there are several others:

  · Prezi, available at www.prezi.com
  · Slide Rocket, available at www.sliderocket.com
  · Google Slides, available in Google Drive and useful for

      collaborative assignments
  · Keynote, the Apple presentation slide software on Macs
  · Impress, an Open Office product

      (http://www.openoffice.org/prod-uct/impress.html)
  · PrezentIt
  · AdobeAcrobat Presenter
  · ThinkFree
  · E-Maze

Each software allows you to present professional-looking slides.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 619
For example, you can use the full range of fonts, although many
of them are not appropriate for presentations because they
are hard to read. Use Table 10.3 to track advantages and
disadvantages of using slides.

Advantages to Using      Disadvantages to Using Slides
Slides

· They allow             · They're too linear and audiences
   visualization of         aren't encouraged to see the
   concepts;                relationship between ideas
                            (Frommer, 2012);
· They are easily
   portable and          · PowerPoint is too rigid in the
   uniform;                 slide-by-slide format (Tufte, 2005).

· They can be            · They become overcrowded;
   embedded with         · The presentational slides become
   videos and audio;
                            the speech.
· They are projectable
   and more easily
   visible throughout a
   room

                         Table 10.3

Remember that presentation software aids are a way to display
what you want your audience to know--a graph, an idea, an
image. Presentation software is not the only way to display
these, so slides should be a purposeful choice. What you
display is the top priority.

   Before we continue, we have one note: You'll notice that "text
from the speech" is not included in our list of types of
presentation aids in the section above. You may decide that
adding emphasis to a key word or concept from your speech
is needed - and that's OK! You may even decide that providing
that concept, visually, for the audience is worthwhile by writing
or displaying the words, and that's OK, too. However,
remember that presentation aids are included for a reason,
and it's often unnecessary to provide an entire outline of your
speech's text through a presentation software like PowerPoint

620 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
slides. Speakers, too often, copy and paste parts of their speech
onto a PowerPoint slide and think, "There! A presentation aid!"
Ask: what purpose does this text serve for my audience? If your
answer doesn't result in clarifying, emphasizing, or retaining,
it's likely not needed.

Creating Quality Slide Shows

Slides should show the principles of good design, which
include unity, emphasis or focal point, scale and proportion,
balance, and rhythm (Lauer & Pentak, 2000). Presenters should
also pay attention to tone and usability. With those principles
in mind, here are some tips for creating and then using
presentation software.

  · Unity and Consistency: use a single (readable) sans serif
      font, single background, and unified animations for your
      visuals so that they look like a unified set. Each slide
      should have one message, photo, or graphic.

  · Emphasis, Focal Point, and Visibility: all information
      should be large enough--at least 24-point font-- for
      audiences. To guarantee visibility, follow the 7X7 rule: no
      more than seven horizontal lines of text (including the
      heading) and the longest line should not exceed seven
      words. Finally, provide higher contrast between text and
      slides.

  · Tone: Fonts, color, clip art, photographs, and templates all
      contribute to tone, which is the attitude being conveyed in
      the slides. Make sure the tone of the presentation software
      matches the overall aesthetic tone of the speech.

  · Scale and Proportion: Use numbers to communicate a
      sequence. If bullet points are used, the text should be
      short. Adjust graphs or visuals on the slide, avoiding small
      or multiple visuals on the same image.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 621
  · Balance and rhythm: Work to create symmetry and
      balance between each slide. When presenting, think
      about what's being displayed on the slide to the audience
      and when. If you aren't using it, insert a black screen
      between images.

  · Usability: With any image or graphic, make sure to include
      "alt text" - or a description of what the image is. Proving alt
      text is helpful for users with screen readers.

We recommend that you survey your university's resources for
assistance with creating quality and accessible presentation
slides.

Low-Tech Presentation Aids

In addition to presentation slides, there are other "low-tech"
ways to display. Instead of providing a diagram on PowerPoint,
you may decide that drawing it live is more beneficial. Below,
we talk through a few additional means to display your
information to the audience.

Dry-Erase Board

If you use a chalkboard or dry-erase board, what you display
should still be thought-out, rehearsed, and clearly professional.
You run the risk of appearing less prepared, but numerous
speakers do utilize chalk and dry-erase boards effectively.
Typically, these speakers use the chalk or dry-erase board for
interactive components of a speech. For example, maybe
you're giving a speech in front of a group of executives. Chalk
or dry-erase boards are very useful when you want to visually
show information that you are receiving from your audience. If

622 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
you ever use a chalk or dry-erase board, follow these five simple
rules:

  · Write large enough so that everyone in the room can see
      (which is harder than it sounds; it is also hard to write and
      talk at the same time!).

  · Print legibly; don't write in cursive script.
  · Write short phrases; don't take time to write complete

      sentences.
  · Never turn your back to the audience while you're talking.
  · Be sure you have markers that will not go dry, and clean

      the board afterward.

Flipchart

A flipchart is useful for situations when you want to save what
you have written for future reference or to distribute to the
audience after the presentation. As with whiteboards, you will
need good markers and readable handwriting, as well as a
strong easel to keep the flipchart upright.

Posters

Posters often represent a key graph, idea, or visualization. For a
poster, you likely want to display one key piece of information
at one key part of your presentation. Otherwise, posters are
probably not the best way to approach presentation aids in a
speech. There are problems with visibility as well as portability.
Avoid producing a presentation aid that looks like you simply
cut pictures out of magazines and pasted them on.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 623
Handouts

Handouts are appropriate for delivering information that
audience members can take away with them. As we will see,
handouts require a great deal of management if they are to
contribute to your credibility as a speaker.

   First, make sure the handout is worth the trouble of making,
copying, and distributing it. Does the audience really need the
handout? Second, make sure to bring enough copies of the
handout for each audience member to get one. Having to
share or look on with one's neighbor does not contribute to
a professional image. Third, consider timing. We recommend
providing the handout at the conclusion of your speech.

Reminders for Integrating Presentation
Aids

Regardless of what presentation aid you choose--a photo,
chart, map--and the medium that you'll display it--a handout,
slide deck, audio device--all presentation aids require
rehearsal. While we've included tips on integrating
presentation aids in your speech throughout this chapter, use
the following list of strategies to integrate your aid into the
speech.

  · Gather all citation information and provide it both visually
      and orally to your audience.

  · In your speaking notes, mark where you will integrate the
      presentation aid so that you don't forget about it due to
      nervousness.

  · Determine where the presentation aid will be when it's
      not being displayed.

  · For a PowerPoint presentation, include blank/black slides

624 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
      that are used when your visual aid isn't in use.
  · Store other objects in non-distracting locations.
  · Rehearse your transitions into and out of the presentation

      aid.

The Mythical Norm and Presentation Aids

When you're an audience member, it's important to reflect
on the assumptions that we hold about the speaker. Are we
judging a speaker based on our own assumptions of what's
normal?

   Similarly, when you're making decisions about presentation
aids as a speaker, it's important to be reflexive about who is
in the audience. Are you making decisions about presentation
aids based on our own assumptions about what's normal and
who's normal? Are you assuming, for example, that all
audience members are able-bodied and able to visually and
audibly experience your presentation aid?

   Creating an accessible experience for audience members
must be a priority. For example, you may want to avoid red and
green colors on your visual aids as they're not perceivable to all
audience members. While constructing presentation software
of slides, make sure you include alt-text for images, especially
if you provide the slides to the presentation. These are for
audience members who may be sight-impaired. Check out
guidelines for the presentation software you're using on how
to embed alt-text. Additionally, be weary of smells that may be
intense or irritate audience members. Overall, be careful not to
assume that audience members also fit the mythical norm as
you construct your presentation aid.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 625
Conclusion

To finish this chapter, we will recap a few key pieces of
information. Whether your aid is a slide show, object, or dry
erase board, these standards are essential:

  · Presentation aids must be easily experienced by your
      audience.

  · Presentation aids must be portable, easily handled, and
      efficient. They should disappear when not in use.

  · Presentation aids should be aesthetically pleasing and in
      good taste. Additionally, electronic media today allows you
      to create very "busy" slides with varieties of fonts, colors,
      collages of photos, etc. Keep in mind the principles of
      unity and focal point.

  · Color is another aesthetic aspect. Some colors are just
      more soothing, readable, and appropriate than others.
      Also, the color on your slides may be different when
      projected from what is on your computer.

  · Provide credit when using images that aren't your own.
  · Finally, presentation aids must support your speech and

      have high relevance to your content.

This chapter has covered a wide range of information about all
kinds of audio and visual aids, but audiences today expect and
appreciate professionally designed and handled presentation
aids. The stakes are higher now, but the tools are many.

Attribution

This chapter is adapted from "Speak Out, Call In: Public
Speaking as Advocacy" by Meggie Mapes (on Pressbooks). It

626 | Appendix F: Presentation Aids
is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

                                                    Appendix F: Presentation Aids | 627
Appendix G: Stages of
Listening

Stages of the Listening Process

Listening is a skill of critical significance in all aspects of our
lives, from maintaining our personal relationships, to getting
our jobs done, to taking notes in class, to figuring out which
bus to take to the airport. Regardless of how we're engaged
with listening, it's important to understand that listening
involves more than just hearing the words that are directed at
us. Listening is an active process by which we make sense of,
assess, and respond to what we hear.

   The listening process involves five stages: receiving,
understanding, evaluating, remembering, and responding.
These stages will be discussed in more detail in later sections.
An effective listener must hear and identify the speech sounds
directed toward them, understand the message of those
sounds, critically evaluate or assess that message, remember
what's been said, and respond (either verbally or nonverbally)
to information they've received.

   Effectively engaging in all five stages of the listening process
lets us best gather the information we need from the world
around us.

628 | Appendix G: Stages of
Listening
Active Listening

Active listening is a particular communication technique that
requires the listener to provide feedback on what he or she
hears to the speaker, by way of restating or paraphrasing what
they have heard in their own words. The goal of this repetition
is to confirm what the listener has heard and to confirm the
understanding of both parties. The ability to actively listen
demonstrates sincerity, and that nothing is being assumed or
taken for granted. Active listening is most often used to
improve personal relationships, reduce misunderstanding and
conflicts, strengthen cooperation, and foster understanding.

   When engaging with a particular speaker, a listener can use
several degrees of active listening, each resulting in a different
quality of communication with the speaker. This active
listening chart shows three main degrees of listening:
repeating, paraphrasing, and reflecting.

                                                 Appendix G: Stages of Listening | 629
   Active listening can also involve paying attention to the
speaker's behavior and body language. Having the ability to
interpret a person's body language lets the listener develop a
more accurate understanding of the speaker's message.

The Receiving Stage

The first stage of the listening process is the receiving stage,
which involves hearing and attending.

   Hearing is the physiological process of registering sound
waves as they hit the eardrum. As obvious as it may seem, in
order to effectively gather information through listening, we
must first be able to physically hear what we're listening to. The
clearer the sound, the easier the listening process becomes.

   Paired with hearing, attending is the other half of the
receiving stage in the listening process. Attending is the

630 | Appendix G: Stages of Listening
process of accurately identifying and interpreting particular
sounds we hear as words. The sounds we hear have no
meaning until we give them their meaning in context.
Listening is an active process that constructs meaning from
both verbal and nonverbal messages.

The Challenges of Reception

Listeners are often bombarded with a variety of auditory stimuli
all at once, so they must differentiate which of those stimuli are
speech sounds and which are not. Effective listening involves
being able to focus on speech sounds while disregarding other
noise. For instance, a train passenger that hears the captain's
voice over the loudspeaker understands that the captain is
speaking, then deciphers what the captain is saying despite
other voices in the cabin. Another example is trying to listen to
a friend tell a story while walking down a busy street. In order
to best listen to what she's saying, the listener needs to ignore
the ambient street sounds.

   Attending also involves being able to discern human speech,
also known as "speech segmentation. "1 Identifying auditory
stimuli as speech but not being able to break those speech
sounds down into sentences and words would be a failure of
the listening process. Discerning speech segmentation can be
a more difficult activity when the listener is faced with an
unfamiliar language.

The Understanding Stage

The second stage in the listening process is the understanding
stage. Understanding or comprehension occurs when both the

                                                  Appendix G: Stages of Listening | 631
speaker and audience share an experience of meaning, and
constitutes the first step in the listening process. This is the
stage during which the audience determines the context and
meanings of the words they hear. Determining the context and
meaning of individual words, as well as assigning meaning in
language, is essential to understanding sentences, and, thus,
both are essential to understanding a speaker's message.

   Once the listener understands the speaker's main point, they
can begin to sort out the rest of the information they are
hearing and decide where it belongs in their mental outline.
For example, a political candidate listens to her opponent's
arguments to understand what policy decisions that opponent
supports.

   Before getting the big picture of a message, it can be difficult
to focus on what the speaker is saying. Think about walking
into a lecture class halfway through. You may immediately
understand the words and sentences that you are hearing, but
not immediately understand what the lecturer is proving or
whether what you're hearing at the moment is the main point,
side note, or digression.

   Understanding what we hear is a huge part of our everyday
lives, particularly in terms of gathering basic information. In
the office, people listen to their superiors for instructions about
what they are to do. At school, students listen to teachers to
learn new ideas. We listen to political candidates give policy
speeches in order to determine who will get our vote. But
without understanding what we hear, none of this everyday
listening would relay any practical information to us.

   One tactic for better understanding a speaker's meaning is
to ask questions. Asking questions allows the listener to fill in
any holes he or she may have in the mental reconstruction of
the speaker's message.

632 | Appendix G: Stages of Listening
The Evaluating Stage

This stage of the listening process is the one during which
the listener assesses the information they received, both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Evaluating allows the listener
to form an opinion of what they heard and, if necessary, to
begin developing a response.

   During the evaluating stage, the listener determines
whether or not the information they heard and understood
from the speaker is well constructed or disorganized, biased
or unbiased, true or false, significant or insignificant. They also
ascertain how and why the speaker has come up with and
conveyed the message that they delivered. This process may
involve considerations of a speaker's personal or professional
motivations and goals. For example, a listener may determine
that a co-worker's vehement condemnation of another for
jamming the copier is factually correct, but may also
understand that the co-worker's child is sick and that may be
putting them on edge. A voter who listens to and understands
the points made in a political candidate's stump speech can
decide whether those points were convincing enough to earn
their vote.

   The evaluating stage occurs most effectively once the
listener fully understands what the speaker is trying to say.
While we can, and sometimes do, form opinions of information
and ideas that we don't fully understand--or even that we
misunderstand--doing so is not often ideal in the long run.
Having a clear understanding of a speaker's message allows
a listener to evaluate that message without getting bogged
down in ambiguities or spending unnecessary time and
energy addressing points that may be tangential or otherwise
non-essential.

   This stage of critical analysis is important for a listener in

                                                 Appendix G: Stages of Listening | 633
terms of how what they heard will affect their own ideas,
decisions, actions, and/or beliefs.

The Remembering Stage

In the listening process, the remembering stage occurs as the
audience categorizes and retains the information they've
gathered from the speaker for future access. The
result--memory--allows the person to record information
about people, objects, and events for later recall. This process
happens both during and after the speaker's delivery.

   Memory is essential throughout the listening process. We
depend on our memory to fill in the blanks when we're
listening and to let us place what we're hearing at the moment
in the context of what we've heard before. If, for example, you
forgot everything that you heard immediately after you heard
it, you would not be able to follow along with what a speaker
says, and conversations would be impossible. Moreover, a
friend who expresses fear about a dog she sees on the sidewalk
ahead can help you recall that the friend began the
conversation with her childhood memory of being attacked by
a dog.

   Remembering previous information is critical to moving
forward. Similarly, making associations to past remembered
information can help a listener understand what she is
currently hearing in a wider context. In listening to a lecture
about the symptoms of depression, for example, a listener
might make a connection to the description of a character in a
novel that she read years before.

   Using information immediately after receiving it enhances
information retention and lessens the forgetting curve or the
rate at which we no longer retain information in our memory.
Conversely, retention is lessened when we engage in mindless

634 | Appendix G: Stages of Listening
listening, and little effort is made to understand a speaker's
message.

   Because everyone has different memories, the speaker and
the listener may attach different meanings to the same
statement. In this sense, establishing common ground in
terms of context is extremely important, both for listeners and
speakers.

The Responding Stage

The responding stage is the stage of the listening process
wherein the listener provides verbal and/or nonverbal reactions
based on short- or long-term memory. Following the
remembering stage, a listener can respond to what they hear
either verbally or non-verbally. Nonverbal signals can include
gestures such as nodding, making eye contact, tapping a pen,
fidgeting, scratching or cocking their head, smiling, rolling
their eyes, grimacing, or any other body language. These kinds
of responses can be displayed purposefully or involuntarily.
Responding verbally might involve asking a question,
requesting additional information, redirecting or changing the
focus of a conversation, cutting off a speaker, or repeating what
a speaker has said back to her in order to verify that the
received message matches the intended message.

   Nonverbal responses like nodding or eye contact allow the
listener to communicate their level of interest without
interrupting the speaker, thereby preserving the speaker/
listener roles. When a listener responds verbally to what they
hear and remember--for example, with a question or a
comment--the speaker/listener roles are reversed, at least
momentarily.

   Responding adds action to the listening process, which
would otherwise be an outwardly passive process. Oftentimes,
the speaker looks for verbal and nonverbal responses from the

                                                 Appendix G: Stages of Listening | 635
listener to determine if and how their message is being
understood and/or considered. Based on the listener's
responses, the speaker can choose to either adjust or continue
with the delivery of her message. For example, if a listener's
brow is furrowed and their arms are crossed, the speaker may
determine that she needs to lighten their tone to better
communicate their point. If a listener is smiling and nodding
or asking questions, the speaker may feel that the listener is
engaged and her message is being communicated effectively.

Conclusion

In short, active listening is crucial for establishing our ethos. If
we hope to be persuasive, we need to demonstrate our good
will, good character, and good judgement to others by carefully
listening and responding to their messages.

636 | Appendix G: Stages of Listening
Appendix H:
Intercultural
Communication

               Figure 1
               Source:
               pixabay.co
               m

   Culture involves beliefs, attitudes, values, and traditions that
are shared by a group of people. From the choice of words
(message), to how you communicate (in person, or by email), to
how you acknowledge understanding with a nod or a glance
(nonverbal feedback), to the internal and external interference,
all aspects of communication are influenced by culture.

   Watch the following 1 minute video What is Culture?

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://openpress.usask.ca/
        rcm200/?p=1989#oembed-1

                                                                    Appendix H: Intercultural
                                                                        Communication | 637
It is through intercultural communication that you come to

create, understand, and transform culture and

identity. Intercultural communication is communication

between people with differing cultural identities. One reason

you should study intercultural communication is to foster

greater self-awareness (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). Your

thought process regarding culture is often "other focused,"

meaning that the culture of the other person or group is what

stands out in your perception. However, the old adage "know

thyself" is appropriate, as you become more aware of your own

culture by better understanding other cultures and

perspectives. Intercultural communication can allow you to

step outside of your comfortable, usual frame of reference and

see your culture through a different lens. Additionally, as you

become more self-aware, you may also become more ethical

communicators as you challenge your ethnocentrism, or your

tendency to view your own culture as superior to other

cultures.

Ethnocentrism makes you far less likely to be able to bridge

the gap with others and often increases intolerance of

difference. Business and industry are no longer regional, and

in your career, you will necessarily cross borders, languages,

and cultures. You will need tolerance, understanding, patience,

and openness to difference. A skilled business communicator

knows that the process of learning is never complete, and

being open to new ideas is a key strategy for success.

Communication  with                            yourself  is

called intrapersonal communication, which may also be

intracultural, as you may only represent one culture. But most

people belong to multiple groups, each with their own culture.

Does a conversation with yourself ever involve competing

goals, objectives, needs, wants, or values? How did you learn

of those goals, or values? Through communication within and

between individuals many cultures are represented. You may

struggle with the demands of each group and their

638 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
expectations and could consider this internal struggle
intercultural conflict or simply intercultural communication.

   Culture is part of the very fabric of our thought, and you
cannot separate yourself from it, even as you leave home,
defining yourself anew in work and achievements. Every
business or organization has a culture, and within what may
be considered a global culture, there are many subcultures
or co-cultures. For example, consider the difference between
the sales and accounting departments in a corporation. You
can quickly see two distinct groups with their own symbols,
vocabulary, and values. Within each group, there may also be
smaller groups, and each member of each department comes
from a distinct background that in itself influences behaviour
and interaction.

   Intercultural communication is a fascinating area of study
within business communication, and it is essential to your
success. One idea to keep in mind as you examine this topic
is the importance of considering multiple points of view. If you
tend to dismiss ideas or views that are "unalike culturally," you
will find it challenging to learn about diverse cultures. If you
cannot learn, how can you grow and be successful?

   To summarize, intercultural communication is an aspect of
all communicative interactions, and attention to your
perspective is key to your effectiveness. Ethnocentrism is a
major obstacle to intercultural communication.

How to Understand Intercultural
Communication

The American anthropologist Edward T. Hall is often cited as
a pioneer in the field of intercultural communication (Chen
& Starosta, 2000). Born in 1914, Hall spent much of his early
adulthood in the multicultural setting of the American

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 639
Southwest, where Native Americans, Spanish-speakers, and
descendents of pioneers came together from diverse cultural
perspectives. He then traveled the globe during World War
II and later served as a U.S. State Department official. Where
culture had once been viewed by anthropologists as a single,
distinct way of living, Hall saw how the perspective of the
individual influences interaction. By focusing on interactions
rather than cultures as separate from individuals, he asked
people to evaluate the many cultures they belong to or are
influenced by, as well as those with whom they interacted.
While his view makes the study of intercultural communication
far more complex, it also brings a healthy dose of reality to the
discussion. Hall is generally credited with eight contributions to
the study of intercultural communication as follows:

 1. Compare cultures. Focus on the interactions versus
      general observations of culture.

2. Shift to local perspective. Local level versus global
      perspective.

 3. You don't have to know everything to know something.
      Time, space, gestures, and gender roles can be studied,
      even if we lack a larger understanding of the entire
      culture.

4. There are rules we can learn. People create rules for
      themselves in each community that we can learn from,
      compare, and contrast.

 5. Experience counts. Personal experience has value in
      addition to more comprehensive studies of interaction
      and culture.

6. Perspectives can differ. Descriptive linguistics serves as a
      model to understand cultures, and the U.S. Foreign
      Service adopted it as a base for training.

 7. Intercultural communication can be applied to
      international business. U.S. Foreign Service training
      yielded applications for trade and commerce and became

640 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
      a point of study for business majors.
8. It integrates the disciplines. Culture and communication

      are intertwined and bring together many academic
      disciplines (Chen & Starosta, 2000; Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990;
      McLean, 2005).
9.

Hall indicated that emphasis on a culture as a whole, and how
it operated, might lead people to neglect individual differences.
Individuals may hold beliefs or practice customs that do not
follow their own cultural norm. When you resort to the mental
shortcut of a stereotype, you lose these unique
differences. Stereotypes can be defined as a generalization
about a group of people that oversimplifies their culture
(Rogers & Steinfatt, 1999).

   The American psychologist Gordon Allport explored how,
when, and why people formulate or use stereotypes to
characterize distinct groups. When you do not have enough
contact with people or their cultures to understand them well,
you tend to resort to stereotypes (Allport, 1958).

   As Hall notes, experience has value. If you do not know a
culture, you should consider learning more about it firsthand
if possible. The people you interact with may not be
representative of the culture as a whole, but that is not to
say that what you learn lacks validity. Quite the contrary; Hall
asserts that you can, in fact, learn something without
understanding everything, and given the dynamic nature of
communication and culture, who is to say that your lessons
will not serve you well? Consider a study abroad experience if
that is an option for you, or learn from a classmate who comes
from a foreign country or an unfamiliar culture. Be open to
new ideas and experiences, and start investigating. Many have
gone before you, and today, unlike in generations past, much of
the information is accessible. Your experiences will allow you to

                                  Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 641
learn about another culture and yourself, and help you to avoid
prejudice.

                                   Prejudice involves  a

                                   negative    preconceived

                         Read the  judgment or opinion that
         following web             guides conduct or social
article Stereotypes Impact         behaviour (McLean., 2005). As
  Workplace Behavior In            an example, imagine two
        Complex Ways               people walking into a room
                                   for a job interview. You are

                                   tasked to interview both, and

having read the previous section, you know that Allport (1958)

rings true when he says we rely on stereotypes when

encountering people or cultures with which we have had little

contact. Will the candidates' dress, age, or gender influence

your opinion of them? Will their race or ethnicity be a conscious

or subconscious factor in your thinking process? Allport's work

would indicate that those factors and more will make you likely

to use stereotypes to guide your expectations of them and your

subsequent interactions with them.

People who treat other with prejudice often make

assumptions, or take preconceived ideas for granted without

question, about the group or communities. As Allport

illustrated, you often assume characteristics about groups with

which you have little contact. Sometimes you also assume

similarity, thinking that people are all basically similar. This

denies cultural, racial, ethnic, socioeconomic, and many other

valuable, insightful differences.

In summary, ethnocentric tendencies, stereotyping, and

assumptions of similarity can make it difficult to learn about

cultural differences.

642 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
Common Cultural Characteristics

  Figure 2 Culture Characteristics [Image Description]

   Groups come together, form cultures, and grow apart across
time. How do you become a member of a community, and
how do you know when you are full member? What aspects
of culture do people have in common and how do they relate
to business communication? Researchers who have studied
cultures around the world have identified certain
characteristics that define a culture. These characteristics are
expressed in different ways, but they tend to be present in
nearly all cultures.

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 643
Rites of Initiation

Cultures tend to have a ritual for becoming a new member. A
newcomer starts out as a nonentity, a stranger, an unaffiliated
person with no connection or even possibly awareness of the
community. Newcomers who stay around and learn about the
culture become members. Most cultures have a rite of initiation
that marks the passage of the individual within the
community; some of these rituals may be so informal as to
be hardly noticed (e.g., the first time a coworker asks you to
join the group to eat lunch together), while others may be
highly formalized (e.g., the ordination of clergy in a religion).
The nonmember becomes a member, the new member
becomes a full member, and individuals rise in terms of
responsibility and influence.

   Across the course of your life, you have no doubt passed
several rites of initiation but may not have taken notice of them.
Did you earn a driver's license, register to vote, or acquire the
permission to purchase alcohol? In North American culture,
these three common markers indicate the passing from a
previous stage of life to a new one, with new rights and
responsibilities.

   Rites of initiation mark the transition of the role or status of
the individual within the group. Your first day on the job may
have been a challenge as you learned your way around the
physical space, but the true challenge was to learn how the
group members communicate with each other. If you graduate
from college with a Master of Business Administration (MBA)
degree, you will already have passed a series of tests, learned
terms and theories, and possess a symbol of accomplishment
in your diploma, but that only grants you the opportunity to
look for a job--to seek access to a new culture.

   In every business, there are groups, power struggles, and
unspoken ways that members earn their way from the role of
a "newbie" to that of a full member. The newbie may get the

644 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
tough account, the office without a window, or the cubicle next
to the bathroom, denoting low status. As the new member
learns to navigate through the community--establishing a
track record and being promoted--he passes the rite of
initiation and acquires new rights and responsibilities.

   Over time, the person comes to be an important part of the
business, a "keeper of the flame." The "flame" may not exist in
physical space or time, but it does exist in the minds of those
members in the community who have invested time and effort
in the business. It is not a flame to be trusted to a new person,
as it can only be earned with time. Along the way, there may
be personality conflicts and power struggles over resources
and perceived scarcity (e.g., there is only one promotion and
everyone wants it). All these challenges are to be expected in
any culture.

Common History and Traditions

Think for a moment about the history of a business like Tim
Hortons--what are your associations with Tim Horton, the
relationship between hockey, coffee, and donuts? Traditions
form as the organization grows and expands, and stories are
told and retold to educate new members on how business
should be conducted. The history of every culture, of every
corporation, influences the present. There are times when the
phrase "we've tried that before" can become stumbling block
for members of the organization as it grows and adapts to new
market forces. There may be struggles between members who
have weathered many storms and new members, who come
armed with new educational perspectives, technological tools,
or experiences that may contribute to growth.

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 645
Common Values and Principles

Cultures all hold values and principles that are commonly
shared and communicated from older members to younger
(or newer) ones. Time and length of commitment are
associated with an awareness of these values and principles,
so that new members, whether they are socialized at home, in
school, or at work, may not have a thorough understanding of
their importance.

   Watch the following 2 minute video: Core Values &
Company Culture from Jim Collins, Tony Hsieh, and
Steve Jobs

   https://youtube.com/
watch?v=ecWiloEJ1dk%3Ffeature%3Doembed

Common Purpose and Sense of Mission

Cultures share a common sense of purpose and mission. Why
are we here and whom do we serve? These are fundamental
questions of the human condition that philosophers and
theologians all over the world have pondered for centuries.
In business, the answers to these questions often address
purpose and mission, and they can be found in mission and
vision statements of almost every organization. Individual
members will be expected to acknowledge and share the
mission and vision, actualize them, or make them real through
action. Without action, the mission and vision statements are
simply an arrangement of words. As a guide to individual and
group behavioural norms, they can serve as a powerful
motivator and a call to action. For example, Boeing Canada's
Purpose and Mission, and Aspiration statements are as follows:

646 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
   Purpose and Mission: Connect, Protect, Explore and Inspire
the World through Aerospace Innovation

   Aspiration: Best in Aerospace and Enduring Global Industrial
Champion

   Based on these two statements, employees might expect a
culture of innovation, quality, and safety as core to their work.
What might those concepts mean in your everyday work if you
were part of Boeing "culture?"

Common Symbols, Boundaries, Status,
Language, and Rituals

Many people learn early in life what a stop sign represents, but
not everyone knows what a ten-year service pin on a lapel, or a
corner office with two windows means. Cultures have common
symbols that mark them as a group; the knowledge of what a
symbol stands for helps to reinforce who is a group member
and who is not. Cultural symbols include dress, such as the
Western business suit and tie. Symbols also include slogans
or sayings, such as "Mr. Christie you make good cookies" or
"Noooobody". The slogan may serve a marketing purpose but
may also embrace a mission or purpose within the culture.
Family crests and clan tartan patterns serve as symbols of
affiliation. Symbols can also be used to communicate rank and
status within a group.

   Space is another common cultural characteristic; it may be
a nonverbal symbol that represents status and power. In most
of the world's cultures, a person occupying superior status is
entitled to a physically elevated position--a throne, a dais, a
podium from which to address subordinates. Subordinates
may be expected to bow, curtsy, or lower their eyes as a sign of
respect. In business, the corner office may offer the best view
with the most space. Movement from a cubicle to a private

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 647
office may also be a symbol of transition within an
organization, involving increased responsibility as well as
power. Parking spaces, the kind of vehicle you drive, and the
transportation allowance you have may also serve to
communicate symbolic meaning within an organization.

   The office serves our discussion on the second point
concerning boundaries. Would you sit on your boss's desk or
sit in his chair with your feet up on the desk in his presence?
Most people indicate they would not, because doing so would
communicate a lack of respect, violate normative space
expectations, and invite retaliation. Still, subtle challenges to
authority may arise in the workplace. A less than flattering
photograph of the boss at the office party posted to the
recreational room bulletin board communicates more than a
lack of respect for authority. By placing the image
anonymously in a public place, the prankster clearly
communicates a challenge, even if it is a juvenile one.
Movement from the cubicle to the broom closet may be the
result for someone who is found responsible for the prank.
Again, there are no words used to communicate meaning, only
symbols, but those symbols represent significant issues.

   Communities have their own vocabulary and way in which
they communicate. Consider the person who uses a sewing
machine to create a dress and the accountant behind the desk;
both are professionals and both have specialized jargon used in
their field. If they were to change places, the lack of skills would
present an obstacle, but the lack of understanding of terms,
how they are used, and what they mean would also severely
limit their effectiveness. Those terms and how they are used are
learned over time and through interaction. While a textbook
can help, it cannot demonstrate use in live interactions.
Cultures are dynamic systems that reflect the communication
process itself.

   Cultures celebrate heroes, denigrate villains, and have
specific ways of completing jobs and tasks. In business and

648 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
industry, the emphasis may be on effectiveness and efficiency,
but the practice can often be "because that is the way we have
always done it." Rituals serve to guide our performance and
behaviour and may be limited to small groups or celebrated
across the entire company.

   Rituals can serve to bind a group together, or to constrain it.
Institutions tend to formalize processes and then have a hard
time adapting to new circumstances. While the core values or
mission statement may hold true, the method of doing things
that worked in the past may not be as successful as it once
was. Adaptation and change can be difficult for individuals
and companies, and yet all communities, cultures, and
communication contexts are dynamic, or always changing. As
much as we might like things to stay the same, they will always
change--and we will change with (and be changed by) them.

                           Read the following web article: Culture at
                        Work: The Tyranny of `Unwritten Rules'

                           To summarize, all cultures have
                        characteristics such as initiations, traditions,
                        history, values and principles, purpose,
                        symbols, and boundaries.

Divergent Cultural Characteristics

We are not created equal. Cultures reflect this inequality, this
diversity, and the divergent range of values, symbols, and
meanings across communities. People have viewpoints, and
they are shaped by their interactions with communities. Let's
examine several points of divergence across cultures.

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 649
                                                                                        Figure 3
                                                                                        Source:
                                                                                        Pixabay.co
                                                                                        m

Individualistic versus Collectivist Cultures

The Dutch researcher Geert Hofstede explored the concepts
of individualism and collectivism across diverse cultures
(Hofstede, 2005). He found that in individualistic cultures like
the United States and Canada, people value individual freedom
and personal independence, and perceive their world primarily
from their own viewpoint. They perceive themselves as
empowered individuals, capable of making their own
decisions, and able to make an impact on their own lives.

   Cultural viewpoint is not an either/or dichotomy, but rather
a continuum or range. You may belong to some communities
that express individualistic cultural values, while others place
the focus on a collective viewpoint. Collectivist cultures
(Hofstede, 1982), including many in Asia and South America,
and many Indigenous cultures, focus on the needs of the
nation, community, family, or group of workers. Ownership and
private property is one way to examine this difference. In some
cultures, property is almost exclusively private, while others
tend toward community ownership. The collectively owned
resource returns benefits to the community. Water, for

650 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
example, has long been viewed as a community resource,
much like air, but that has been changing as business and
organizations have purchased water rights and gained control
over resources. How does someone raised in a culture that
emphasizes the community interact with someone raised in
a primarily individualistic culture? How could tensions be
expressed and how might interactions be influenced by this
point of divergence? In the following sections these viewpoints
will be examined.

Explicit-Rule Cultures versus Implicit-Rule
Cultures

Do you know the rules of your business or organization? Did
you learn them from an employee manual or by observing the
conduct of others? Your response may include both options,
but not all cultures communicate rules in the same way. In
an explicit-rule culture, where rules are clearly communicated
so that everyone is aware of them, the guidelines and agenda
for a meeting are announced prior to the gathering. In
an implicit-rule culture, where rules are often understood and
communicated nonverbally, there may be no agenda.
Everyone knows why they are gathered and what role each
member plays, even though the expectations may not be
clearly stated. Power, status, and behavioural expectations may
all be understood, and to the person from outside this culture,
it may prove a challenge to understand the rules of the context.

   Outsiders often communicate their "otherness" by not
knowing where to stand, when to sit, or how to initiate a
conversation if the rules are not clearly stated. While it may
help to know that implicit-rule cultures are often more tolerant
of deviation from the understood rules, the newcomer will be

                                  Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 651
wise to learn by observing quietly--and to do as much research
ahead of the event as possible.

Uncertainty-Accepting Cultures versus
Uncertainty-Rejecting Cultures

When people meet each other for the first time, they often use

what they have previously learned to understand their current

context. People also do this to reduce uncertainty. Some

cultures, such as the United States and Britain, are highly

tolerant of uncertainty, while others go to great lengths to

reduce the element of surprise. Whereas a U.S. business

negotiator might enthusiastically agree to try a new procedure,

the Egyptian counterpart would likely refuse to get involved

until all the details are worked out.

Charles          Berger  and           Richard  Calabrese

(1975) developed Uncertainty Reduction theory to examine

this dynamic aspect of communication. Here are seven axioms

of uncertainty:

1. There is a high level of uncertainty at first. As we get to

know one another, our verbal communication increases and

our uncertainty begins to decrease.

2. Following verbal communication, nonverbal

communication increases, uncertainty continues to decrease,

and more nonverbal displays of affiliation, like nodding one's

head to indicate agreement, will start to be expressed.

3. When experiencing high levels of uncertainty, we tend

to increase our information-seeking behaviour, perhaps asking

questions to gain more insight. As our understanding

increases, uncertainty decreases, as does the information-

seeking behaviour.

4. When experiencing high levels of uncertainty, the

652 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
communication interaction is not as personal or intimate. As
uncertainty is reduced, intimacy increases.

   5. When experiencing high levels of uncertainty,
communication will feature more reciprocity, or displays of
respect. As uncertainty decreases, reciprocity may diminish.

   6. Differences between people increase uncertainty, while
similarities decrease it.

   7. Higher levels of uncertainty are associated with a decrease
in the indication of liking the other person, while reductions in
uncertainty are associated with liking the other person more.

Time Orientation

Edward T. Hall and Mildred Reed Hall (1987) state
that monochronic time-oriented cultures consider one thing
at a time, whereas polychronic time-oriented cultures
schedule many things at one time, and time is considered in a
more fluid sense. In monochromatic time, interruptions are to
be avoided, and everything has its own specific time. Even the
multitasker from a monochromatic culture will, for example,
recognize the value of work first before play or personal time.
Canada, Germany, and Switzerland are often noted as countries
that value a monochromatic time orientation.

   Polychromatic time looks a little more complicated, with
business and family mixing with dinner and dancing. Greece,
Italy, Chile, and Saudi Arabia are countries where one can
observe this perception of time; business meetings may be
scheduled at a fixed time, but when they actually begin may
be another story. Also note that the dinner invitation for 8 p.m.
may in reality be more like 9 p.m. If you were to show up on
time, you might be the first person to arrive and find that the
hosts are not quite ready to receive you.

   When in doubt, always ask before the event; many people
from polychromatic cultures will be used to foreigner's

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 653
tendency to be punctual, even compulsive, about respecting
established times for events. The skilled business
communicator is aware of this difference and takes steps to
anticipate it. The value of time in different cultures is expressed
in many ways, and your understanding can help you
communicate more effectively.

Short-Term versus Long-Term Orientation

          Figure 4 Short-Term/Long-Term [Image Description]
          Source: ecampusontario

   Do you want your reward right now or can you dedicate
yourself to a long-term goal? You may work in a culture whose
people value immediate results and grow impatient when
those results do not materialize. Geert Hofstede discusses this
relationship of time orientation to a culture as a "time horizon,"
654 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
and it underscores the perspective of the individual within a
cultural context. Many countries in Asia, influenced by the
teachings of Confucius, value a long-term orientation, whereas
other countries, including Canada, have a more short-term
approach to life and results. Indigenous peoples are known for
holding a long-term orientation driven by values of deep, long-
term reflection and community consultation.

   If you work within a culture that has a short-term orientation,
you may need to place greater emphasis on reciprocation of
greetings, gifts, and rewards. For example, if you send a thank-
you note the morning after being treated to a business dinner,
your host will appreciate your promptness. While there may be
a respect for tradition, there is also an emphasis on personal
representation and honour, a reflection of identity and
integrity. Personal stability and consistency are also valued in a
short-term oriented culture, contributing to an overall sense of
predictability and familiarity.

   Long-term orientation is often marked by persistence, thrift
and frugality, and an order to relationships based on age and
status. A sense of shame for the family and community is also
observed across generations. What an individual does reflects
on the family and is carried by immediate and extended family
members.

Direct versus Indirect

In Canada, business correspondence is expected to be short
and to the point. "What can I do for you?" is a common
question when a business person receives a call from a
stranger; it is an accepted way of asking the caller to state
his or her business. In some cultures it is quite appropriate
to make direct personal observation, such as "You've changed
your hairstyle," while for others it may be observed, but never
spoken of in polite company. In indirect cultures, such as those

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 655
in Latin America, business conversations may start with
discussions of the weather, or family, or topics other than
business as the partners gain a sense of each other, long before
the topic of business is raised. Again, the skilled business
communicator researches the new environment before
entering it, as a social faux pas, or error, can have a significant
impact.

Materialism versus Relationships

Members of a materialistic culture place emphasis on external
goods and services as a representation of self, power, and social
rank. If you consider the plate of food before you, and consider
the labour required to harvest the grain, butcher the animal,
and cook the meal, you are focusing more on the relationships
involved with its production than the foods themselves. Caviar
may be a luxury, and it may communicate your ability to
acquire and offer a delicacy, but it also represents an effort.
Cultures differ in how they view material objects and their
relationship to them, and some value people and relationships
more than the objects themselves. The United States and
Japan are often noted as materialistic cultures, while many
Scandinavian nations feature cultures that place more
emphasis on relationships.

Low-Power versus High-Power Distance

In low-power distance cultures, according to Hofstede (2009),
people relate to one another more as equals and less as a
reflection of dominant or subordinate roles, regardless of their
actual formal roles as employee and manager, for example. In
a high-power distance culture, you would probably be much

656 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
less likely to challenge the decision, to provide an alternative,
or to give input. If you are working with people from a high-
power distance culture, you may need to take extra care to
elicit feedback and involve them in the discussion because
their cultural framework may preclude their participation. They
may have learned that less powerful people must accept
decisions without comment, even if they have a concern or
know there is a significant problem. Unless you are sensitive to
cultural orientation and power distance, you may lose valuable
information.

                         Read the following Harvard Business Review
                      article: Research: The Biggest Culture Gaps Are
                      Within Countries, Not Between Them
   To summarize, cultures have distinct orientations when it
comes to rules, uncertainty, time and time horizon, masculinity,
directness, materialism, and power distance.

Image Description

Figure 2 image description: This diagram is showing a large
circle with the words Global Village in it and four surrounding
circles with the words political, ethical, legal, and economic in
them. [Return to Figure 18.6]

   Figure 4 image description: This diagram shows a long
arrow pointing to the right and the words long term
underneath, short arrow pointing to the left with the words
short term underneath. [Return to Figure 18.8]

                                 Appendix H: Intercultural Communication | 657
Attribution

This chapter is adapted from "Business Writing for Everyone"
by Arley Cruthers (on openpress.usask.ca). It is licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License.

658 | Appendix H: Intercultural Communication
Glossary

ethos
pathos
accidental communication

      when one person stimulates meaning in the mind of
      another without having any intention of doing so and
      without necessarily knowing that he or she has done so
action verbs
      verbs found in job application materials that quickly
      identify a candidate's skills, achievements, and
      accomplishments
active listening
      engaging with the speaker and the material you hear in
      an active way, such as by asking questions, paraphrasing
      ideas, and listening without judgement
active voice
      a sentence structure where the subject carries out the
      action
Advertiser's Stance
      a rhetorical corruption where the speaker or writer
      undervalues the subject and overvalues pure effect
ambiguity
      the quality of being open to more than one interpretation

                                                                                    Glossary | 659
APA Style
      the American Psychological Association (APA) Style is a
      style guide that provides guidance on how to format
      papers. For this course, we are using it only for rules on
      citing sources and creating reference entries.

audience
      the receiver or receivers of a message

audience-centred
      preparing materials for a speech, report, or job package
      that a focus on the audience rather the speaker or the
      message

author-date citation system
      a system for creating in-text citations that requires the
      inclusion of the author(s) last name, and the year the
      source was published. For RCM 200, we want you to also
      include the page number.

axiom
      a universal principle or foundational truth that operates
      across cases or situations

back matter
      the final part of your report, this is where your reader can
      find information that will help them learn more
      information about the topic. The elements are the
      recommendations, the appendix and the references page

660 | Glossary
character
      the personal history and personality traits of the speaker or
      writer

chronological résumé
      a traditional résumé format whose main section is the
      "employment experience" section. Jobs are listed in reverse
      chronological order, with skills/achievements under each
      position

clause
      when a subject and verb are combined in a sentence. There
      are two types: independent clause and dependent clause.

comma splice
      when two independent clauses are incorrectly joined by a
      comma

communication
      the process of one person stimulating meaning in the
      mind of another by means of a message

conciseness
      using the fewest words possible to achieve the goal of
      communication

connective statements
      several types of statements or phrases that are designed to
      connect part of your speech to make it easier for audience
      members to follow

                                                                                     Glossary | 661
constraints

      something that makes it difficult for your message to be
      received, such as beliefs, facts, interests, and motives. These
      can from both the rhetor and the audience
coordinating conjunctions

      a word that joins two clauses. These include words like and,
      but, for, yet, nor, or, so
cover letter

      also known as an "application letter," this document is your
      opportunity to establish a connection with the company
      you are applying to. You will pick a few significant
      qualifications that make you a good fit for the position and
      go into depth about each one.
credibility

      a quality that allows others to trust and believe you
dependent clause

      a clause that relies on another part of the sentence for
      meaning because it cannot stand on it's own
direct quote

      a word-for-word copy of someone else's words and/or
      ideas.
ethos

      a rhetorical appeal that addresses the values of an
      audience as well as establishes authorial credibility/
      character

662 | Glossary
exigence

      a problem that needs to be solved. This "problem" isn't
      always negative though. It can be something that needs to
      be said or a task that needs to be completed
expressive communication

      Communication that arises from the emotional, or
      motivational, state of the individual
Extemporaneous

      a speech delivery method where the presentation is
      carefully planned and rehearsed, but spoken in a
      conversational manner using brief notes
extemporaneous speech

      a type of speech delivery that is carefully planned and
      rehearsed, but uses minimal notes and is spoken in a
      conversational manner
face

      our sense of self-worth in a given situation
face loss

      the experience of feeling judged, or feeling that people do
      not recognize us as we perceive ourselves to be
feedback

      information that a receiver sends back to the sender
focused topic

      a specific topic for a written report or oral presentation that
      is neither too broad or too general.

                                                                                    Glossary | 663
footing

      the foundation upon which your credibility rests in a given
      interaction

front matter

      the first group of elements that a reader will see of your
      report. These elements are the cover page, the transmittal
      document, the title page, the table of contents, the list of
      tables and figures, and the summary.

full block format

      a standard letter format that has seven elements: (1)
      letterhead/logo, (2) the heading, (3) salutation, (4) the
      introduction, (5) the body, (6) the conclusion, (7) the
      signature line

functional (skills) résumé

      a résumé format whose main section is the "Skills and
      Achievements" section. Skills are organized into categories.
      There is still an "Employment Experience" section, but it
      only include basic information about each position.

fused sentence

      when two independent clauses are combined without any
      punctuation

gerund

      a word ending in -ing that serves as a noun or adjective in
      a sentence, not a verb

gerund fragment

      a type of sentence fragment where the issue is a gerund

664 | Glossary
      (an -ing word serving as a noun or adjective) being used
      incorrectly in a sentence
gifs

      an image file that is usually animated in some way
header block

      the section of a memo that contains detailed information
      on its recipient, sender, and purpose
Impromptu

      a speech delivery method where a short message is
      presented without advanced preparation
in-text citation

      also called a "citation," in-text citations are a mechanical
      way that a writer acknowledges the work of others. An in-
      text citation can take two forms: a parenthetical citation or
      a narrative citation.
independent clause

      a clause that can stand on it's own because it conveys a
      complete idea.
informative report

      a report where you establish your credibility so the
      audience will accept the facts you present
interview

      the phase of the job search process where you go from
      being an applicant on paper to a real, three dimensional
      person.

                                                                                    Glossary | 665
Interviewing

      the phase of the job search process where you are
      evaluated on your verbal communication skills through
      face-to-face (or phone) interaction
iterative

      an iterative process is a process for calculating a desired
      result by means of a repeated cycle of operations. An
      iterative process should be convergent, i.e., it should come
      closer to the desired result as the number of iterations
      increases.
jargon

      certain words that are used by a profession or group that
      are difficult for others to understand
job package

      a collection of documents that are used to apply for a
      position such as a cover letter and résumé
keywords

      words in a job posting that highlight skills, qualities, and
      values that are important to a company
lead-ins

      long strings of words that don't add much to the overall
      meaning of the message
letter

      a brief message to recipients that are often outside the
      organization

666 | Glossary
logos

      a rhetorical appeal that requires the use of logic, careful
      structure, and objective evidence to appeal to the audience

Manuscript

      a speech delivery method where a message is read word-
      for-word off a written page or autocue device

Memorized

      a speech delivery method where a message is presented
      after being committed to memory by the speaker

memos

      full name "memoranda," these are documents sent within
      an organization to pass along or request information,
      outline policies, present short reports, or propose ideas

modes of appeal

      Aristotle's means for persuading an audience. The modes
      are ethos, pathos, and logos

narrative citation

      a type of citation where the source information is
      embedded into the text. The author's name is in the text
      and is then followed by the year in parenthesis. The year is
      then followed by a signal verb. Include the page number
      at the end of the sentence in parenthesis. For example:
      MacLennan (2009) argues....(p. 10).

netiquette

      etiquette for using the internet, or more specifically,
      communicating in online spaces. This includes (1) knowing

                                                                                    Glossary | 667
      your context, (2) remembering the human, (3) recognizing
      that text is permanent, (4) avoiding flaming, and (5)
      respecting privacy and original ideas

noise

      information that is added unintentionally to a message
      during a transmission

nominalizations

      an issue where the main action (a verb) is turned into a
      noun which overcomplicates the writing

non-verbal communication

      the transfer of information through the use of body
      language including eye contact, facial expressions,
      gestures and more

non-verbal feedback

      a type of feedback where you use your whole body to
      provide information to a speaker. Some examples include
      leaning your body in, using eye contact, and nodding
      affirmatively

oral report

      a type of report where a person is using their voice to relay
      information

outline

      a visual structure where you can compile information into
      a well-organized document

paraphrase

      a way to use your own words to present information. This

668 | Glossary
      method is more detailed and specific than a summary and
      retains the length of the original source.
parenthetical citation

      a type of citation that comes at the end of a sentence
      where an outside source is used. The author, date, and
      page number go inside the parenthesis. For example:
      (MacLennan, 2009, p. 10)
passive voice

      a sentence structure where the subject of a sentence
      receives an action instead of doing it
pathos

      a rhetorical appeal that tries to tap into the audience's
      emotions to get them to agree with a claim
persuasive report

      a report where you want the audience to accept the
      facts and you want them to change their thinking and
      actions
phrase

      a group of words that are missing a subject, a verb, or both
plagiarism

      when a person represents the ideas of another as their own
      original work
plain words

      words that are more common and easier for readers to
      understand

                                                                                    Glossary | 669
popular sources
      sources that are good for background information and
      ideas, but not for including in actual research

pre-writing
      the first phase of the writing process where you gather
      information and content from sources to help generate
      materials in the drafting phase

predicate
      the verb that conveys the action or state of being in a
      clause or sentence

preparation outline
      a comprehensive form of outline that includes all of the
      information in your speech

preposition
      words that show relationships between other words. Some
      examples include in, on, at, of, and under

preposition fragment
      a type of sentence fragment where an issue with a
      preposition makes the sentence an incomplete idea

primary research
      research that is often made up of first-person accounts
      and can be useful for issues where there is little research
      available

670 | Glossary
Projection

      a technique for making your voice loud and clear that is
      more than just speaking loudly or shouting

rate

      how quickly or slowly you speak during a presentation

receiver

      a person who receives a message from a sender

reference entry

      detailed information about your source that a reader can
      use to find the information on their own. A reference entry
      should include, at minimum, the author(s) who generated
      the source, the date the source was published, the title of
      the source, and information on where the source can be
      found.

references

references page

      a section of your report that will have reference entries
      for all of the sources you cite in your paper. All reference
      entries should be organized in alphabetical order by author
      last name or organization name, and, if the reference runs
      on to multiple lines, each successive line should be
      indented.

report

      an account of your investigation into a subject, presented
      in a written document or oral presentation that has
      conventional formatting

                                                                                     Glossary | 671
report body
      the main portion of the report that has all the content
      of your findings. The elements are the introduction, the
      discussion, and the conclusion.

research question
      a question that a research project sets out to answer

résumé
      a document that summarizes your education, skills, talents,
      employment history, and experiences in a clear and
      concise format for potential employers

reverse chronological order
      a way of organizing your job experiences so that you are
      starting with the most recent job and working backwards
      toward your first job

rhetor
      a person who uses rhetoric to accomplish a task through
      communication

rhetoric
      a practical, purposeful communication that attempts to
      create change in the world by enabling a rhetor to
      persuade people to change their beliefs or solve problems.

rhetorical audience
      an audience that can take action to solve a problem and
      can be persuaded by the rhetor to take action

672 | Glossary
rhetorical balance

      a way to construct a persuasive message that keeps a
      balance between three rhetorical elements: logos, pathos,
      and ethos.
rhetorical communication

      the process of a source stimulating a source-selected
      meaning in the mind of a receiver by means of verbal and
      non-verbal messages
rhetorical corruptions/perversions

      any issue that arises when one of the modes of appeal
      is out of balance. These corruptions/perversions are the
      pedant's stance, the advertiser's stance, and the
      entertainer's stance
rhetorical exigence

      a "problem" that can be affected by human activity
rhetorical situation

      also known as a "communication context," this is a complex
      of persons, events, objects, and relations presenting an
      actual or potential exigence which can be completely or
      partially removed if discourse, introduced into the
      situation, can so constrain human decision or action as to
      bring about the significant modification of the exigence.
run-on sentence

      a writing error where two or more independent clauses are
      connected without proper punctuation

                                                                                    Glossary | 673
scholarly sources
      sources that are typically peer-reviewed by experts, more
      technical in nature, and cite references

scope
      elements you must consider that can impact the message
      you create and how it will be received. For example, the
      audience, the purpose of your message, and constraints
      you must work within

secondary research
      research the requires searching libraries and other
      locations for other peoples' published studies and research

self-inventory
      the process of brainstorming your past accomplishments,
      skills, and achievements

sender
      a person who sends a message

sentence fragment
      a writing error where a sentence is missing a subject or
      verb

Shannon-Weaver Model
      also known as the transmission model, this
      communication model shows communication as a linear
      process where a sender encodes information and sends it
      to a receiver who decodes it

674 | Glossary
SIDCRA
      an acronym that stands for the six parts of a report: (1)
      summary, (2) introduction, (3) discussion, (4) conclusion, (5)
      recommendations, (6) appendix

signal verb
      a special verb that show the reader how an author is
      expressing their ideas

simple future
      a verb tense that is used to talk about things that haven't
      happened yet

simple past
      a verb tense that is used to talk about things that
      happened or existed before now

simple present
      a verb tense that is used show an action is happening right
      now or that it happens regularly

speaker
      a person sending a message through their voice

speaking outline
      a keyword outline used to deliver an extemporaneous
      speech

subject
      the topic being discussed in a clause or sentence

                                                                                     Glossary | 675
subordinate conjunction

      a word that connects a dependent clause to an
      independent clause. It shows a cause-and-effect
      relationship or a shift in time and place between the two
      clauses

subordinate conjunction fragment

      a type of sentence fragment that is caused by an issue with
      a subordinate conjunction

summary

      a way to use your own words to present your own
      information. This method is used for describing an entire
      source. This means that you will focus only on main ideas
      and not go into details.

targeted (hybrid) résumé

      a résumé format that includes, both, a well-developed
      "Skills and Achievements" section that highlights a
      candidates most relevant skills and includes bullet points
      under each job in the "Employment Experience" section

team chat applications

      a program, such as Slack or Microsoft Teams, that
      companies use to promote efficient communication across
      their workforce

technical communication

      any communication on a specialized, technical topic

thank you note

      a brief note that thanks the interviewers for meeting with

676 | Glossary
you. It should also express your continued interest in the
position, reference something specific from the
conversation, and remind them of your qualifications

the advertiser's stance

a rhetorical corruption that occurs when the speaker or
writer undervalues the subject of the message and focuses
more on the effect of the message

the entertainer's stance

a rhetorical corruption that occurs when the speaker or
writer undervalues establishing their credibility to an
audience

the pedant's stance

a rhetorical corruption that occurs when the speaker or
writer underplays the relationship of the speaker to the
audience

the rhetorical triangle

a communication model that states the elements of

communication--the        speaker,  audience,  and

message--are related to each of the others, showing that

communication is a complex, dynamic system

tone

the attitude of a communicator toward the message being
delivered and/or the audience receiving the message

transactional

types of communication that are highly designed to create
a purposeful exchange between the sender and receiver of
a message

                                    Glossary | 677
transition words

      words that are used to connect words, phrases, or
      sentences. Examples include: as a matter of fact,
      moreover, in other words, and as a result
verb

      a word that conveys the action or state of being in a
      sentence
verb tenses

      grammatical ways of altering verbs to show when a person
      does something, or when something existed or happened
verbal delivery

      using your voice to communicate a message through
      projection, vocal enunciation and punctuation, pace and
      rate, and vocal pauses
verbal feedback

      a type of feedback where you ask specifics types of
      questions to help guide the speaker. These include open-
      ended questions, clarifying questions, and questions that
      confirm understanding
visual delivery

      the way you use elements of nonverbal
      communication--eye contact, facial expressions, attire, and
      movement--to communicate your message
Vocal enunciation

      a speaking technique where words are pronounced

678 | Glossary
      correctly and expressed in such a way that it draws in the
      audience
vocal pauses
      a strategic pause during a presentation that gives your
      audience a chance to fully understand what has been said
written report
      a type of report where a person uses writing to relay
      information

                                                                                    Glossary | 679
About the Authors

This text could not be created without the support and
feedback from a number of people and groups, including:

  · the Gwenna Moss Centre for Teaching and Learning with
      Heather Ross, Stryker Calvez, and Aditi Garg

  · Julie Maier and the Distance Education Unit
  · Dayne Gawley
  · and the College of Engineering

Finally, the content in the text was created through a
combination of existing OER texts and original content by the
following authors:

   Rebekah Bennetch coordinates RCM 200: Effective
Professional Communication and teaches several upper-year
technical communication courses for the Ron and Jane
Graham School of Professional Development in the College of
Engineering. She holds an MA in Interdisciplinary Studies, an
MEd in Educational Technology and Design, and is pursuing
a PhD in Education. She's also a mom to a teenager and a
cat, and originally hails from Savannah, Georgia on the land of
the Yamassee, Muscogee, and Creek Peoples.

   Corey Owen holds an MA in English, an MA in Classics, and
a PhD in English. Since 2007, he has been a faculty member
in the Ron and Jane Graham Centre for the Study of
Communication (now known as the Ron and Jane Graham
School of Professional Development), where he teaches
introductory and advanced courses in rhetoric and
communication.

   Zachary Keesey is an educator and author. He holds a
Masters of Education in Teaching and a Masters of Fine Arts
in Writing. He has taught in K-12 and university settings in

680 | About the Authors
the United States, Canada, and Japan with an emphasis on
designing supports for English Language Learners and
international students. He is originally from Gladstone, Oregon,
the traditional lands of the Molalla and Clackamas Peoples.

                                                                     About the Authors | 681
