Introduction to Narrative Journalism
      Introduction to
  Narrative Journalism

           Real Stories, Artfully Told

       BENJAMIN WIELECHOWSKI

       SKYLER ANDERSON; FAITH
BILLINGER; ALLEN DILLARD; JENNA

     ELDER; MATTHEW JOHNSON;
       SHAZA MAATOUK; PATRICK

    MASELL; BROOKE MADGWICK;
    AUTUMN TASHMAN; MADELYN
 VASBINDER; AND ZEENA WHAYEB

                     UM-DEARBORN OPEN EDUCATION
                                       DEARBORN, MI
Introduction to Narrative Journalism Copyright © 2021 by Benjamin
Wielechowski is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.
Contents

Acknowledgements                 vii

Table of Contents                viii

Introduction                     1

Part I. Main Body

1. Ethics                        3

2. Research                      8

3. The Five Elements of Fiction  13

4. Theme                         22

5. Character                     31

6. Setting                       53

7. Plot                          57

8. Point of View                 72

9. Digital Storytelling          83

Glossary                         89
Acknowledgements

This textbook would not have been possible without the
support from the following:

   Thank you to the UM-Dearborn OER Task Force for the
support and funding made possible through the 2020 grant
award. This includes Holly Sorscher, Associate Director,
Mardigian Library (Chair), Alfonso Sintjago - Instructional
Designer (Member), Antonios Koumpias, Assistant Professor of
Economics (Member), Autumm Caines, Instructional Designer
(Member), Christopher Casey, University Coordinator of Digital
Education (Member), Raya Samet, Education, Health & Human
Services Librarian (Member), and Sophia McFadden-
Keesling, First Year Experience Librarian (Member).

   I'd like to give an extra special thanks to Raya Samet and
Autumm Caines for their consistent guidance and support
throughout the process of creating this book. You provided
encouragement and clarity at crucial points in the process, and
though at a times a solitary process, it didn't always feel like
one.

   I also want to thank my former students who so graciously
contributed their work to this textbook. This includes Shaza
Maatouk, Madelyn Vasbinder, Matthew Johnson, Zeena
Whayeb, Patrick Masell, Allen Dillard, Jenna Elder, Autumn
Tashman, Brooke Madgwick, and Faith Billinger. Your
exemplary work has always been the best pedagogical tools for
me as a teacher, and without your work, this text couldn't exist.

   Finally, I'd like to thank my partner, Holly, my son, Felix, and
my dog, Murphy, for granting me the time and space to
complete the text, even if it meant less `make-believe' time and
fewer evening walks.

                                                                     Acknowledgements | vii
Table of Contents

Acknowledgements
   Introduction
   Chapter 1: Ethics
   Chapter 2: Research
   Chapter 3: The Five Elements of Fiction
   Chapter 4: Theme
   Chapter 5: Character
   Chapter 6: Setting
   Chapter 7: Plot
   Chapter 8: Point of View
   Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling
   Glossary

viii | Table of Contents
Introduction

                "We tell ourselves stories in order to live."
                                      - Joan Didion

Welcome to Narrative Journalism! While this genre/craft/form
of art goes by many names (i.e. Creative Nonfiction, Narrative
Nonfiction, Literary Nonfiction, New Journalism, etc.), narrative
journalism is most simply defined as the following: storytelling
(narrative) through the use of primary and secondary research
(journalism). Narrative journalism is ALWAYS concerned with
nonfiction writing (true stories!), but what sets narrative
journalism apart from say, history or news journalism, is that
narrative journalism is hyper-focused on the craft of the story,
often relying on literary techniques more often found in fiction
writing. As a framework, these literary techniques will be
explored through the five elements of fiction: theme,
character, setting, plot, and point of view.

   This textbook is largely organized around these five elements
of fiction, though the first couple of chapters are concerned
with foundational journalism concepts, including Ethics
(Chapter 1) and Research (Chapter 2). Following these chapters
on journalism basics, we then delve into what uniquely defines
narrative journalism from other forms of journalism. Not only
do the elements of fiction create some structure for the
textbook, but we will also work through and explore a
sequence of projects that engages with these various elements
in creative and informative ways.

   One of the most useful aspects of this text is the abundance
of student examples featured within, examples that showcase
the different projects and elements of fiction through inventive

                                                                                  Introduction | 1
and instructive ways. I've added commentary throughout each
example to supplement the more explicit instruction found in
each chapter.

   As we set off on this journey into the world of narrative
journalism and just how we integrate literary techniques into
our journalistic endeavors, there are a few key terms of be
mindful of as they will be referred to regularly throughout the
text:

   Primary Research
   Secondary Research
   Angle
   Scope

2 | Introduction
1. Ethics

 "If I were to offer any advice to young writers, it would be this:
    be discriminating and be discerning about the work you
    set for yourself. That done, be the untutored traveler, the
   eager reader, the enthusiastic listener. Put what you learn

  together carefully, and then write thoughtfully, with respect
                  both for the reader and your sources."
                                      - Barry Lopez

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To fully understand the four obligations that a
             narrative journalist must navigate and how that
             informs their work.
          · To draw connections between these obligations
             and the concept of `purpose' as it relates to a
             narrative journalist and their work.

This book begins with a chapter on ethics, because ethics
should be a foundation of all that we do as narrative journalists.

   Ethics are ALWAYS a concern and consideration for
journalists, not least for narrative journalists. However, as much
as we are concerned with ethical issues such as disclosure, on

                                                                            Chapter 1: Ethics | 3
and off the record, manipulating facts/quotes to fit our story,
"fake news," and more, one of the most important ethical
concerns for a narrative journalist comes down to what our
`purpose' is for a story, how we realize that purpose, and what
`ethically-suspect' actions we might take in service of that
purpose.

   Jacqui Banaszynski and Fernanda Santos explain it best in
their panel discussion at the 2021 Power of Narrative
Conference held at Boston University. Banaszynski explains the
obligations we have as journalists: obligations to the profession,
obligations to the story subject(s), obligations to the readers,
and obligations to the truth ("or as close as we can get to it" -
Jacqui Banaszynski).

   The full discussion can be found below:

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://oer.pressbooks.pub/
        narrativejournalism/?p=5#oembed-1

   Let's unpack these relationships further as they relate to
ethics and our "purpose" for our stories. And, it is important
to notice that Banaszynski does not mention anything about
prioritizing what the journalist wants.

  · Obligations to the profession: we as journalists represent
      journalists everywhere, and when one of us makes self-
      serving or suspect decisions ethically, it harms the entire
      profession. If Donald Trump and his obsession with the
      phrase "fake news" has taught us anything, it is that the
      journalism profession has no status or influence without

4 | Chapter 1: Ethics
   the trust of the people, and so we must be that much
   better, that much more honest and transparent and
   thorough and humble, because there are forces working
   against us. Regardless of what we want of our stories, our
   obligations remain with the four-way relationship
   Banaszynski described above.
· Obligations to the story subjects: Fernanda Santos points
   out an essential truth when it comes to reporting on our
   story subjects:

   "I say [to my story subjects], look, you have the power
   because it's your story that I'm trying to tell. Help me tell
   your story. And I'll always say, if there's anything I'm not
   asking you, if there is anything you want to show me, that
   you're embarrassed [of], please help me understand your
   world. Don't paint a rosy picture if it's not rosy. I really want
   to understand, because unless other people understand,
   there is never going to be anything done to help improve
   your life... but if I can use my megaphone to tell your story
   to others that is truthful, that is touching, that is poignant,
   that's compelling, then there is a possibility that
   something will happen...[....]"

   Our obligation to our story subjects is to tell their stories.
   We are storytellers at our most fundamental level, and as
   Fernanda Santos explains, our job is to tell stories in
   'truthful,' 'touching,' `poignant,' `compelling' ways in order
   to touch our readers, which leads us into the next
   obligation.
· Obligations to our readers: if you are a writer of narrative
   nonfiction, your readers expect to read nonfiction. No

                                                                         Chapter 1: Ethics | 5
      matter how many literary devices we want to incorporate
      or how talented we are at writing nonfiction in a way that
      mirrors fiction, we are still telling true stories, and if we
      break that trust, if we bend our stories to fit what we want
      as writers, than we have broken one of the most
      fundamental relationships we have as writers. In addition,
      as mentioned above, we are nothing without the trust of
      our readers, and what we do as narrative nonfiction
      writers is of dire importance because there is far too much
      information available, and it is up to us to provide full
      stories, complete stories, insightful stories into the lives of
      those around us.
  · Obligations to the truth: I'm not sure there is too much
      more to be said that hasn't already been covered in the
      three bullet points above, but truth is the great unifier of
      all of them. Truth is what grounds all of the other
      obligations, and we must approach each of those other
      relationships through a lens of truth. Banaszynski clarifies
      "or as close as we can get to it," because truth in
      journalism is not as clearcut as we might like to believe.
      Truth means different things to different people, and our
      story subjects might have a different truth to our readers
      or even to others in our profession, and this can
      complicate things as we strive to reflect truth in our
      writing. But, as with any work of journalism, in the end it
      comes through us, the writer, and the truth we see
      emerging from our thorough and tireless research.

The bottom line is this: always be mindful of the four
obligations we have as narrative journalists and shrewdly make
use of our two most valuable tools when it comes to ethics:
honesty and transparency.

   I will end this chapter with a short story about
sensationalism and its potential impact when we do not fully
consider the four-way relationship described above: in Julian

6 | Chapter 1: Ethics
Rubinstein's book, The Holly: Five Bullets, One Gun, and the
Struggle to Save an American Neighborhood, a terrific piece
of narrative journalism, Rubinstein tells the story of Terrance
Roberts, a gang member turned anti-gang activist, while
weaving in the history of gang violence and the police
corruption spurring it on. He tells a complex and nuanced tale
incorporating history, dynamic characters, and an expose that
will make you question what you know and understand about
the `boogeyman of gang violence' out in our streets. In stark
contrast, Rubinstein details a National Geographic docuseries
titled Drugs, Inc., in which one of the episodes focuses on the
Park Hill neighborhood, the location of The Holly and Terrance
Roberts' home. In the book, Terrance recounts his experience,
one in which he advocated for his `camo movement,' an anti-
gang effort, and he brought in some of the young Bloods to
demonstrate the power of the movement and to illustrate that
change is possible if the socioeconomic conditions could be
addressed. When the episode aired, the Nat. Geo. production
focused solely on the violence and the drugs, sensationalizing
the stereotype, and completely neglecting Terrance Roberts,
the camo movement, and the deeper systemic issues related
to gang violence. This ended up being a catalyst for more
violence in the neighborhood, pulling Terrance Roberts back
into a life he worked so hard to remove himself from.

                                                                            Chapter 1: Ethics | 7
2. Research

    "We can't write the beautiful narrative stories that we all
 dream of unless we can get some things from the mouths of

    our sources. They must be comfortable enough to tell us
anything. In journalism school, no one called the interactions
between journalists and sources relationships, but that's what

                                        they are."
                                   - Isabel Wilkerson

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To learn the difference between primary and
             secondary research, and the function of each as it
             relates to narrative journalism.
          · To understand the various types of primary and
             secondary research, and the tools and skills that
             are available when conducting any form of
             research.

Research is EVERYTHING to a journalist, and though it sounds
cliche, it is entirely true. Not only is research the foundation
of any piece of narrative journalism and almost always drives
the narrative, but it also informs the journalist and keeps the

8 | Chapter 2: Research
journalist honest. Regardless of the journalist's hopes or
expectations for a story, the research is the most important
piece, and this means the journalist has to listen to the research
and follow the research.

   For the sake of ease, we'll define research into two categories:
1.) primary research, and 2.) secondary research.

Primary Research:

Primary research is the research that the journalist acquires
first-hand, be it interviews, surveys, experiments, personal
experience or observation, etc. This research gets us as close
as possible to the source and the "moment" of a story. This is
the sort of research that drives the story in a piece of narrative
journalism.

The Interview:

The interview is the most crucial form of primary research for
a narrative journalist. This is where we can get closest to the
heart of any story, as nearly every story revolves around some
aspect of the human experience, and well, people are, of
course, the key to deepening our understanding the human
experience. The interview is also the most challenging form
of primary research, as it often takes a great deal of work to
set-up and schedule interviews, as well as to document those
interviews, be it with a recording device, note-taking, or some
other method. In addition, meaningful interviews take
time--like a long time--as the quote by Wilkerson attests to.
Your subjects will only be invested in an interview if you are
invested in them--who they are and what they have to say. "To
complete an assignment" or "to ask a few questions" are not
very compelling reasons for a story subject to open up to you.

                                                                      Chapter 2: Research | 9
   Because of the complexity of the interview format and the
many factors that determine what is a "good" or "bad"
interview, there is really no right way to conduct an interview.
My advice is to find your feet by doing. Some basics, however,
are as follows:

   1.) Yes/No questions are not helpful.
   2.) Silences are okay, even good at times (they often lead to
our subjects revealing more).
   3.) While prep questions can be helpful, don't be afraid to
follow the conversation (adhering to a reformatted script will
hinder the flow).
   4.) The best "interviews" don't feel like interviews at all, but
rather like conversations with close friends.

Surveys:

Surveys can be incredibly valuable as a way to gauge public
opinion on anything. This can be as simple as a shared
experience on a college campus, or something as complex as
public policy and the impact on a certain neighborhood. With
the prevalence of social media, surveys can be conducted
remotely with ease, and this is an excellent method to get a
`sense' of an issue's impact on groups of people.

Experiments:

While experiments often bring to mind laboratories and
research in the sciences, experiments can also be invaluable
to narrative journalists. For a journalist, experiments can be
anything that the journalist partakes in to understand
something on a more immediate, personal level. For example,
I spent my first semester of graduate school experimenting
with garbage waste production. My roommates and I had a
competition of who could go the longest without creating a

10 | Chapter 2: Research
single item of garbage (i.e. something that couldn't be recycled
or composted). This 'experiment' taught me an incredible
amount about the drawbacks of our consumer culture and
how much time and effort it takes to actually lessen our impact
on the systems of waste disposal. I don't believe I could have
learned any of that information, or at least not in the same way,
without actually experimenting.

Personal Observation:

This might seem obvious having explored the various primary
sources available to us, but your personal experience and
observations can and should be drawn upon as you craft your
stories. Not only does this apply to lived experience, but your
own photographs, your video footage, and any other
documentation of your first-hand experience helps to bring
your readers into a story.

Secondary Research:

Secondary research is research that is acquired through
previous publications, whether they be articles, books,
databases, reviews, etc. This sort of research can be found in
libraries, on the web, or any other place one might look for
previously published work. This is the sort of research used to
provide context surrounding the main storyline.

Library Resources:

Though it should go without saying, libraries are some of the
best resources any journalist or researcher have available to
them. Not only is there an abundance of sources in libraries,
free of charge, but there are experts in libraries whose sole

                                                                      Chapter 2: Research | 11
job is to help you research more effectively. Seek out these
resources!

Web Resources:

As everything seems to move online, so do our library
resources, and everything that was once available in libraries
can now be accessed from your home, as long as you have a
computer and internet connectivity. While the `great big web'
can be equally productive and counterproductive, it is often a
good place to start your research, as a quick google search or
database visit can provide a lot of direction.

Archives:

This is, in my opinion, the unsung hero of secondary sources.
Historical archives are available, and though they often take
more time and effort to locate and gain access to, the
documents cataloged in archives are some of the most
treasured pieces of research you will ever find. You can seek out
actual physical archives in museums, etc., or you can visit the
places of interest that have physical records--for example, tax
records at your local township. If you like a good treasure hunt,
archives might just be itch you've been waiting to scratch.

   Both forms of research are essential to any piece of narrative
journalism. Without the primary, the narrative suffers; without
the secondary, the narrative can seem flimsy or superficial.
Context is crucial for the reader to fully understand the angle
and scope of a piece (see Chapter 4 for more on this).

12 | Chapter 2: Research
3. The Five Elements of
Fiction

                         "We are all born storytellers."
                                  - Fernanda Santos

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To develop a basic understanding of the five
             elements of fiction.
          · To foster a deeper appreciation for literary
             techniques applied to nonfiction work.

   I often begin a course of Narrative Journalism with the
question: What "elements" must all stories have for them to
be 'stories'? What follows is a cascade of student responses
that touch on character, setting, meaning and theme, conflict
and events and terms used to describe the plot or story arc.
And indeed, all stories must be about someone or something,
and this someone or something will exist in some sort of
environment, whether that be a concrete or abstract place.
And yes, all stories should have meaning, and meaning that

                                                    Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction | 13
we can connect with as human beings. Even with characters
situated in a place, there must also be things happening (or
deliberately not happening) to someone or something for any
story to progress. The fifth element of fiction is more related
to craft and technique rather than content, and while it is
celebrated in fiction writing, it is equally useful in creative
nonfiction--that element is point of view.

   While Creative Writing scholars are not always in agreement
about the elements of fiction, general consensus outlines five
essential elements that feature in all stories: they are 1.) Theme,
2.) Character, 3.) Setting, 4.) Plot, and 5.) Point of View.

Theme:

As described at the beginning of this chapter, we read stories
to see ourselves revealed in them, to find meaning in them
through a character's trials and tribulations. While much
depends on the individual reader, a writer creates characters,
places them in particular places, chooses a point of view (or
more), and organizes events in a certain way in order to teach
us something or show us something that means something.
While theme often describes broad concepts like love or honor
or vengeance or solidarity, most stories also carry with them
a message, a more specific statement about the theme or
themes. Without meaning, stories are forgettable. Meaning
gives stories true life.

Character:

Character is perhaps the most important element of fiction, as
things must happen to someone or something in order for a
story to progress. Not only is this crucial for story development,

14 | Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction
but as human beings, we read stories and enjoy stories
because we can see ourselves in them, often through the
characters. In order to understand this element of "character,"
and how we as narrative journalists can more deliberately craft
our stories, there are a few keywords that should be defined
further:

Protagonist:

The protagonist is your main character, your lead, the character
the story revolves around. Think Harry Potter or Anne of Green
Gables or Pee Wee Herman or the Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.

Antagonist:

The antagonist is your `villain,' the character who often creates
the most strife and struggle for the protagonist. While
nonfiction doesn't always include characters that fulfill certain
`roles,' it is important to think about relationships between
characters, particularly relationships between your story
subject (your protagonist) and others, whether they be central
or peripheral characters.

Round vs. Flat Characters

Round versus Flat are terms used to describe character
development. Round characters are fully developed, `human'
characters, full of complexity and nuance. They have the
capacity for the full range of human emotion, and they are
capable of both right and wrong. Think Ted Lasso or Cersei
Lannister from Game of Thrones. Flat characters are typically
one-dimensional. They are stereotypes, essentially. Think
Voldemort from Harry Potter, or Mr. Belding from Saved by the
Bell.

                                                    Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction | 15
Static vs. Dynamic Characters

Static versus Dynamic are also terms used to describe
character development. Static characters are characters who
do not experience any sort of change throughout the story.
Dynamic characters do experience change, often profound
change, and this can be physical, mental, emotional, or
spiritual. While there is space for both static and dynamic
characters in stories (based on what the characters represent
within the story), readers connect better with dynamic
characters.

Setting:

As important as characters are, characters are both influenced
by and hold influence over the places they inhabit and visit.
In addition, the sequence of events (discussed in the next
element below) are inextricably linked to "place." All that being
said, "place" and "setting" deserve further description and
definition:

Place:

When setting is concerned, there is a spectrum of both place
and time. Place encompasses geographical location, of course,
but also everything that plays a part of that mosaic. The people,
the culture, the community, the politics, the weather, the
physical landscape, the weather, the flora and fauna, all of it
contributes to what a place is and how the characters interact
with it. Think about a story taking place in the Arctic Circle
versus a story on a remote desert island. Think about your
hometown versus New York City or a small town out in rural

16 | Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction
Tennessee. Place matters for more reasons than simple
geography.

Time:

Likewise, time must be defined on a spectrum. Time can mean
literal time of day, the season, the era, and all of these
deviations of time will impact the characters and the story
monumentally. Think about stories set at night versus in the
day, summertime stories versus other seasons, stories that take
place during WWII versus science fiction stories of the future.

Plot:

Plot (what I often refer to as narrative design) can be defined
as the sequence of events in which the story plays out, but
on a fundamental level, it encompasses much more than that,
and in order to fully embrace the power of plot from the
perspective of "craft", we must explore those elements. The
traditional western plot structure follows what is called the
inverted checkmark.

                                                                                        Graphic
                                                                                        depiction of
                                                                                        the
                                                                                        inverted
                                                                                        checkmark
                                                                                        plot
                                                                                        structure.

                                                   Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction | 17
The inverted pyramid plot structure follows the classic "hero
quest," where the protagonist experiences struggle and
conflict as the action rises, then the story reaches its tipping
point, or climax, and in the falling action the protagonist
experiences some sort of change, whether physical, mental,
spiritual, etc. Some of the key terms to be aware of are the
following:

Exposition:

Exposition is all the stuff included at the beginning of a story to
provide context. Characters might be introduced. The setting
might be described. Some sort of tension might appear. There
isn't a lot of action in the exposition, but it sets everything up so
that action can begin.

Rising Action:

The rising action is everything that happens leading up to the
climax, including the conflict. This is when all of the tension
builds, conflict rages, and we reach a breaking point in the
story.

Conflict:

The conflict is often defined as the main struggle that the
protagonist experiences. This could be physical, mental,
emotional, spiritual, or a combination of these.

Climax:

The climax of the story is the turning point. This is when the
conflict and tension reach their crescendo and typically the

18 | Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction
most important scene or event takes place. Typically, the story
begins to conclude after the climax.

Falling Action:

The falling action is everything that occurs following the
climax. It takes us out of the story and winds everything down.

Resolution:

The resolution is the conclusion of a story, typically focusing on
some change that the protagonist has experienced.

While we can not invent events or plot points in a piece of
nonfiction, we are in complete control of the narrative design
and how those events are revealed to the audience. Techniques
such as flashback, flash forward, and suspense are all
extremely effective in narrative journalism.

Point of View:

Point of view is perhaps the unsung hero of literary devices.
This element is inherent in any form of storytelling, and while it
doesn't shout out to us and demand our attention as an aspect
of craft because of how natural it is, it impacts everything in
terms of how we experience a story. Below are the different
types of point of view and the impact they can have in a story:

First Person:

First person point of view takes the form of the first person

                                                   Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction | 19
pronoun "I," "me," "we." This point of view is very compelling as
it brings us intimately close to the narrator, and while there is
often a question of the narrator's reliability, first person is very
engaging through its use of tone and voice.

Second Person:

Second person point of view takes the form of the second
person pronoun "you." This is the least commonly used point of
view, though it has its use in "choose your own adventure" style
stories. This point of view puts the reader directly into the story,
but it can often feel inauthentic and contrived.

Third Person:

Third person point of view takes the form of the third person
pronouns, "he," "she," "they." This point of view is one of the
most common, particularly in nonfiction, but it can be broken
down further according to psychic distance from the
characters (listed in order from most psychic distance to least).

  · Objective: Objective 3rd person POV is fully removed from
      the thoughts and feelings of the characters. With 3rd
      person objective, we only hear words and see actions. This
      the traditional point of view for stage plays.

  · Limited (Omniscient): Limited omniscient 3rd person POV
      delves into the thoughts and feelings of one character,
      often the protagonist. With this point of view, we get into
      the psyche of the character.

  · Omniscient: Omniscient 3rd person POV delves into the
      thoughts and feelings of all of the characters. There is no
      psychic distance between the reader and the characters,
      and this point of view can be used to set up dramatic
      irony, where the characters don't understand one another,

20 | Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction
      while the reader has insight into what motivates and
      frustrates each character.

Media Attributions

  · Inverted Checkmark Graphic © Ben Wielechowski is
      licensed under a CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial)
      license

                                                   Chapter 3: 5 Elements of Fiction | 21
4. Theme

"There's a resurgence of narrative in the last few years, [...] and
     maybe that's because we no longer in journalism have

  information as our primary currency [...], so I think what we
       have to do is look more and more for ways to provide
                                       meaning."
                                - Jacqui Banaszynski

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To draw connections between the element of
             fiction, theme, and the strategies and techniques
             available in narrative journalism.
          · To understand the key concepts of `angle' and
             'scope' as they relate to narrative journalism.

As discussed in the previous chapter, oftentimes for us to be
interested in stories, we must be able to find meaning in them.
This can happen in a variety of ways, and considering how
diverse and varied readership is of any piece of fiction or
nonfiction, much of the extracted meaning of a story is
dependent on the individual reader. That is not to say the
journalist doesn't have a role in the "shape" of the meaning. On

22 | Chapter 4: Theme
the contrary, everything the journalist includes in the story will
be for some purpose, and that purpose, though it may shift at
different points in the creation process or even the story itself,
that initial purpose or meaning is what provides the foundation
of meaning for the entire story. This is often referred to as the
"theme" and/or "message."

   The difference between the two, theme and message, is an
important one, however. Theme refers to general ideas about
the human experience: love, jealousy, greed, beauty,
vulnerability, etc. The message is what a writer wants to say
about a particular theme through the vehicle of the story. In
fiction, there are few rules in terms of theme and message and
the author's purpose and manner of conveying that purpose.

In narrative journalism, as has been discussed at length in
Chapter 1: Ethics, we have more to consider than simply what
we, the journalist, want to say and the meaning we want to
impart. That being the case, I use the following two terms to
discuss theme and message as they apply to narrative
journalism: angle and scope.

Angle and Scope:

Angle:

The angle is most simply defined as the journalist's perspective
on the subject/story subject, or what exactly the journalist
wants to communicate. Now this can manifest in a variety of
ways, but as Fernanda Santos explains to her story subjects,
"your story will filter through me, and will be constructed with
other reporting beyond what you tell me, it will be constructed
with who I am, with everything that I have lived, because all
of that also influences the way we approach storytelling, the
way we ask people and how much we listen and how we listen

                                                                        Chapter 4: Theme | 23
and how we put things together." This quote is completely tied
into angle. We decide what information is important enough
to put into a story, we choose the narrative structure, we find
meaning in the stories we report on and in the people within
those stories, and all of that put together influences our
perspective, and that is what we put forth to our readers.

Scope:

Scope refers to the narrative scope of the article. How much
narrative will be woven into your article is an important
consideration because our stories come to life through the
narrative, but we cannot reconstruct entire lives on the page
for our readers. We must choose how much narrative to include
based on what interactions we have with the story subject(s).
The narrative scope should involve the journalist, as that sort
of hands-on reporting is essential in bringing scenes and
characters to life. The scope may differ depending on the
project type and length. A classic character profile might have
a narrative scope of a single meeting. Narrative journalists
working on book length manuscripts might report for years,
and those years of reporting form the narrative scope. For
example, Adrien Nicole LeBlanc spent ten years reporting on a
Puerto Rican family in the Bronx and their struggles in a small
but intricately woven community in her book, Random Family.

   Let's take a look at a couple of student examples and how
they explore these concepts of angle and scope. In the first
example, Shaza Maatouk presents us with a very compelling
Humans of New York style character snapshot with a clear
angle:

     Example 1

24 | Chapter 4: Theme
        Shaza Maatouk

                                                      "A talent is something
                                                   you are born with. A skill
                                                   is something you acquire

                                                        over many years of
                                                     training, practice, and

                                                       hard work. I am not
                                                      talented, I am skilled.
      From a very young age, I knew that I wasn't very book
     smart. I always wanted to enhance the creativity within
       me and take it to a whole new level. After finding out
      that magic was my passion, I decided that I was going
       to become a magician. I didn't know how I was going
      to do it or when that was going to happen but, before I
     knew it, I was a so-called "beginner magician." It's been
       13 years since I performed my first show. Fortunately,
           this journey has taught me several things. Most
         importantly, it taught me how to believe in myself
        more than anyone else. So, hone your craft, do what
               you love, and don't let anything stop you!"

The image and the quote worked perfectly together to
articulate a very specific aspect of the story subject. Shaza
wants to communicate the story subject's passion for magic.
The quote and the image capture this almost obsession for and
devotion to this creative art form.

   In the next example, Madelyn Vasbinder shares a character
sketch of her mother:

                                                                        Chapter 4: Theme | 25
     Example 2

        Madelyn Vasbinder
        COMP 310
        Professor Wielechowski
        7 Feb 2021
        Project 1B Revision
        2007. The basement light was off over her head, just
     the lamp over her desk stayed on, lighting up her work
     space. It saved money in electricity, or so she thought.
     She yawned, moving around the piece of fabric to find
     the right positioning for it before she sewed it on. The
     clock behind her head read 1:24. It wasn't the afternoon.
     She had work in the morning, a paper due after that.
     Dinner to make before that. But for right now, for this
     mid-October evening, she had to sew. Sew little pieces
     of clay onto tulle fabric, sew that tulle fabric onto the
     skirt she'd made two days before. She'd baked the
     pieces of clay yesterday, so they were cured now. On
     her break at work, between bussing tables, she had
     poked small holes into the tops of the clay pieces to
     make it easier to sew them on. Still, she hoped they
     looked like teeth. Who would the Tooth Fairy be
     without teeth?
        Her notes from sociology class were stacked on either
     side of the old sewing machine she'd gotten from her
     grandmother, her mémé. The most recent notes were
     opened in front of her, just next to the sewing machine.

26 | Chapter 4: Theme
She read them as she sewed. She'd gotten home from
class just after 10, cleaned up the mess from the dinner
she hadn't been home to eat, and then began sewing.
MercyMe's I Can Only Imagine played in the
background as she worked. She hadn't even noticed the
time and probably wouldn't until she was done with this
part of the project. That was okay, though. It wasn't for
her anyways. Her daughter wanted to be the Tooth Fairy
for Halloween. And homemade costumes were better.

_  _  _

   2013. 10:45 at night. I'm in bed and I hear the front
door close downstairs. I know who it is because I know
her schedule, so I rush down to the kitchen. Her back is
turned from me, she's wearing a cardigan with her
black, curly hair up in a bun to keep it out of her face.
She probably put it up around noon. She's wearing my
winter boots, we've been the same size now for years
even though I stand 3 inches taller than her at 5 foot 5.
Her bags- filled with books, papers, her work laptop
and her school laptop- are sitting on the kitchen island.
She's sorting through the bags of food and I can smell
the grease from across the room.

"How was class?" I ask her.

   "It was good. Busy, I'll tell you in a minute. What'd you
ask for, again?" She responds.

   I make my way over and grab the fries and milkshake
I'd ordered. She picked it all up on her way home. My
brothers are already sitting at the island eating. I sit
down next to them, picking up fries as I turn to face her.
Like usual, we all sit at the island on one side while she
stands on the other side. We eat as she tells us about

                             Chapter 4: Theme | 27
her day. Getting our youngest brother- who is asleep
upstairs- ready this morning, then work, stopping at her
internship on her lunch break, and finally class in the
evening. We respond with similar summaries of our
days. And we chat like this for about thirty minutes
before each of us slowly makes our way back up to bed.
Starting, of course, with me and my brother who are
both in our low teens. She tells me- years later- that she
never slept right after these conversations, which were
a verycommon occurrence, but instead would clean, do
homework, or do regular work. She was always working
overtime, at work, at home, at school.

_  _                   _

   2021. My mother was a single mother from the time I
was 4. She always worked full time and yet she always
made the time to care for her kids. She was always
there to cook dinner and when she wasn't, she'd
prepare food and leave it in the fridge for my older
siblings to reheat. I never went without, none of my
siblings ever went without. And she always thanked
God.

   Even now, sitting down to interview her for this
project, she reminds me to thank God. Her diplomas,
one from her Bachelor's degree- which she got when I
was still young enough to trick or treat- and the other
from her Master's degree, which she got when I was
old enough to stay up past 10, sit on the shelves above
her desk. We sit at her desk while we speak, as I ask
my questions and as she gives her answers. We've just
finished dinner. She made pasta and made the separate
meal of gluten free pasta for her and I to split (I inherited
Celiac from her, and she will always feel bad for this.

28 | Chapter 4: Theme
Gluten free cookies that she bought me sit next to me
as I write this, I did not ask for them. I got home one
day and she'd set them on my bed as a small surprise,
though she does this at least once a month.). She cooks,
even now, every single night. Or... most nights. I've
convinced her over the years that she doesn't have to
cook for her children every night, that as adults (or
teenagers) we won't starve. She still isn't fully convinced,
and really will only skip cooking if there are leftovers
from something she'd made the night before still sitting
in the fridge. Though there usually aren't.

   And she still sews. She altered some pants for me just
earlier this month. I bought them because they were on
sale, couldn't try them on because the dressing rooms
were closed, and when I got home, she asked to see
them on. She revels in everything her children do, even
to the point of still asking to see all the clothes I buy
myself. So, I tried them on and they were slightly loose.
She had me give them to her and she took in the waist.
She also sews as a hobby, she spends most weekends
in her sewing room (which is our former formal dining
room). For Christmas each year, most everyone gets a
homemade present (homemade is better). This year it
was blankets. Last year it was stockings- custom made
with our names embroidered on the cuff- to hang over
the fireplace.

   She also still works. Full time. But most of us, her
children, are grown up now. My youngest brother, who
is almost a decade younger than I am, is now almost
a teenager. And she has remarried since, to my step
father.

   She's not quite as busy as she once was, and she's

                                                                  Chapter 4: Theme | 29
     no longer in school. But she still is every last bit the
     hardworking mother she has always been, perhaps too
     much, for her own sake. She still loves everything her
     children do. And her children still love everything that
     she does.

Madelyn communicates a very clear angle about her story
subject, which is captured in the final paragraph: her mother
is a remarkably hardworking, devoted mother. What is
particularly effective in this example is Madelyn's use of scope.
While most character profiles revolve around a single
encounter with the story subject, Madelyn has years to draw
from. Yet in order to fully "show" her mother (we'll get into
showing versus telling in the next chapter), Madelyn doesn't
tell her mother's life story, but instead, she focuses on a couple
of rich and vivid scenes that fully immerse us in narrative and
bring her mother to life on the page. This is the power and
beauty of well-crafted narrative scope.

In the next chapter, we'll go into more detail about the
interconnectedness of angle and scope with showing versus
telling. Angle and scope, with the help of showing (and telling
when necessary), are instrumental in the craft of narrative
journalism.

Media Attributions

  · Portrait © Shaza Maatouk is licensed under a CC BY
      (Attribution) license

30 | Chapter 4: Theme
5. Character

    "To develop a character--whether a kid whose trip to the
      wrong place triggered social change or an important

    historical figure--we do two things: explore the subject's
  complexity, and present that complexity through a series of

                                      revelations"
                                    - Stanley Nelson

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To develop a better understanding of the
             character profile and the function of character as
             a literary technique in narrative journalism.
          · To appreciate the difference between "showing"
             and "telling," while developing a deeper
             understanding of when and how to use the
             techniques.

While chapter 3 went into detail about how we describe the
element of "character," there is still the matter of how we use
it in narrative journalism. For me, the best investigation of this
element is through the character sketch or character profile.
The character profile is one of the most common and

                                                                    Chapter 5: Character | 31
compelling forms of narrative journalism, and it should be no
surprise, as human subjects are inherently interesting to us as
humans.

   Some of the best character profiles I've ever come across,
which are really character profile vignettes, are artfully curated
and crafted by photographer, Brandon Stanton, in his Humans
of New York series.

                    One or more interactive elements has been
                    excluded from this version of the text. You can
        view them online here: https://oer.pressbooks.pub/
        narrativejournalism/?p=31#oembed-1

Brandon began his project photographing random strangers
on the streets of New York, and posting these portraits with a
short quote or two. The underlying concept: All humans have
a story to tell. This concept developed into what is now an
international blog with numerous bestselling books.

   The reason I find these character profiles so compelling and
instructive is that they rely entirely on the element of character.
These profiles are minimalistic: originally, they contained a
single image and a quote from the subject. That was all. All
of the human subjects were encapsulated in the following:
physical features, surrounding, content of the quote, and
manner of speaking. This is the epitome of "showing" as a
narrative device.

Showing vs. Telling

The beauty of the "Humans of New York" form lies in its reliance
on "showing" instead of "telling." While the photographer
chooses the photo and the quote to include, the subject is

32 | Chapter 5: Character
clearly and plainly presented. And yet we come away with this
deep and profound understanding of who these people are,
their "essence," and we come away with a deeper connection
to our shared humanity.

   Let's take a look at a couple of student examples:

     Example 1

        Matthew Johnson
        Professor Wielechowski
        Composition 310
        23 January 2021

                                                       "For me, the software
                                                   development path stems

                                                     back to eighth grade,
                                                   actually. I always wanted
                                                   to make a video game. [I]
                                                    was interested in game
                                                   development and seeing
         what went into that field of work. So, I would be at
        home looking up game design, trying to see how to
              make characters, add textures to characters,
         animations to characters, and then I [finally] asked
      myself: "How is this character going to know to move?"
         That introduced me to code right then and there. I
     liked just being able to type something out on a screen,
                    and then watch it do as I expected."

                                                                    Chapter 5: Character | 33
While Matt simply presents an image and quote from the story
subject, not only do we understand what motivates this story
subject, but we also get some backstory, and we come away
feeling a connection to the story subject. This is effective
storytelling.

     Example 2

        Zeena Whayeb
        Project 1A

         "With baking, there's a
         lot of science to it. In
       America, they don't do

            this enough, but
           you're technically
          supposed to go by
      weight. When we made
            the dough here,

             everything was
     weighed. When I first started, it used to be by cups, and

       that's more of a volume kind of thing. And let me tell
     you, that's very inconsistent because how you scoop up
     flour can affect your end product. So, I switched over to

         weight, and I felt it's a lot easier, too, because now
     when I develop a new cookie recipe, I can just decrease

        the weight--the grams of flour--and up something
          else. There has to be a balance between your dry
                   ingredients and wet ingredients, too."

34 | Chapter 5: Character
While Zeena presents the story subject almost matter-of-factly
with this quote about baking, there is much more
communicated through this short profile. There is an allusion
to personal history, and there is humor and passion tucked
neatly within the quote. Like in the previous example, we come
away feeling connected to this story subject.

   In both examples, there is no commentary from the authors
of the text, and so, the only techniques available are to "show,"
and to show exclusively through your story subject--their
physical attributes, their facial expressions, their fashion, their
environment, their words, their manner of speaking. This is a
lesson in purely "showing" your story subject. Concrete detail,
rich description, scene, and dialogue are all terrific techniques
used in order to "show" your story subject in longer pieces of
narrative journalism.

   With all of the focus on "showing," this is not to say that
the technique of "telling" should be avoided, because it too has
its place within narrative journalism. At times "telling" can get
us from point A to B, while "showing" should be used to fully
immerse us in character and scene. When considering how
much "telling" to include, we must be discerning with amount,
as too much of it can feel overbearing and patronizing to your
reader.

 Character Profiles:

   A traditional character sketch or profile should achieve the
same result as a Humans of New York profile. However, the
narrative journalist has more time and opportunity to "show"
their subject. Considerations of angle and scope will come into
play (see chapter 4), but more than that, the narrative journalist
must decide just how to show their subject (and what balance
of "telling" might be required). How do we tap into someone's
essence? Yes, physical attributes and fashion and visual cues
are very telling about a person. Behavior, mannerisms, ways
of speaking, are also very telling. A person's relationships, their
backstory, their interests, passions, talents, etc., they all matter

                                                                    Chapter 5: Character | 35
and mean something about who a person is. So what does a
narrative journalist choose?

   Character Profiles are not biographies, and the more
backstory and history you try to pack into a profile, often the
more distance we feel from the subject. Conversely, the smaller
the narrative scope of the profile, the more focused our
"viewing" of the subject is, often the sharper that focus is. And
the effect of this is the story subjects come to life off of the
page, as the following student examples illustrate:

     Example 1

        Matthew Johnson
        Professor Wielechowski
        Composition 310
        27 January 2021

                  The Software Developer with No Degree
        Raymond had an interest in video game
     development since the eighth grade. He would race
     home from school, eager to open up Blender, and
     begin crafting 3D models of weapons and characters
     with the television on silent in the background. As a
     child he took great pleasure in playing a variety of
     games, from platformers like Sonic the Hedgehog,
     action like Grand Theft Auto, and almost the entire Call
     of Duty franchise, so developing games seemed like
     the next best thing. He even planned on attending
     college for 3D modeling and design so that one day,
     he could see his titles on the store shelves. However,

36 | Chapter 5: Character
Raymond's dream of creating his childhood delicacies
for the masses came to a screeching halt as he asked
himself "How will these characters know to move?" An
answer he would find in the field of software
development.

   You see, video game characters cannot move without
code, and coding was an exercise that intrigued
Raymond. His new favorite hobby in high school was to
open up Visual Studio, and create basic programs and
websites, of course, with the television on silent in
the background. He enjoyed solving technical
problems, so much so that he even said "I liked
just being able to type something out on a screen, and
then watch it do as I expected," as if he was a master of
the trade. One could say that Raymond bit off a bit
more than he could chew, as after he graduated from
high school, he attended College of Creative Studies
(CCS) to get his hands dirty in another skill, graphic
design.

   While he intended to learn another skill to be
versatile in the job market, Raymond found his stay at
CCS to be bland and unfulfilling. He created posters,
critiqued typography, and made flyers. Although he
knew his efforts were solving problems, he wasn't
solving the technical problems that he had a passion
for. Not to mention, CCS was expensive, costing
$25,000 annually for tuition and housing. He may have
had a scholarship to go there, but from every angle,
Raymond could tell that path he'd chosen wasn't worth
the money. And so, humbled by his own ambitions, he
came back home, got a part-time job at Chipotle, and
resumed coding.

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 37
        Despite the fact that Raymond was not in a position
     to return to school, he never thought that lacking a
     college degree would prevent him from getting a job
     in software development. "Quite frankly we're living in
     a time where more fields are being considered as
     trades and employers are worried about moving fast
     and just hiring the right person to get the job
     done. [This] took a great deal of stress off of me when I
     decided to [take] the route that I did."

        Nevertheless, Raymond spent the majority of his free
     time building a portfolio that would allow him to stand
     out from his collegiate peers. Over the span of nine
     months, he taught himself to code, and created a
     variety of websites (which utilized relevant
     technologies, and demonstrated his knowledge of data
     structures and algorithms). At one point, Raymond
     even considered traveling down to Utah to enroll in
     DevMountain, just to gain some type of certificate, but
     due to his wealth of knowledge in the subject, the
     teaching assistant denied him access to the bootcamp.

        While Raymond exhibited the technical skills
     necessary to get a job as a software developer,
     interpersonal skills were just as important, and his past
     experiences lent a hand establishing those. During
     Raymond's time at Chipotle, he was promoted from a
     team member to a kitchen manager, which improved
     his leadership skills. "Once I became a kitchen
     manager, I learned how to work under pressure, and
     how to mentor my peers. In software
     development, being able to communicate why one
     solution is better in the long term than another is a key
     skill to have." Additionally, Raymond's various jobs as a

38 | Chapter 5: Character
landscaper helped him to serve customers in the best,
and most efficient way possible. "When you're coding,
you're not only considering application speed, but also
trying to ensure that the client gets the most
functionality out of your program."

   With a combination of technical and soft skills, the
only thing Raymond had to do was get an interview.
After traveling to multiple networking events, and
getting in touch with several hiring managers, he
finally received a call from Red Ventures Detroit. Due to
his outstanding portfolio of work, and his desirable
interpersonal nature, Raymond was hired on as a
software developer with a starting salary of $85,000. At
last, he acquired his dream job.

   In his new position, Raymond gets satisfaction from
the instant feedback he gets while building
applications. He can solve complex problems in a few
keystrokes, without having to carry the intense weight
that similar engineers face on a daily basis. "On a bad
day, I can afford to be messy where other types of
engineers can't. I have the luxury to just mash random
buttons into my terminal, and run test cases against a
set of sample data to see if I get the
expected outcome." However, Raymond understands
that there is great responsibility required
when completing his job, as he deals with sensitive
customer information. "There's a great deal of trust [the
customer] is making with our company and that trust
is not meant to be broken."

   Upon inquiring if there was anything Raymond
would have done differently, he said no. He still wishes
to pursue a degree in Computer Science, just to have

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 39
     the knowledge. However, Raymond emphasized the
     importance of specializing in one thing, and being the
     best at it. He says, "Instead of being a jack-of-all-trades,
     master of nothing, you should take one skill that
     you enjoy, master it, and that will propel you in your
     career." Following this advice is what got him as far as
     he has today.

        Currently, Raymond works at StockX, ensuring that
     people are able to get their hands on sought after
     goods that are authentically verified.

Matt paints a broader, more detailed picture of the story
subject in this traditional character profile, and he relies on
a balance of "showing" and "telling." The entire framework of
the profile utilizes "telling" and summary as Matt touches on
some major points in Raymond's life, but this interspersed with
direct quotes brings us into the narrative, as well as bringing
Raymond to life on the page.

   The next example by Zeena Whayeb takes a slightly different
approach:

     Example 2

        Zeena Whayeb
        Professor Wielechowski
        Project 1B
        01 February 2021

40 | Chapter 5: Character
                           Sara Treats You Batter
   I entered the small bakery. A caramel latte scent
diffused from a short cylindrical candle into the warm,
cozy shop; the soft ambiance complemented the
sweetness in the air. An aesthetic arrangement of
cookies lined the counter, from the famous s'mores to
the classic chocolate chip. I glanced to my left and was
met with the large painted sign of the Detroit skyline
atop a cookie. Above this logo were the words "Treat
You Batter," a clever play on words Sara came up with
from the Shawn Mendez song, "Treat You Better."
   I met Sara's oldest brother, Mohammed, behind the
cash register and ordered their newest drink: the iced
mocha latte. Sara then entered through the back
double doors and stood behind the curved glass
counter, wearing her blue mask. Her floral hijab
wrapped around her head neatly, and her eyes happily
greeted me as she immediately went to make the iced
coffee.
   "I want you to tell me your honest opinion," she
requested as she began mixing and pouring. Her
second older brother, Ali, then came to help make the
coffee, while she took a new customer's order. "I told
her to tell us her honest feedback," she said to her
brother as she moved away. Ali nodded in
understanding and finished preparing the drink. After
handing it to me, the pair of siblings watched me
carefully as I took a sip. The flow of the iced coffee, with
a tinge of bitterness and sweetness, made me sigh
happily.

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 41
        "It's really good," I reported honestly. "I like it better
     than the caramel one."

        "Would you say it needs more sugar? My friend
     tasted it yesterday and told me to make it sweeter," Ali
     said with uncertainty.

        "No, no, I think it's good."
        The siblings then spoke hastily about whether they
     should add more sugar. Sara and I seemed to like the
     way it was, but her brother was the perfectionist of the
     family. Sara told me that he spent a month perfecting
     their cuban latte drink.
        "But you can taste the coffee," Ali said, still unsure.
     Sara immediately reminded, "But it's an iced coffee .
     You're supposed to taste it."
        "People don't really like that," he shrugged.
        "There are those who do." Sara countered, and I
     nodded, sipping the coffee happily under my mask.
        A few weeks ago, I was introduced to the bakery's
     chocolate chip cookies. From then on, I became their
     regular customer. The business has been growing in
     popularity, and they've received coverage from
     multiple media stations. One morning, I took the
     opportunity to sit down with Sara and learn more
     about her and her family's business. She was reluctant
     to tell me about herself because she felt her older
     brother, Ali, had more of a story to tell. However, I
     assured her that she had one to tell, as well.
        Sara, a Muslim woman in her late 20s, has always
     liked baking, and she always sought new recipes to try.
     Soon, she began to make her own recipes. She explains,

42 | Chapter 5: Character
"I remember always trying to figure out a really good
chocolate chip recipe. I tried a bunch [of times] with
brown butter, soft butter, whatever butter. Then, I
found one that was closest to what I wanted it to be."
Her younger brother, Abdullah, shared the idea of
selling their cookies on Instagram. When the demand
for their cookies continued to grow, the four siblings
found it difficult to bake and carry out the orders in
their small kitchen. This is when they took the grand
step to open up their own bakery.

   However, this was no easy decision for Sara. At the
time, she had been working at Volkswagen for six years,
and she was definitely no risk-taker, describing herself
as "a play-it-safe, stay-in-my-lane person." The decision
did eventually become clear when she noticed herself
losing motivation, forcing her to contemplate if the
corporate life was truly for her. "I like to say that I went
through some type of quarter life crisis," she
reminisces. "I really loved [working there] initially
because it's a great place to work, but when you work
corporate, your goal is to be promoted or find a better
job and eventually work towards retirement. During my
fourth year, I was getting very lethargic with the work,
and for me, I feel really guilty if I'm not motivated to do
something." She realized she will not be able to
continue this type of work until her senior years,
explaining that if this isn't the life for her, then "what's
my purpose of just kind of doing it?"

   After Sara was on board, the siblings began looking
for several places, and they decided on a space Sara
describes as a "white box," meaning it was completely
empty of any design or interior walls: "There was

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 43
     nothing here," she says, gesturing to the wall
     separating the front from the kitchen. "You build these
     walls, and you design everything," This complete
     control over the customization of the interior space
     attracted their attention, and they got the space.

        Their excitement was immeasurable. However, the
     work necessary to open one's business always turns out
     to be more than anticipated. Sara encountered a major
     issue merely a few days before the bakery's grand
     opening: she couldn't bake the cookies. "I've never used
     a commercial oven before," Sara explains. "We got
     these trays that were basically almost end to end
     within the oven. A week before, I would test bake, and I
     kept testing every day. Every time, the cookies look fine
     from the outside, but when you break it open, it's
     straight raw." Anxiety settled uncomfortably on the
     siblings as they tried to figure out the problem. Their
     main baker, Sara, was at a total loss. Having little time
     left, they pondered if they should make the cookies at
     home and then drive them to the shop. However, this
     idea was quickly dismissed; it simply wasn't feasible.

        Sara began researching extensively and stumbled
     upon a forum that instructed them to use a smaller
     pan. Having tried everything else, she immediately
     gave it a try. "The initial tray was too large. So, the
     circulation of the heat in the oven was not evenly
     distributed. When we used the half sheet trays, it
     worked!"

        Having overcome this obstacle, Sara and her three
     brothers finally opened the bakery in early March--a
     couple of days before COVID-19 caused a lockdown
     order in Michigan. The rising concern of the pandemic

44 | Chapter 5: Character
did not deter the siblings from trudging forward. Sara
referenced her brother's words, "My brother said when
you go into business, you expect a lot of things, you
have to set yourself up for failure and disappointment."
She then continues jokingly, "But you set yourself up
for a lot of things, you just never expected a pandemic
to hit..."

   The family noticed the gradual decline of their
customers, and when the cases surged, they closed
their storefront. Instead, they focused on deliveries.
Weeks later, they changed to curbside pickup. Weeks
after that, they opened the storefront back up.
However, Sara explains that those weeks after the
opening were crucial to building a customer base and
utilizing the hype from the community. Because the
initial hype was cut short, building a customer base
and spreading the word took longer than it usually
would. "It's fine, though," Sara says, showing her
resilience, "We've learned a lot through the process,
and adapting is the biggest thing."

   Maintaining the bakery has been a lot of work, and
Sara admits to me that it can sometimes be
exhausting. However, she finds it very fulfilling and
expresses her joy at working with her family: "I think it's
easier for sure to work with family. When there are any
arguments, you can be more straight up about things."
In the bakery, Sara takes on the baking portion and
most of the financial aspect, where she utilizes her
math degree from the University of Michigan-
Dearborn. Though working at the bakery does take up
most of her time, Sara enjoys certain hobbies outside of

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 45
     her work. Most notably, she loves to read--her favorite
     book is The Outsiders --and watch sports.

        For the present, Sara wants to continue to develop
     and experiment with new menu items. She is currently
     working on cakes and other cookie recipes. In the
     future, she hopes to expand the bakery and possibly
     pursue a master's degree in math.

Rather than tell us about the story subject, Zeena immediately
immerses us in scene. Through the use of sensory detail,
dialogue, and her presence within the narrative, we get to
experience the bakery and Zeena's interaction with Sara from
the very beginning. This drives the narrative and the character
profile. Like Matt, Zeena does rely on the technique of "telling"
and summary when we get into the backstory of the story
subject and her journey to where she is today. This
combination and balance can be extremely effective.

   Let's take a look at one final student example, one that I've
chosen because of the strategies of characterization:

     Example 3

        Patrick Masell
        Prof. Benjamin Wielechowski
        COMP 310-001
        22 Sept. 2019

46 | Chapter 5: Character
                           Essence and Anguish

   The interview has come to an end. I turn off the
recorder and she slumps back in her chair, finally
relaxed. She takes hold of her large, black-framed
eyeglasses and with a smooth gesture of her slender,
delicate hand adjusts them in a fashion that reminds
me of a librarian. We pause and take in the sounds of
bustle during the mid-day rush that shuffles past the
modest coffeehouse. Things hadn't gone smoothly. The
coffeehouse had gotten crowded and noisy, the patio
wasn't much better, and I often failed to keep the
conversation flowing. But it was over. I was no longer
interviewing Madison; now I was catching up with an
old colleague, Maddie. It is here, I'm told, once the
notebook is closed and your subject is no longer
nervously twisting the sleeve around her coffee cup, is
where you've reached the center of the onion. This is
where the best revelation, the inner truth often
emerges. What would Maddie's inner truth be?

   "Do you see those two guys there?" she draws my
attention to a pair of figures across the street. "The one
with the dreads does my piercings." It's clear that
Maddie keeps her piercer busy since she had gauges in
both ears and a septum piercing. She remarks that the
tattoo shop where she gets her work done is nearby. I
ask her how many tattoos she has, but she has lost
count. She then points out her latest piece, a single
word in bold, black ink poking through an exposed
hole in her distressed jeans. It reads: ESSENCE. She tells
me that it has a mate printed on her other leg:
ANGUISH, but it's hidden beneath the denim. "It means

                                                              Chapter 5: Character | 47
     that a person is born to be a certain way," Maddie
     explains. A person's essential traits, their defining
     characteristics are determined before their birth and
     the individual should adhere to that function to be
     satisfied.

        "I was always considered a "college bound kid" in
     high school," Maddie informs me. She attended
     Whitmer High School in Toledo. "Honors and AP
     classes, graduated ranked 12th in my class..." Good
     grades came naturally to her, as did athletics and
     friendships. She was also engaged in extracurricular
     activities as well. Maddie seemed tailor made to pursue
     higher learning both as a student and a teacher. This
     isn't surprising given the fact that she came from a
     family that valued higher education; many of them
     were teachers, after all. Plato would probably argue
     that fate willed Maddie into being accepted into
     University of Toledo for a degree in secondary
     education and, given her pedigree, it would be hard to
     argue against him.

        "Anguish is choice," Maddie explains to me. "People
     are a balance of both." She goes on to tell me about
     philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, whom she discovered in
     an unorthodox way. Maddie laughs and says, "Man, I'm
     glad we aren't recording this!" before confessing that
     she discovered Sartre because that was the stage
     name taken by her favorite adult actress, Charlotte
     Sartre. Sartre, the French philosopher and not the porn
     star, believed "being precedes essence", or we create
     meaning; it is not assigned for us. Choice is anguish
     due to the implication that without a preordained

48 | Chapter 5: Character
existence, nothing is for certain. We are free and
terrifyingly so.

   Maddie had cried on orientation day, but she did not
know why. After a semester at Toledo, she transferred
to Michigan State and there she had the opportunity to
teach. Instead of it being her calling, she struggled to
find meaning in the work. She enjoyed it, but it did not
allow her to be herself. Maddie was attempting to live
up to the expectations that others had set instead of
her own. As Sartre would describe it, she was living in
`bad faith;' caught between essence and anguish. Much
to the consternation of those who knew Maddie best,
she dropped out of school entirely.

   "I think people find me intimidating, but I only say
that because its what I've been told from a few people.
I think of myself as very sheepish and easily skittish and
don't think I have much of a strong presence at all." I
can confirm that Maddie can be intimidating at first,
judging from personal experience. On the other hand, I
would argue she has a much stronger presence than
she would have you believe. Being around Maddie, one
tends to notice the heads turning in her direction. Tall
and willowy with a fair complexion, Maddie invokes the
image of `Hollywood Gothic'; something like Elizabeth
Taylor-by-way-of-Morticia Adams. I've always known
her to be meticulous about her appearance. It occurs to
me during the interview that it's a necessity; her
appearance acts like a business card. It's part of her
profession. Today she is more casual, but I still get the
sense that there is something deliberate in the way she
pulls her raven-hued hair into a haphazard bun. After
dropping out of MSU, Maddie enrolled into the

                                                             Chapter 5: Character | 49
     Estheticians program. An esthetician performs
     cosmetic skin treatments including facials, hair
     removal, surface level massages and a plethora of
     similar treatments.

        Maddie's first exposure to esthetics came back at
     university when friends visited her in her dorm room to
     get their eyebrows waxed. She took an interest in skin
     care and beauty; helping others take better care of
     themselves keyed into her strong maternal instincts.
     "Finding a career field that challenges me as well as
     excites me was incredible," she recalls. Prior to
     dropping out of school, however, she didn't consider
     this passion to be a worthy profession. It took
     recognition of this passion from others to convince
     Maddie that learning to become an esthetician could
     be a valid career path. "Know thyself," the Greek
     aphorism goes. Sartre would call it `living authentically.'
     To do so, Maddie would have to reject the belief that
     her passion wasn't serious enough. "There might not
     always be people that will take you seriously," she
     explains, "but if you take yourself seriously others will
     follow suit."

        Maddie is in a period of flux, with many pieces of her
     life shifting. We speak at length about her concerns.
     She has a state licensing exam to take for esthetics, she
     might carry the same gene that caused her mother's
     breast cancer, and she recently broke up with her
     girlfriend. On the upside, her older brother will be
     getting married soon. She is planning on taking David
     as her plus one to the wedding. David is Maddie's best
     friend, perhaps more than that. She tells me that when
     looking at him she sees, "everything I want to be." She

50 | Chapter 5: Character
     confesses that part of her hopes to rekindle a past
     romance, but she has her trepidations. They had tried
     dating several times, each leading to failure. Most
     recently, things dissolved due to strong, opposing
     opinions they have developed over the time they had
     known each other. Opinions neither could acquiesce to
     the other. She pauses briefly when discussing this and
     stares at the table; brow furrowed. Her pained
     expression tells me she's reliving a raw memory. I wish
     to console her, but she has no need for tired platitudes.
     Maddie is at a crossroads. She is not meant to be an
     esthetician, she is not meant to be with David. Essence
     is an illusion and all she has is the burden of choice that
     weighs upon her countenance. Anguish. But there is
     beauty to be found in anguish. Since nothing is pre-
     ordained, she is free to define her life; to live
     authentically.

        Our meeting had ended. She collects her things, I
     tuck my notebook under my arm, we embrace briefly, I
     watch her walk away. I had known Maddie for over a
     year and for the past two hours she answered every
     question I thought to ask. However, I hadn't really
     begun to understand her until she casually discussed
     her tattoos. In these brief moments, I feel as though I
     better understand myself, as well. I'm sad to see her go,
     but I'm thankful for the time we've shared. It's okay to
     be sad. It means our time together had value. I've
     defined my truth and I know now where to find the
     truth behind Madison Reynolds. It resides in the space
     between essence and anguish.

Like the two previous examples, Patrick utilizes a balance of

                                                                    Chapter 5: Character | 51
"showing" and "telling." The attention to detail, the description,
and the natural, compelling dialogue put us front and center
in the story. The commentary and summary help us move
throughout the profile and give the story subject more depth.
The angle is communicated through repetition of `essence' and
`anguish,' with the title and the symbol of the tattoos acting
as very effective literary devices. The characterization and the
structure of the profile are worth dwelling on. Patrick focuses
on what might be considered mundane details, like how
Maddie twists the sleeve around her coffee cup when she's
nervous, and within these details we learn a world about
Maddie. The physical description and the exchange of dialogue
are also extremely effective in bringing Maddie off of the page.
Patrick also does something very clever here with the structure
of the profile. Instead of organizing the profile around the
interview, this profile begins at the end of the interview where
we get to really "see" the story subject. The information gained
through the interview is then revealed throughout in those
moments of commentary. This has everything to do with
narrative design, which will be discussed at length in Chapter
7.

Media Attributions

  · PortraitRaymond © Matthew Johnson is licensed under a
      CC BY-NC (Attribution NonCommercial) license

  · PortraitSara © Zeena Whayeb is licensed under a CC BY-
      NC (Attribution NonCommercial) license

52 | Chapter 5: Character
6. Setting

"I think of the setting as a horizontal plane and the individual
              as a vertical plane. The line created by their
                     intersection--there lies the story."
                                       - Tom Wolfe

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To further explore narrative journalism through
             the element of fiction, setting, and the place-
             profile.
          · To better understand the function of setting
             and its impact as a literary device in immersive
             storytelling.

Place-based journalism, or place profiles, shares similarities
with the character profile. One of the big differences is the
number and the prominence of the featured characters.
Whereas a character profile is driven by a single (or perhaps a
few) character(s), a place profile explores the issues of a place,
and the people who are involved in a place, and so this follows a
more traditional, longer piece of narrative journalism that relies

                                                                        Chapter 6: Setting | 53
on more immersive reporting and involves a variety of people
and places.

   For beginning narrative journalists, a piece of place-based
journalism achieves two things: first, it allows a journalist to
immerse themselves in "place," and, as described earlier,
primary research is a crucial skill to develop. Second, place is
grounding, and this allows the story to emerge from a place, as
there are infinite opportunities for storytelling in every single
place. All that being said, looking at a few examples might help
to solidify the form while inspiring ideas for future pieces of
place-based journalism.

   Let's take a look a few student examples to help us better
understand how `place' functions within narrative journalism
and the ways in which these student journalists approach their
topics:

Place Profile:

     Example 1

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://oer.pressbooks.pub/
              narrativejournalism/?p=33#oembed-1

54 | Chapter 6: Setting
        By: Allen Dillard

Allen's entire mini documentary revolves around a place
known as the WIG. Through this focus on place, we get to meet
the people involved in its development and the ways in which
it has impacted the skating community and the surrounding
neighborhood. The anchor of the entire piece is, of course, the
place, and this allows Allen to fully immerse us in place, in this
case, through visual imagery.

   The next student example takes a different approach, not
only in content and tone, but in presentation.

     Example 2

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://oer.pressbooks.pub/
              narrativejournalism/?p=33#audio-33-1

        By: Matthew Johnson

Matt weaves together personal narrative, interviews, scientific
studies, audio clips, sound effects, and more to create a very
dynamic podcast about video game addiction. Since the

                                                                        Chapter 6: Setting | 55
gaming world is virtual, this piece of place-based journalism
does not have a concrete geographical location like the
previous example, and yet, there is a culture and community
that unites the characters within the story and those impacted
by the story subject. Though the use of first person narration,
along with the detailed interviews and audio clips, we feel
completely immersed in `place' and in 'story,' while Matt takes
us through the highs and lows of video game addiction.

56 | Chapter 6: Setting
7. Plot

   "Narrative is chronology: This happens, that happens, the
 other thing happens, and then something else happens. [....]

    Story is something else: taking select parts of a narrative,
 separating them from everything else, and arranging them
  so they have meaning. Meaning is intrinsic to storytelling."

                                      - Jon Franklin

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To explore the relationship between the
             element of plot and the concept of "narrative
             design."
          · To better understand how genre impacts plot
             and structure and how narrative journalists can
             leverage this element of fiction across genres.

While plot is a very instructive and accessible term as far as
literary elements are concerned, I prefer the term narrative
design for narrative journalism, as it prioritizes craft over
storyline. And, as mentioned in Chapter 3, we cannot
manipulate the storyline when writing nonfiction. We cannot
invent events and we cannot delete events. We cannot

                                                                             Chapter 7: Plot | 57
rearrange how events occurred in a piece of nonfiction (as this
creates monumental ethical violations). We can, however, play
around with how the story is revealed to our reader, and this is
why the element of plot is such a crucial and effective tool in
narrative journalism.

Often considered to be the "quintessential" text of narrative
journalism, Truman Capote's In Cold Blood catalogs the
murders of the Clutter family, a wealthy farming family located
in a small town in Holcomb, Kansas, and while these stories
of unnecessary violence were not new, the storytelling
techniques Capote incorporated were rarely seen before in
nonfiction. From dozens of hours of primary research, mainly
interviews with the convicted murderers, Capote recreated the
days leading up to, the night of the murders, and the weeks
and months and years that followed including the manhunt,
arrest, conviction, and eventual execution of the two convicted.
Capote moves around in time, from before the murders,
chronicling the movements of the Clutter family and the two
would-be murderers, and then brings the stories together in a
way that reads like fiction. The story is in and of itself "stranger
than fiction," but Capote manages something far greater than
a front page news story with his mastery of narrative design.

Narrative Design:

Narrative design has everything to do with the structure of
a story. Yes, plot is involved with what happens first, second,
third, etc., and how all of the events impact and influence one
another, but narrative design takes a step back from the story
in order to fully consider the reader experience (and not just
what the characters are doing). What arrangement of the
narrative will most powerfully impact the audience, and how
best can we communicate our angle? For the most effective

58 | Chapter 7: Plot
narrative design, full consideration must be given to the reader
and the reading experience. Let's take a look at a student
example to analyze just how narrative design can be used to
affect that reader experience:

     Example

        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vy4NlpaH4KM
        By: Jenna Elder

Jenna begins this mini-documentary focusing in on her
protagonist as she completes a Covid check-in before
attending practice. This is an expert narrative device, as we are
immediately immersed. The next sequence in the film provides
national context for the covid pandemic. Then the focus
returns to the protagonist and her experience and
perseverance through the pandemic. The design choices to
include multiple interviews that contrast the protagonist's
experience only further emphasize the angle of the story.

Narrative Design and Genre:

In order to highlight the power of narrative design and the
opportunities we have as journalists, let's compare and
contrast a few different genres: narrative journalism, news
journalism, and scriptwriting/graphica. Each require a specific
design or structure in order to adhere to the conventions of the
genre. Because of these differences, it is important to dissect
the design to see how each genre works on a structural level.

                                                                             Chapter 7: Plot | 59
  · Narrative Journalism relies heavily on the elements of
      fiction, and so, there is added attention to character,
      setting, plot, point of view, and of course, theme. See how
      these elements play out in the following example:

     Example

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
              text. You can view them online here:
              https://oer.pressbooks.pub/
              narrativejournalism/?p=35#audio-35-1

        By: Autumn Tashman

Autumn begins by with a short personal narrative, which
engages us through the elements of character and point of
view, as this piece is driven by first person narration. Autumn
also explores this "alternate reality" of social media and the
impact this "place" has on people who visit. The mix of personal
narrative and interviews, complemented by important
secondary research, creates for a thorough and compelling
expose about the effects of social media.

  · Traditional Journalism conversely, follows a very specific
      form. The structure must follow the inverted pyramid,
      which provides the entire story in the headline and lede of

60 | Chapter 7: Plot
the article.

                                The lede should answer

                                the who, what, where,

                                when, how, and why. This

                                plot structure relies on

                                revealing the most

                                information possible in the

                                least amount of time,

                                prioritizing the information

The inverted pyramid structure  rather than  the story.
typical of news journalism.     Narrative    journalism,

                                conversely, does almost the

exact opposite: story over information. See this student

example by Autumn Tashman, one that focuses on the

same content matter as the previous example, but look at

how formulaic the structure is, from the headline, to the

subheadline, to the lede (all telling the full story), then into

the body of detail within the story, and finally the tail:

Example

 The Effect Upward Comparisons
Have on Social Media Users

  Comparisons amongst users on social

                                                                       Chapter 7: Plot | 61
    media who display the highlights of their
    lives creates damaging effects on users.

        (Image would usually be featured in this location
     with caption)

        Autumn Tashman
        When users log onto their social media platforms,
     they face comparing themselvesbased on human
     nature for self-evaluationwith people who showcase
     the highlights of their lives. This poses risk for users to
     feel worse about themselves and lead to depression,
     low self-esteem, and anxiety.
        The Theory of Social Comparison that has been
     proposed by psychologist Leon Festinger states that it
     is "the proposition that people evaluate their abilities
     and attitudes in relation to those of others in a process
     that plays a significant role in self-image and subjective
     well-being" according to the APA Dictionary. It is also
     said that the three types of comparisons are
     upward, downward, and lateral, where upward
     comparisons are often seen in social media when
     people compare themselves with someone perceived
     to be better than him or her based on what this person
     showcases on their pages.
        According to a study published in 2016 where 881
     female college students were evaluated, it was found
     that "the more time teens spent on social media, the
     more they compared their bodies with those of their
     friends. Consequently, they felt more negative about

62 | Chapter 7: Plot
their bodies." Similarly, a study published in 2019 that
investigated the effect "Instagram vs Reality"
images had on 305 women found that body
dissatisfaction increased when looking at the
"ideal" images. While social media may not be to blame
for human nature and their unavoidable nature to
compare oneself with others for self-evaluation, what
social media does is exacerbate this dilemma and
create expectations for themselves where the baseline
of these expectations is skewed to attract others.

   The apps TikTok, Instagram, Snapchat, and Facebook
are recommended for people ages 12 and up. For
young adolescents, the ages of 12 to 13 are the years
where body dysmorphia is first detected, according to
a Help Guide article. It's also said in this article that a
symptom for body dysmorphia is comparing oneself
negatively to others, and by the Theory of
Social Comparison, humans have this sort of
inevitability to take part in evaluating their own worth
by comparing themselves with others, and social
media platforms are just one place where this can be
achieved. More specifically, well over the majority of
people who act as the basis of comparison have been
edited in a way that would make themselves look
better online, through the photoshop app Facetune
(71% of people say they won't post a picture online
without somehow touching it up). These 12-13 year old
children have access to these types of photos that are
intended to be appealing, which can lead to upward
comparisons which in turn lead to low self-esteem and
even symptoms of depression.

   In a TedTalk, Bea Arthur, founder and CEO of The

                                                                      Chapter 7: Plot | 63
     Difference, a company that provides on-demand
     access to therapy, addressed the possible effects that
     Facebook has on people. She says, "Facebook started
     out as a way to keep up with people that you like, but
     it's slowly turned into a way to keep up with people
     that you now kind of resent." Because people have
     a tendency to compare themselves to whom they are
     seeing online (that this friend just got married, or that
     friend just landed a new job at a Fortune 500 company
     for example), it creates this negative space where
     people begin to downplay their own successes based
     on the ones people choose to showcase online.

        Anthropologist Bob Deutsch believes that "The very
     nature of [social media] causes all of us to be fake," and
     he supports this claim by saying "...With the right filter
     and snappy status update can project an image of a life
     far better than the one we authentically experience."
     Jessica Stillman agrees with Deutsch's verdict, and
     backs up her claim that "The more miserable you are,
     the happier your social media posts" by using a Twitter
     thread showing that social media harbors people's dark
     sides in life. For example, one woman posted a joyful-
     looking picture of her holding her smiling baby with
     the caption, "This photo is of me and my daughter
     (now almost 9) as a baby. I hadn't slept in months and
     had RAGING postpartum anxiety. I loved her but mostly
     wanted to run away. I was tired and angry and scared
     all the time." What's seen on social media is only what
     people want others to see, and in reality, viewers are
     missing out on half, if not more, of the full story.

        Doctor Steve Rose reported that "social media use
     activates the same reward centers in the brain

64 | Chapter 7: Plot
triggered by addictions to chemical compounds." Every
"like" that a person gets triggers the brain's reward
center, creating this addictive effect to receive likes,
and as a result, people will do what it takes to feel the
reward of earning more likes on their posts. For many,
this involves using photoshop, retaking a selfie dozens
of times, finding the perfect lighting and angle for a
pose, and more. While it's essentially impossible to
prevent comparisons among users, understanding that
what is advertised on social media most likely isn't the
real-deal is a first step in canceling out the negative
effects that may come with self-evaluation through
others.

   Sources:
   How social media is increasing a person's exposure to
body shaming and body image (indiatimes.com)
   Rising dysmorphia among adolescents : A cause for
concern (nih.gov)
   Statistics -- Megan Meier Foundation
   Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD) - HelpGuide.org
   Comparison culture: impact of Instagram on our self-
esteem (stylist.co.uk)
   Social Comparison Therapy in Social Media | Newport
Academy
   `I Was Obsessed With Facetune': 71% Of People Won't
Post A Picture Online Without Photoshopping It - That
Needs To Change | Grazia (graziadaily.co.uk)
   Gender differences in Mental Health - RAMH

                                                                      Chapter 7: Plot | 65
        Why Everyone and Everything on Social Media Is
     Fake (entrepreneur.com)

        The More Miserable You Are, the Happier Your Social
     Media Posts, and This Twitter Thread Proves It | Inc.com

        Why We Are Addicted To Social Media: The
     Psychology of Likes | Steve Rose, PhD social
     comparison theory - APA Dictionary of Psychology

  · Scriptwriting and Graphica doesn't technically fall within
      the genre of narrative journalism, but it can be extremely
      insightful in how we negotiate our narrative design. Both
      forms are very character and scene driven, and so we can
      learn more about narrative design through exploring this
      unique format. This format is also more directly connected
      to fiction than are some of the other formats, and that
      liberty in craft can also be instructive. When compared to
      documentary, which is a classic form of narrative
      journalism, scriptwriting and graphica are more
      impressionistic, and by this I mean scriptwriters take an
      event that has happened (rather than while it is
      happening) and present a version of the event or issue
      with some form of hindsight. This taps into our sense of
      meaning, and so as writers, we have to think more deeply
      about how scene and character can convey meaning
      outside of a strict chronology of events. Let's take a look at
      the following example by Autumn Tashman to see how
      she tackles the same subject matter (effects of social
      media) through this new format:

66 | Chapter 7: Plot
Student Example

                                                        Autumn Tashman
   Scene 1:
   Three best friends, Alyssa, Jasmine, and Alex are
hanging out at a sleepover get-together, scrolling
through their TikTok feeds before getting ready for bed.
Alyssa stumbles across a trending TikTok dance that
she's been wanting to do for several days.
   Alyssa: You guys have to do this TikTok dance with
me! We could totally become famous off of this! We
literally just have to stand in one spot and jump around
a bit. Then BOOM! People will love us!
   Jasmine: Eh, I'll pass on this one. You two go ahead.
   Jasmine gives a smile of encouragement to her
friends, Alyssa and Alex.
   Alex: All right, fine. But Alyssa, if this blows up, I'll hate
you forever; you know how bad I am at dancing!
   Alyssa: Yeah yeah yeah. Come on!
   Alyssa teaches Alex the dance, and they take a
couple of tries to perfect it to the best of their abilities.
Once they are satisfied, Alyssa uploads it onto her
page.
   Jasmine: You guys look great in this! You know
Alyssa, even though you only have 200 followers, I think
this video could be a real hit.
   Alyssa: Thanks Jasmine! I hope you're right!

                                                                       Chapter 7: Plot | 67
        Scene 2:
        The next morning, the three girls are asleep, but Alex
     is rudely awakened by the sound of someone's phone
     constantly buzzing. She comes to realize that Alyssa's
     is the one that is making all the rukkus.
        Alex: Hey, hey, Alyssa, wake up!
        Alyssa: Why, what's wrong?
        Alex: Your phone has been dinging for the past 30
     minutes, it's driving me crazy!
        Alyssa: What?! No way, it must be the video we
     uploaded, let's check it out.
        Alyssa checks her phone to realize that the video of
     Alex and her dancing has 400k views and 30k likes.
     Alex pulls out her own phone to look at the uploaded
     video alongside Alyssa.
        Jasmine: Wow, the video actually blew up! I was
     kinda half-joking when I said that your video would get
     famous cause I feel like that never happens, but look at
     that, you go girls! What are the comments saying
     about it?
        Alex: Ummmm... You might not want to look at them
     Alyssa.
        Alyssa: (Beginning to tear up) Oh my god. These
     comments are awful. How could anybody even think to
     say something so rude?
        Jasmine: What are they saying?
        Alex: I mean, a lot of them are positive, but there are

68 | Chapter 7: Plot
a good amount of them that are comparing the two of
us. Also, take a look at this one.

   Alex hands Jasmine her phone, and Jasmine begins
to read one of the comments.

   Jasmine: "Why is the girl on the right shaped like
that? I don't know what I'd do if I looked like her"...
Alyssa, I'm so so sorry. The people commenting these
things are so insecure about themselves that they find
other people to hate on to make themselves feel better.

   Alyssa: Maybe, but that comment alone had over 400
likes. At this point, I don't even know if people are
caught up in their own insecurities, or if they genuinely
think I'm unattractive. I never should have posted this
stupid video.

   Alex: Alyssa, don't think like that! You look amazing in
the video, and people just live for drama online. I know
it's easier said than done, but try not to take these
comments to heart.

   Alyssa: Yeah... right.

   Scene 3:
   2 MONTHS LATER
   The three best friends facetime each other for
Christmas day. While they spend time apart, they are
all curious to know what they all got under their trees.
   Alex: Merry Christmas girlies! What did you all end up
getting under your trees?
   Jasmine: Just the usual! some clothes, makeup, and

                                                                      Chapter 7: Plot | 69
     nail polish. But I also got this super cute new pair of
     shoes! What about you, Alyssa?

        Alyssa: Nice! I've been wanting this new pair of shoes,
     but I didn't have room to ask for them on my list. I
     ended up getting this super cool high-end jump rope,
     some protein powder, a set of weights, and some other
     little things. I'm so excited to try them out.

        Alex: That all sounds great, but Alyssa, it never
     seemed like you were into the whole sporty-exercise
     kinda thing. Are you doing this because of what people
     said on that one video from a while back?

        Alyssa: Honestly, that has a lot to do with it. I think it's
     easier said than done, trying to ignore the hate, and a
     lot of those comments really got to me. But man, do I
     hate today's standards.

        Jasmine: You could say that again. People expect so
     much from us, and when we don't fit what people like
     to see, we get hate. UGH! What a twisted reality.

        Alyssa: Yeah, tell me about it.

The first thing you may notice is the change is formatting. The
italicized text is stage direction, the bold text identifies the
characters in scene, and the standard text is the dialogue. This
is a specific convention of the scriptwriting genre. Looking at
the narrative design, you may notice that this form is heavily
driven by the narrative storyline, and so Autumn immediately
immerses us in scene as we see the three characters explore
social media and the negative consequences of something
perceived to be innocent and fun. By the end of the script, we
feel this dramatic impact that the characters suffer due to the
occurrence in Scene 1. This is in part due to the incredible

70 | Chapter 7: Plot
narrative design.

Media Attributions

  · Inverted-pyramid-in-comprehensive-form © Christopher
      Schwartz is licensed under a CC BY-SA (Attribution
      ShareAlike) license

                                                                             Chapter 7: Plot | 71
8. Point of View

"We are trained as journalists to describe action secondhand,
through quotes and observation. Skilled narrative writers put
  the reader there and let her witness it, have the experience,
feel it. That's much more powerful than a secondhand version

                                        of reality."
                                        - Jack Hart

     Learning Objectives

        The learning objectives for this chapter are as follows:
          · To better understand POV as an element of
             fiction as it relates to narrative journalism.
          · To gain skills is using POV across multiple
             genres in order to impact the reader experience.

Point of view is a quirky element of fiction when applied to
narrative journalism because of preconceptions. News
journalism prides itself on 3rd person objective reporting
where there is no hint of a narrator or author telling the story.
Fiction plays around with point of view so wildly that we can
have a dozen narrators in a single novel. Nonfiction does not
have the same freedoms with point of view as does fiction,
but thorough research and reporting can give us tremendous

72 | Chapter 8: POV
opportunity. It all comes down to how we craft and include
our research into a piece of writing. The gold standard for
nonfiction is to adhere to the facts of a story, and what our
sources experience and say and feel are legitimate facts of the
story (if those sources check out of course). For example, if you
have an interview that reveals how a character "felt" during an
event, you can recreate that scene while commenting on the
feelings of the character, as that is authentic to the story.

   For example, in Truman Capote's In Cold Blood, he puts us in
the vehicle of the two murderers as they drive to the Clutter
household, and we can listen to their conversations and peer
inside their minds. This is possible due to an extraordinary
number of interviews with the subjects. In Random Family,
Adrien Nicole LeBlanc lived on and off with her story subjects,
experiencing their lives for almost ten years. When she writes
what they thought and felt, she knew them intimately, and
conveys those thoughts and feelings using the subject's own
words. If your story subject tells you they "felt scared," you can
write, "So and so felt scared," and that is honest and true
reporting, and yet the point of view is now from the story
subject rather than you, the narrator and author of the story.
These slight shifts in POV are extremely effective in storytelling,
but let's look at some student examples to see just how this
element can be executed:

Point of View and Genre

  · Narrative Journalism is often driven by the 1st person POV
      (as has been discussed at length in Chapter 5) as the
      journalist reflects on and recounts personal experience
      involving the story subject(s). While this is very effective, as
      Isabel Wilkerson demonstrates masterfully in both Caste:
      The Origins of Our Discontents, and The Warmth of Other
      Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration, as she
      catalogs her experiences and interactions as she conducts

                                                                            Chapter 8: POV | 73
      her research, it is not the only POV available to us. Let's
      look at this student example to see what we might learn
      about point of view and genre:

     Example

        By: Patrick Masell

Patrick makes some very creative and sophisticated decisions
in terms of point of view, and so this example gives us plenty to
explore. The introduction page begins in 1st person, as Patrick
invites us into his research process as he explores the
hauntings of Greenfield Village. In the fourth paragraph,
Patrick introduces Macy, one of the story subjects, and yet, it
is as if Macy is telling us her story. This is credit to Patrick's
incredible research and creatively with using 3rd person limited
omniscient point of view (delving into the psyche of one
character). In addition, you can see him moving effortlessly
between these points of view. This is beauty and power of point
of view when applied to narrative journalism.
74 | Chapter 8: POV
· Traditional Journalism celebrates itself for its 3rd person
   objective reporting. The narrator (journalist) should not
   appear at all, and all that matters is the facts of the story.
   This is useful as far as POV is concerned because it is very
   easy to identify and to recreate. See the student example
   by Skyler Anderson below:

  Example

   What we can learn from online
 queer communities

    As COVID-19 restrictions turn one year old,
  what can we learn from communities that
  were organized online before the
  pandemic?

     (Image would usually be featured in this location
  with caption)

     Skyler Anderson
     Student at University of Michigan - Dearborn
     March 24, 2021
     Over the course of the past year, the world has been
  grappling with the COVID-19 Pandemic. In this time in
  person interactions have had to be dramatically

                                                                         Chapter 8: POV | 75
     reduced to stop the spread of the novel coronavirus.
     With the stopping of physical interactions it is a good
     idea to look towards communities that are used to
     interacting with each other in a primarily virtual way.

        LGBTQ+ communities have often found themselves
     primarily interacting online long before the pandemic
     had started. This online interaction had come about
     out of necessity as queer people often find themselves
     put into situations where they are unable to be
     themselves in public facing ways for one reason or
     another. This has led to vast and extensive online
     communities with meaningful relationships of many
     kinds being built up within them. Perhaps the world at
     large can learn from these communities in these
     troubling times.

        First and foremost online queer communities show
     that it is possible to build meaningful and fulfilling
     connections with other people without ever physically
     meeting them. With the advent of instant messaging
     between people conversations can be had with people
     all across the globe in real time. These conversations
     can be through text, voice, and even video. What can
     be taken away from this is that non physical
     communication can be used for much more than just
     classes or jobs. They can be used to keep in touch with
     people you already know or even be used to meet new
     people. With these connections people are able to
     interact and discuss interests, talk about what is
     happening in their lives, and even create lifelong bonds
     with people.

        In the modern era there is much more to do than just
     talk online. It is incredibly easy to interact with others

76 | Chapter 8: POV
     through online multiplayer games by hopping into a
     call and playing a few rounds of a game with some
     friends in a community game night. There's much
     more than action shooter games too. There are all sorts
     of websites where you can play internet adaptations of
     various board and party games. In addition, there are
     also ways of watching movies and shows together
     online seamlessly, such as through browser extensions
     like WatchParty or websites like caracal.

        Another big way of interacting with others is through
     online concerts. While they gained massive popularity
     in the past year due to lockdown restrictions they
     began much earlier than that. One particular example
     is Coalchella, which is a yearly online edm festival that
     uses Minecraft as a virtual world to host the festival.
     While not inherently LGBTQ many acts who took part
     in the festival have queer members.

        There is often talk of online connections being "less
     real" than physical relationships. Yet when the
     pandemic hit and the isolation and loneliness of being
     stuck without any physical interactions began it
     became clear that humans need interactions in some
     other way. The queer communities that have existed
     for years online show that there is another way of
     achieving this essential human interaction without
     ever physically being next to someone.

Skyler maintains a distance from the material, and she
presents the information clearly and without any subjectivity
(it doesn't matter how the journalist feels about the content
matter, as the story is prioritized). Still, it is worth mentioning
that angle is still present, because Skyler has chosen what

                                                                            Chapter 8: POV | 77
information to include in the article and what the central story
of the article is (captured in the headline and lede).

  · Scriptwriting and Graphica also rely heavily on 3rd person
      objective point of view, but in a very different way, and to a
      much different effect. Both forms are all about "showing,"
      and so there is no commentary/influence from the
      narrator/journalist. Unlike news journalism, however, the
      point of view is directly linked to meaning and theme,
      whereas news journalism is more interested in revealing
      information. This difference is useful in understanding just
      how a single point of view can be used and to what effect.
      See the student example by Skyler Anderson below,
      focused on the same content matter as the example
      above.

     Example

     A Welcoming Community

        by: Skyler Anderson
        STAGE DIRECTION
        The set consists of 5 rooms with a door on the back
     wall. Each room will have lights that light up whenever
     a person's message is sent. Rather than reading lines,
     each line will be played using text-to-speech unless
     otherwise stated to signify that it is a text message.
     Each room should have a distinct style. Nyx's room is a

78 | Chapter 8: POV
punk style with deep purple lights and a trans flag on
the wall. Dawn's room is a pastel style with cyan lights
with an ace flag on the wall. Jo's room is in a country
style with red lights and a lesbian flag on the wall.
Aera's room should have a celtic style with deep green
lights with the rainbow flag on the wall. Sierra's room
will change with each scene.

SCENE I - NEW MEMBER

   Everyone is in their room except for Sierra. Nyx and
Jo will be laying on their beds on their phones, while
Aera and Dawn will be at their desks. Sierra's room
should be furnished with IKEA furniture, have white
lights, and no flags on the wall.

   Sierra enters scene by entering room and sitting at
desk.

SIERRA  Hello, my name is Sierra!

JO Welcome Sierra, what brings you here?

SIERRA  Well I've begun to question my gender

identity so I wanted to join an LGBTQ server to meet

some other people and understand myself more.

   JO I hope you enjoy this place, it's really friendly.
What pronouns would you like us to use?

SIERRA  For now any are fine.

JO Alright well I hope you enjoy it here!

   NYX Sierra if you have any questions feel free to ask
me!

SIERRA  Thanks, I don't have any at the moment,

but everything is just really confusing for me right now.

                                   Chapter 8: POV | 79
   AERA I get that, I've spent a lot of time thinking
about my own identity too.

DAWN                 Well if you ever need anything feel free

to ask, I'm always happy to help a new queer person in

need!

(end scene)

SCENE II - VENTING

   A few weeks have passed since the previous scene.
Sierra's room now has a nonbinary flag uP and the
lights are yellow. The IKEA furniture still remains. Aera
and Jo are not in the scene, while Sierra, Nyx, and
Dawn are.

SIERRA               Folks, I am really going through a lot

right now and could really use some help.

NYX Aww what's wrong Sierra?

SIERRA               It's just that I came out to my family and

they are having a hard time accepting me. I'm not in

any danger or anything, but they're really not

supportive of me.

   NYX I've been there. Listen, it doesn't matter what
anyone thinks. Your gender identity is valid and you'll
get through this.

SIERRA               It's just so hard, and it feels like people

struggle with using they/them for me.

SIERRA               I wish I lived in a more accepting house,

in a more accepting area.

DAWN                 You'll get there eventually. Just

remember that we're here for you, and will help you

80 | Chapter 8: POV
through this. We're a community and we stick together
through tough times.

SIERRA       Thanks, I really needed to hear that.

(end scene)

SCENE III - GAME NIGHT

   This scene takes place a few weeks later than the
previous. All the actors should be at their desks. Sierra's
room is now more vibrant and has a lot of plants. The
light color should still be yellow.

SIERRA       What game are we playing tonight?

NYX Skribbl.io

SIERRA       ooo, What's that?

NYX It's a lot like pictionary, but it's online

SIERRA       Sounds fun!

DAWN         It is! I'm really good at it!

   JO  Dawn, you lost the last three games we played
:p

DAWN         Shhhh I am trying to be cool

JO Try ice.

AERA Alright ready to begin?

ALL Yeah

   A few rounds go by, actors should improvise actions
and actually play the game for effect. Screen should
be added to the stage so the audience can watch the
game as it happens.

                                            Chapter 8: POV | 81
SIERRA               That was really fun! We should do it

again sometime!

   AERA Yeah! We try to organize them on every Friday,
but we fell out for a bit. Since everyone enjoys them, I'll
try to organize them a lot more.

SIERRA               Alright! I really like hanging out with y'all

   JO We really like hanging out with you too, I'm
glad you decided to join our community. I'm sure the
others think much the same.

(end scene)

Again, the point of view here is 3rd person objective, and yet,
the effect is completely different. The focus is, of course, on
the characters in the story, and while we don't delve into the
psyches of these characters, we do understand their thoughts
and feelings through there words and actions. This is a credit to
Skyler's scene and character development. In this way, point of
view complements all of the other elements of fiction in order
to heighten the reader experience.

Media Attributions

  · Screen Shot 2021-08-31 at 12.08.47 PM

82 | Chapter 8: POV
9. Digital Storytelling

   "Don't get too comfortable with the present. Journalism is
 ever-changing, more so than many other fields. Solid writing

   skills, flexibility and curiosity go a long way in helping one
                                         adapt."

                                      - Sally Banner

     Learning Objectives

        Type your learning objectives here.
          · To gain familiarity with the new frontier of
             digital storytelling.
          · To more deeply appreciate the use of
             multimedia in storytelling.

If we look back through the history of journalism, we've come
full circle. Historically, journalism was narrative by nature. This
all changed with the advent of the telegraph, as the speed
that information travelled increased exponentially, as did the
volume of stories the general reader had at their fingertips. This
changed the nature of news journalism and unfortunately, the
purpose of it. Information was valued over story. Now, we find
that the meaning is lost without the story, and so the narrative

                                                      Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling | 83
framework and longform journalism has reestablished a more
prominent role in major networks and publications.

   With the advent of the internet and digital media, we have
an abundance of new tools and methods for storytelling, and
documentaries, podcasts, etc. are incredible vehicles for
narrative journalism. As digital platforms get more
sophisticated, so do the ways in which storytelling takes place.
Now we have VR, interactive, storymaps, and social media
stories that include multiple forms of media and engage us in
never-seen-before ways. In doing so, there is a larger diversity
of voices and stories from all corners of the world. This is the
future of narrative journalism, and it would behoove any
aspiring narrative journalist to immerse themselves in this new
format of digital storytelling. The Online Journalism Awards
archives is the perfect place to start, but let's look at a few
student examples, two of which take the form of websites, and
one that is presented through Instagram:

     Example 1

        By: Brooke Madgwick

84 | Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling
Brooke's piece of digital storytelling focuses on the future of
education, and it incorporates a strong balance of primary and
secondary research, and it wonderfully integrates multimedia
sources in order to tell a more complete and engaging story.

     Example 2

        By: Autumn Tashman
Autumn's piece highlights the use of visual media while
embracing the blog format to draw the reader in and allow
them to connect to the human experience situated in place.
This piece nicely draws together elements of digital storytelling
and place-based journalism to inspire us to explore more of the
state of Michigan.

     Example 3

                                                      Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling | 85
        By: Faith Billinger

Faith's piece of digital storytelling in an incredible artistic
sequence of character profiles all put together through the
social media platform, Instagram. Not only does this appeal to
a new generation of readers, but it allows Faith to reflect her
personality and style through the angle and scope of the piece,
and in doing so, we not only learn about the story subjects
and their style, but more general trends of expressionism and
fashion popular with Generation Z in 2020.

   All of these examples speak to the creativity and opportunity
that exist within digital storytelling. As pieces of narrative
journalism, all of the same concepts and strategies still apply:
the philosophy of ethics, the importance of thorough primary
and secondary research, the role of angle and scope, and the
possibilities that exist for your own storytelling when applying
the elements of fiction to narrative nonfiction work.

86 | Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling
Media Attributions

  · Screen Shot 2021-08-31 at 12.17.10 PM
  · Screen Shot 2021-08-31 at 12.17.27 PM
  · Screen Shot 2021-08-31 at 12.19.51 PM

                                                      Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling | 87
88 | Chapter 9: Digital Storytelling
Glossary

Angle

      Angle refers to the author's perspective on the story
      subject (i.e. what, specifically, the author is trying to
      communicate).
Flash Forward

      Flash forward is a technique used in storytelling to leap
      forward in time from the chronological progression of the
      story.
Flashback

      Flashback is a technique used in storytelling to leap back in
      time from the chronological progression of the story.
Genres

      Genre is a term used to define a category or type of creative
      expression sharing similar style, form, or subject matter.
Primary Research

      Primary research is any research that you, the journalist,
      collects through first-hand experience (i.e. interviews,
      surveys, experiments, personal observations, etc.)
Psychic Distance

      Psychic distance refers to the proximity the reader is to the
      characters' psyches. The closer the psychic distance, the
      more the reader knows about internal thoughts, emotions,
      etc.

                                                                                      Glossary | 89
Scope
      Scope refers to the `narrative' scope of an article (i.e. how
      much narrative coverage (scene/dialogue/etc.) is included
      in an article).

Secondary Research
      Secondary research is any research that someone else has
      collected first-hand (or second-hand) and that you access
      through libraries, databases, archives, etc.

Stage Direction
      Stage direction refers to the descriptive content that helps
      the audience (and performers) visualize the stage setting
      and arrangement of characters.

Suspense
      A literary technique used to create tension in a story by
      withholding crucial information or playing around with
      mood, setting, etc.

90 | Glossary
